- FOOD FOR THOUGHT: EFFORTS TO DEFEND THE NATION'S AGRICULTURE AND FOOD

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FOOD FOR THOUGHT: EFFORTS TO DEFEND THE NATION'S AGRICULTURE AND FOOD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS,
RESPONSE, AND COMMUNICATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 26, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
21-528 PDF               WASHINGTON : 2016

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND COMMUNICATIONS

Martha McSally, Arizona, Chairman
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia            Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Kerry A. Kinirons, Subcommittee Staff Director
John Dickhaus, Subcommittee Clerk
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Martha McSally, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Arizona, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Emergency
Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Dr. R. Douglas Meckes, State Veterinarian, North Carolina
Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Veterinary
Division:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Dr. Tammy R. Beckham, Dean, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Kansas State University:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Mr. Bobby Acord, Former Administrator, Animal Plant Health
Inspection Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Testifying
on Behalf of the National Pork Producers Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    27
Prepared Statement.............................................    28
Mr. Brian R. Williams, Assistant Extension Professor, Mississippi
State University:
Oral Statement.................................................    33
Prepared Statement.............................................    34

FOOD FOR THOUGHT: EFFORTS TO DEFEND THE NATION'S AGRICULTURE AND FOOD

----------

Friday, February 26, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response,
and Communications,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:13 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Martha McSally
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McSally, Walker, Loudermilk,
Donovan, Payne, and Watson Coleman.
Ms. McSally. The Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness
Response and Communications will come to order.
The subcommittee's meeting today to receive testimony
regarding the efforts to defend our Nation's food and
agriculture sector. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
Let me first say this is my last subcommittee hearing that
I will be chairing. Technically, I have actually handed over
the gavel to my good colleague here, Mr. Donovan from New York,
but since we had planned this hearing, we decided to do our
change of command ceremony at the end of the hearing. So, it is
an absolute honor to have been chairing this subcommittee and
working with my colleagues and my Ranking Member, Mr. Payne. I
will be remaining on the subcommittee, but I will be chairing
the Border and Maritime Subcommittee now, which is, obviously,
quite important for my district, and looking forward to
continued leadership opportunities.
Anyway back to the topic at hand. Throughout this Congress,
the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and
Communications has taken a deep dive into the world of
biological terrorism. We have held hearings to assess the
biological threat, understand the scope of the biodefense
problem, and examine Federal programs aimed at tackling some of
the biodefense challenges. Our oversight thus far has primarily
been on the human impacts of biological terrorism.
Today we are going to take a different perspective, and
look at the impacts to the Nation from a terrorist attack on,
or natural disruption of, our agricultural or food systems. An
agroterrorism attack would impact the most basic of human
needs: The food we eat. Furthermore, the food and agricultural
sector is critically important to our Nation's economy. U.S.
food and agriculture accounts for roughly one-fifth of the
Nation's economic activity, contributing $835 billion to the
U.S. gross domestic product in 2014, and is responsible for 1
out of every 12 U.S. jobs.
In my home State of Arizona, ranching and agriculture
contributes around $10 billion a year to the State's economy.
An intentional attack on, or natural disruption of, U.S.
agriculture, or food, therefore, would present a serious threat
to this Nation and cause major economic damage on a number of
levels.
There will be costs related to containing disease, and
destruction of livestock, compensating farmers for loss of
agriculture commodities, and losses in other related
industries, and trade embargoes imposed by other nations.
Intelligence indicates that terrorists have discussed
vulnerabilities in various components of this sector. Food and
agriculture is an attractive target to terrorists, because many
agents are easy to obtain; minimal technology is required to
execute an attack, and our food travels across the country and
world quickly and efficiently.
Furthermore, even if there are few human casualties, an
agroterrorism attack would also undermine public confidence in
the Government, increasing general concerns about the safety of
our food supply, as well as the effectiveness of biological
defense planning. This goes to the heart of what we know groups
like ISIS are trying to do, terrorize by all means possible.
We all need to look at the impacts of the highly pathogenic
avian influenza, or HPAI, a natural event to see how
devastating an intentional act against our food or agriculture
could be. Last year's outbreak of HPAI was the largest animal
health incident in U.S. history, resulting in over $3 billion
in economic losses, and the slaughtering of 48 million birds to
stem the spread of the disease. Eighteen trading partners
banned all imports of U.S. poultry and products, and an
additional 28 trading partners imposed partial bans. This
outbreak, and its rapid farm-to-farm spread, highlighted the
challenge the sector faces related to effective biosecurity,
especially during a large-scale response.
We must ensure we are able to assess our level of
preparedness for any type of major disruption to U.S. food or
agriculture. Our goal today is to gain a better understanding
of what Government, along with academia and the private sector,
are doing to reduce vulnerabilities of the food and agriculture
sector to a terrorist attack.
We hope to gain a better understanding of the scope of the
problem, and identify ways in which we, as Members of Congress
focused on Homeland Security issues, can help prevent attacks,
and improve our readiness and our ability to respond.
I hope to hear about information sharing with the
Government. Is food and agriculture engaged in our process,
including things like the fusion centers? Are you getting the
threat and risk information that you need? I also want to
understand your connectedness to the human health side of
things. Are our current biosurveillance systems integrating the
human, animal, and plant data to form one true, ``One Health''
picture?
With that, I welcome our witnesses, and I look forward to
your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman McSally follows:]
Statement of Chairman Martha McSally
February 26, 2016
Throughout this Congress, the Subcommittee on Emergency
Preparedness, Response, and Communications has taken a deep dive into
the world of biological terrorism. We have held hearings to assess the
biological threat, understand the scope of the biodefense problem, and
examine Federal programs aimed at tackling some of the biodefense
challenges.
Our oversight thus far has primarily been on the human impacts of
biological terrorism. Today we are going to take a different
perspective and look at the impacts to the Nation from a terrorist
attack on, or natural disruption of, our agricultural or food systems.
An agroterrorism attack would impact the most basic of human
needs--the food we eat. Furthermore, the food and agriculture sector is
critically important to our nation's economy. U.S. food and agriculture
accounts for roughly one-fifth of the Nation's economic activity,
contributed $835 billion to the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) in
2014, and is responsible for one out of every 12 U.S. jobs. In my home
State of Arizona, ranching and agriculture contributes around $10
billion a year to the State's economy.
An intentional attack or natural disruption of U.S. agriculture or
food, therefore, would present a serious threat to this Nation and
cause major economic damages on a number of levels. There will be costs
related to containing disease and destruction of livestock,
compensating farmers for loss of agricultural commodities and losses in
other related industries, and trade embargoes imposed by other nations.
Intelligence indicates that terrorists have discussed
vulnerabilities in various components of the sector. Food and
agriculture is an attractive target to terrorists because many agents
are easy to obtain, minimal technology is required to execute an
attack, and our food travels across the country and world quickly and
efficiently.
Furthermore, even if there are few human casualties, an
agroterrorism attack would also undermine public confidence in
Government, increasing general concerns about the safety of our food
supply as well as the effectiveness of biological defense planning.
This goes to the heart of what we know groups like ISIS are trying to
do--terrorize by any means possible.
We need only look at the impacts of highly pathogenic avian
influenza (HPAI), a natural event, to see how devastating an
intentional act against our food or agriculture could be. Last year's
outbreak of HPAI was the largest animal health incident in U.S.
history, resulting in over $3 billion in economic losses and the
slaughtering of 48 million birds to stem the spread of disease.
Eighteen trading partners banned all imports of U.S. poultry and
products and an additional 28 trading partners imposed partial bans.
This outbreak and its rapid farm-to-farm spread highlighted the
challenges the sector faces related to effective biosecurity,
especially during a large-scale response.
We must ensure we are able to assess our level of preparedness for
any type of major disruption to U.S. food or agriculture. Our goal
today is to gain a better understanding of what Government, along with
academia and the private sector, are doing to reduce vulnerabilities of
the food and agricultural sector to a terrorist attack.
We hope to gain a better understanding of the scope of the problem,
and identify ways in which we as Members of Congress focused on
homeland security issues can help prevent attacks and improve our
readiness and ability to respond.
I hope to hear about information sharing with Government. Is food
and agriculture engaged in our processes including fusion centers? Are
you getting the threat and risk information you need? I also want to
understand your connectedness to the human health side of things--are
our current biosurveillance systems integrating the human, animal, and
plant data to form a true ``One Health'' picture?
With that, I welcome our witnesses. I look forward to your
testimony.

Ms. McSally. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Payne, for any opening statement he may have.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning to all
here. I would like to thank subcommittee Chair, Ms. McSally,
for holding today's chair. Madam Chair, I wish you the best of
luck as you take over the Subcommittee on Border and Maritime
Security.
Ms. McSally. Thank you.
Mr. Payne. Biological threats are evolving. As these
threats evolve, so does our perspective about how we can best
protect against the damage that they can inflict. This
subcommittee has historically focused on the human health
impact of the biological threats. I am pleased that we are
expanding the scope of our oversight to include the impact to
U.S. agriculture and food supply.
I represent the 10th Congressional District of the State of
New Jersey. Now, my district is not known for its rolling
fields of corn, hog pens or open cattle ranges. It is, however,
home of the Port of Newark, and Newark Liberty International
Airport. Customs and Border Protection agriculture specialists
at the airport clear up to 20,000 passengers every day. At Port
Newark, one of the busiest ports on the East Coast, specialists
inspect imported food, items, marble slabs, tiles, and wood-
packing material, all of which can carry insects and other
snails that could harm our domestic agriculture. Yet, just this
week, I heard the CPB employees in my district about
insufficient agriculture specialist staffing.
The Port of Newark and Newark International Airport are top
performing ports, with top interception numbers and several
first-in-the-Nation insect finds. But I am concerned that
unless the staffing challenges are resolved, there is a risk
that a new foreign insect could go undetected and do harm to
the agriculture industry and the safety of the food supply.
Although I recognize that we may not be able to stop every
dangerous insect or pathogen from entering our borders, we must
be vigilant. With that said, I also recognize that there are
domestic risks to agriculture--the agriculture industry and the
food supply related to natural disasters and emerging disease,
diseasing and bad actors.
Last year, for example, an avian influenza outbreak was
responsible for nearly $400 million in losses to the egg and
poultry industry, and consumers paid the price at the grocery
store. Although the Avian influenza was a naturally-occurring
event, the financial losses sustained served as a sobering
example of the economic damage that a significant agriculture
incident could inflict.
The food and agricultural industry is valued at nearly $1
trillion in the United States, and its criticality to the
American people is without question. That is why the Federal
Government has designated the food and agriculture sector a
critical infrastructure sector since 2003.
Although there are multiple efforts to enhance the security
of the agriculture industry underway at the Federal and State
level, as well as within industry, significant challenges
remain. For example, earlier this month, this subcommittee held
a hearing on the Department of Homeland Security's struggle to
achieve a National biosurveillance capability to collect and
analyze biosurveillance data related to human health, animal
health, and plant health.
Unfortunately, this DHS National Biosurveillance
Integration Center has struggled to effectively execute its
mission for nearly a decade to the detriment of efforts to
improve the agricultural biosurveillance capabilities. I will
be interested to know what, if any, recommendations the
witnesses have to improve the National biosurveillance
capability in that regard.
Additionally, I will be interested in understanding how
information related to emerging diseases, emergency planning
for natural disasters, and terrorist threats is shared with
stakeholders in the agricultural industry, and whether the
information is actionable.
Finally, I am eager to learn from our witnesses how the
private sector, educational institutions, and non-Government
entities can play an active role in developing and enhancing
biosecurity protocols for the agriculture industry as a whole.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to hearing your testimony. Madam Chair, with that, I
yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Payne follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Donald M. Payne Jr.
February 26, 2016
Biological threats are evolving. As these threats evolve, so does
our perspective about how we can best protect against the damage they
can inflict. This subcommittee has historically focused on the human
health impact of the biological threats. I am pleased that we are
expanding the scope of our oversight to include the impact to U.S.
agriculture and food supply.
I represent the 10th Congressional district of New Jersey. My
district is not known for its rolling fields of corn, hog pens, or open
cattle ranges. It is, however, home of the Port of Newark and Newark
Liberty International Airport.
Customs and Border Protection Agriculture Specialists at that
airport clear up to 20,000 passengers every day. At Port Newark--one of
the busiest ports on the East Coast--specialists inspect imported food
items, marble slabs, tiles, and wood-packing material, all of which can
carry insects or other snails that could harm domestic agriculture.
Yet, just this week, I heard from CBP employees in my district
about insufficient Agriculture Specialist staffing. The Port of Newark
and Newark Liberty International Airport are top performing ports, with
top interception numbers, and several ``First-in-Nation'' insect finds.
But I am concerned that unless the staffing challenges are
resolved, there's a risk that a new foreign insect could go undetected
and do harm to the agriculture industry and the safety of the food
supply. Although I recognize that we may not be able to stop every
dangerous insect or pathogen from entering our borders, we must be
vigilant.
With that said, I also recognize that there are domestic risks to
the agriculture industry and food supply--related to natural disasters,
emerging disease, and bad actors. Last year, for example, an avian
influenza outbreak was responsible for nearly $400 million in losses to
the egg and poultry industry.
And consumers paid the price at the grocery store. Although avian
influenza was a naturally-occurring event, the financial losses
sustained served as a sobering example of the economic damage that a
significant agricultural incident could inflict.
The food and agriculture industry is valued at nearly a trillion
dollars in the United States, and its criticality to the American
people is without question. That is why the Federal Government has
designated the Food and Agriculture Sector a critical infrastructure
sector since 2003. Although there are multiple efforts to enhance the
security of the agriculture industry underway at the Federal and State
level, as well as within industry, significant challenges remain.
For example, earlier this month, this subcommittee held a hearing
on the Department of Homeland Security's struggle to achieve a National
biosurveillance capability to collect and analyze biosurveillance data
related to human health, animal health, and plant health.
Unfortunately, this DHS's National Biosurveillance Integration Center
has struggled to effectively execute its mission for nearly a decade,
to the detriment of efforts to improve agriculture biosurveillance
capabilities. I will be interested to know what, if any,
recommendations the witnesses have to improve the National
biosurveillance capability in that regard.
Additionally, I will be interested in understanding how information
related to emerging diseases, emergency planning for natural disasters,
and terrorist threats is shared with stakeholders in the agriculture
industry and whether the information is actionable.
Finally, I am eager to learn from our witnesses how the private
sector, educational institutions, and other non-Government entities can
play an active role in developing and enhancing biosecurity protocols
for the agriculture industry as a whole.

Ms. McSally. Thank you, Ranking Member Payne. Other Members
of the subcommittee are reminded that opening statements may be
submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 26, 2016
Before we begin, I would like to thank all of the witnesses for
being here today, especially Professor Brian Williams from Mississippi
State University. Mr. Williams is a professor at Mississippi State's
College of Agriculture Economics and will provide important insight
into the economic effects of an agro-event--whether man-made or
naturally-occurring. I would like to thank him for making the trip to
Washington to share his important insights with us today. I represent a
district in Mississippi where agriculture is the No. 1 source of
income.
From catfish and poultry to hogs and rice, agriculture accounts for
$10.6 billion in annual revenue--or over 15 percent--of the State's
income. Any significant disruption to the agriculture industry there--
whether at the hands of terrorist actors, emerging diseases, or natural
disasters--would have devastating rippling effects throughout the State
and the Nation. That is why I have worked hard to advance programs that
improve the National capability to prevent--and mitigate the impact
of--biological events affecting agriculture and improve resiliency
within the industry.
I am interested in hearing our witness' assessment of Federal
efforts to protect the Nation's food supply and to better understand
the risks to our agriculture sector. Late last year, the Blue Ribbon
Study Panel on Biodefense released a report that identified capability
gaps across the National biodefense enterprise. The Panel's report
focused on biodefense efforts associated with protecting human health.
It also addressed bio-threats to agriculture.
An important recommendation from the report called for enhanced
surveillance and detection of biological threats to animal health. This
would be achieved through the establishment of a ``Nationally
notifiable animal disease system'' modeled after the existing system
for identifying human disease outbreaks.
Too often, we find that information sharing does not take place
across units of Government and the private sector. Hopefully, our
witnesses can shed light on whether the Federal Government is doing
enough to identify international threats to the agriculture industry. I
believe these actions must be timely and fact-based to protect domestic
livestock and crops. Domestically, we should examine whether animal
disease reporting requirements ensure that emerging diseases are
identified. That information is central to the ability of health and
safety officials to contain an outbreak.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture has proposed the creation of a
National List of Reportable Animal Diseases. I would be interested to
hear whether the existence of such a list would be helpful to
agricultural stakeholders and whether it could be designed in a way
where States and other owners of disease information could willingly
and comfortably report disease incidence?
Moreover, I want to understand the extent to which the agriculture
industry has been included in emergency planning activities so that it
is resilient in the wake of a natural disaster. Now that NBAF has
received its construction funding, I want to learn about the research
that will be conducted on biological threats to livestock and animal
diseases that can impact human health. To that end, I would like to
learn more about Kansas State's partnership with NBAF, the research
that will be pursued, and how its work will advance National agro-
defense capabilities.

Ms. McSally. We are pleased to have a very distinguished
panel before us today on this important topic. Dr. Doug Meckes
is the North Carolina State veterinarian, a position he has
held since 2014. Prior to that, Dr. Meckes served as the branch
chief for Food, Agriculture, and Veterinary Defense at the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security, where he provided oversight
and management of the Department's implementation of Homeland
Security Presidential Directive-9, Defense of the United States
Agriculture and Food, Integrating the efforts of other DHS
components, and coordinating those efforts with appropriate
Federal departments and agencies, Tribal, State, and local
governments, and the private sector.
Dr. Tammy Beckham is dean of the College of Veterinary
Medicine at Kansas State University, a position she assumed in
August 2015. Prior to her current position, Dr. Beckham served
as the director of the Institute for Infectious Animal
Diseases, or IIAD, a Department of Homeland Security Center of
Excellence in College Station, Texas, where she led the IIAD's
effort to perform research and develop products to defend the
Nation from high consequence, foreign, animal, emerging, and
zoonotic diseases. Did I say that right?
Dr. Beckham. Excellent.
Ms. McSally. I was a premed biology major in college. My
professors would not be proud of me.
Anyway, Dr. Beckham also served as director of the Texas
A&M Veterinary Medical Diagnostic laboratory, where she
provided leadership for its two full-service laboratories and
two poultry laboratories, and directs one of the highest-volume
animal diagnostic labs in the country.
Previously, Dr. Beckham was director of the Foreign Animal
Disease Diagnostic laboratory, part of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture's Plum Island Animal Disease Center in New York.
Her responsibilities included managing the diagnosis of animal
diseases; overseeing diagnostic test development for a Nation-
wide animal health diagnostic system; and coordinating efforts
with the Department of Homeland Security and National Animal
Health Laboratory Network and other entities.
Mr. Bobby Acord has been a consultant for the National Pork
Producers Council since 2004. Prior to that, Mr. Acord served
as administrator for the U.S. Department of Agriculture's
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services from 2001 to 2004.
As APHIS's--is that how you pronounce it--administrator, Mr.
Acord was responsible for protecting U.S. agricultural health
from exotic pests and diseases, administering the Animal
Welfare Act, and carrying out wildlife damage management
activities. Mr. Acord served as APHIS's associate administrator
from 1999 to 2001. Prior to that, he served nearly a decade as
deputy administrator for APHIS's wildlife services program.
Dr. Brian Williams is an assistant extension professor at
the Mississippi State University, Department of Agricultural
Economics. Dr. Williams focuses on the primary areas of
commodity marketing, farm management, production economics, and
agricultural policy. Since joining the department, he has
served as a member of the Mississippi University disaster
response team, where he has focused on assessing damage to the
agricultural academic sector after natural disasters. The
witnesses' full written statements will appear in the record.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Meckes for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF R. DOUGLAS MECKES, D.V.M., STATE VETERINARIAN,
NORTH CAROLINA DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND CONSUMER SERVICES,
VETERINARY DIVISION

Dr. Meckes. Red light. Chairman McSally, Ranking Member
Payne, Members of the House Subcommittee on Preparedness,
Response, and Communications. My name is Doug Meckes, and I am
the State veterinarian and the director of the veterinary
division in North Carolina's Department of Agriculture and
consumer services. The division serves the poultry industry,
the livestock industry, and manages and operates 4 veterinary
diagnostic laboratories in North Carolina.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today about North
Carolina's on-going efforts to prepare for, respond to, and
communicate with stakeholders during agricultural emergencies.
North Carolina and Georgia's robust agriculture and
agribusiness industry, which contributes nearly $80 billion
annually to North Carolina's economy. Sixty-seven percent of
that figure is associated animal agriculture. The industry
accounts for 17 percent of State's income and employs 16
percent of the workforce.
Chairman McSally and Ranking Member Payne have spoken
knowledgeably about the food and ag sectors writ large, and I
will not speak to that. But mindful of the contributions of the
food and ag sector to the Nation, in January 2004, Homeland
Security Presidential Directive-9 was released and established
a National policy to defend agriculture food and food systems
against terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other
emergencies.
Included in HSPD-9 were 18 line items which provide
guidance to address then-identified gaps in our Nation's
ability to identify agriculture and food. Twelve years, later,
gaps remain in our efforts to fulfill the HSPD-9 directives.
I will speak to North Carolina's concerns over 3 of those
gaps today. Federal, State, and local responses capabilities,
availability of vaccine for foot-and-mouth disease, and the
National Animal Health Laboratory Network resources. Line item
14 of HSPD-9 directs participating departments and agencies to
ensure that the Federal, State, and local response capabilities
are adequate to respond effectively to a terrorist attack, to
major disease outbreaks, or other disaster.
Even before HSPD-9, my predecessors in North Carolina
recognized the need for such capability. That need was
precipitated by a series of events in the State, in the Nation,
and internationally. In September 1999, Hurricane Floyd made
landfall in North Carolina, and that resulted in $813 million
in agriculture losses.
In February 2001, an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in
the United Kingdom caused a crisis in agriculture and tourism.
Finally, 9/11 brought new concerns of attacks on our
agriculture and food systems. The likelihood of agroterrorism,
the deliberate introduction of animal plant disease for the
purpose of generating fear, and causing economic losses, and
undermining social stability took on new meaning.
In the midst of these events, North Carolina's veterinary
division launched an effort to meet the challenges of
agriculture and food in the 21st Century. As a result, the
emergency programs division was created within the department
to reduce the vulnerability, minimize the impact of any natural
or man-made disaster, disease, or terrorist attack, and to
facilitate a rapid return to normalcy.
Today, the emergency programs division within North
Carolina has reached maturity and has more than fulfilled its
all hazards response mission. Development of this capability
has been funded by State and various Federal grants: $18
million in State funds, $7.3 million in Federal funds, a
relatively small investment over the years.
Consider what similar investments might have meant to
States so profoundly affected by HPAI. Iowa and Minnesota
experienced $1.6-1.8 billion in economic losses as a result of
HPAI on 180 premises.
Continued Federal, State funding will be necessary to
maintain current capability to develop new capability to train,
to exercise, to replace equipment as needed. Unfortunately,
funding for North Carolina's emergency program division
continues to decline, and places the State's preparedness and
response capability at risk.
North Carolina's second concern, line item 18(a) of HSPD-9,
speaks to the necessity of developing a National Veterinary
Stockpile, containing sufficient amounts of animal vaccine
antivirals, therapeutic products to appropriately respond to
the most damaging animal diseases.
Foremost in the minds with States with significant animal
agriculture production is the possibility of a foot-and-mouth
disease outbreak. Certainly, that is the case in North
Carolina, home to 9 million hogs. The size, the structure, the
efficiency, and the extensive movement inherent in U.S.
livestock industry, will present unprecedented challenges in
the event of an FMD outbreak. Control of such an outbreak in
livestock-dense areas will require tens of millions of doses of
foot-and-mouth disease vaccine.
However, there are not tens of millions of doses of foot-
and-mouth disease available, not anywhere in the world, because
there is no excess production capacity. Current production
meets daily needs, and there is no excess capacity. The reality
has been evident since 2004, when the National Veterinary
Stockpile was created, but there has never been sufficient
funding to stockpile foot-and-mouth disease vaccines.
FMD remains North Carolina's animal agriculture's greatest
threat. The pork industry, the economy, communities,
businesses, and families in North Carolina would be devastated
by a foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. A cooperative
collaborative effort, which includes all stakeholders must be
initiated to develop and implement a plan for establishing an
effective FMD stockpile.
North Carolina's third concern is veterinary diagnostic
laboratory capability. Line item 8, HSPD-9, directs departments
and agencies to develop a Nation-wide laboratory network for
food, veterinary, plant, health, and water resources that
integrate Federal and State laboratory resources. The National
Animal Health Laboratory Network was created as a result of
this directive, and is now a part of the Nation-wide strategy
to coordinate the work of all organizations providing animal
disease surveillance and testing services.
North Carolina's veterinary diagnostic laboratory system is
a part of NAHLN, effectively surveils for and diagnoses
animals' zoonotic diseases every day. However, State and
Federal support of and full funding for the Nation's NAHLN
laboratory system are necessary to optimize capability.
The absence of full funding for the NAHLN was recently
noted in the bipartisan report of the Blue Ribbon Study Panel
on Biodefense, which stated: ``The NAHLN has struggled to
maintain even $10 million of annual funding. Its appropriations
cut over the years to pay for other programs. As a result,
laboratories are unable to meet the threat and at times
eliminate positions and testing capacity for foreign animal
diseases.''
After struggling for years to obtain sufficient funding,
Congress, in 2014, authorized the specific funding line for
NAHLN at $15 million. NAHLN must be funded at this authorized
level in order to meet the need.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on behalf of
North Carolina, about issues of concern related to the defense
in food and agriculture. I am happy to address any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Meckes follows:]
Prepared Statement of R. Douglas Meckes
February 26, 2016
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of the House
Subcommittee on Preparedness, Response, and Communications, my name is
Doug Meckes and I am the State veterinarian and the director of the
Veterinary Division in North Carolina's Department of Agriculture and
Consumer Services. The division includes 150 employees that serve the
poultry industry and the livestock industry, that manage and operate
the State's 4 veterinary diagnostic laboratories, and that are charged
with oversight of 866 kennels and shelters caring for companion animals
in North Carolina. Thank you for the opportunity to speak about matters
of concern in North Carolina's on-going efforts to prepare for, respond
to, and communicate with stakeholders during agricultural emergencies.
North Carolina enjoys a robust agriculture and agribusiness
industry which contributes nearly $80 billion on an annual basis to
North Carolina's economy; 66% of that figure is associated with animal
agriculture and North Carolina ranks second in hog production and third
in overall poultry production in the Nation. On an annual basis, the
industry accounts for 17% of the State's income and employs 16% of the
workforce. North Carolina's agriculture/agribusiness industry is part
of the greater Food and Agriculture Sector (FA Sector), designated by
Homeland Security a critical infrastructure sector in 2003 thus
recognizing its significant contribution to National security and the
economy.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Mike Walden, Reynolds Professor and Extension Economist, NC
State University's College of Agriculture and Life Sciences.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The FA Sector is composed of complex production, processing, and
delivery systems and has the capacity to feed people and animals both
within and beyond the boundaries of the United States. These food and
agriculture systems are almost entirely under private ownership,
operate in highly competitive global markets, strive to operate in
harmony with the environment, and provide economic opportunities and an
improved quality of life for American citizens and others world-wide.
The FA Sector accounts for roughly one-fifth of the Nation's economic
activity. In 2012, total agricultural product sales amounted to $400
billion, with crops and livestock each accounting for roughly half of
those sales. One-fifth of U.S. agricultural production is exported,
generating $144.1 billion in 2013, creating a positive trade balance of
roughly $40 billion, and thereby fueling the U.S. economy.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Food and Agriculture Sector-Specific Plan (SSP) 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In January 2004, Homeland Security Presidential Directive-9 (HSPD-
9) ``established a National policy to defend the agriculture system
against terrorists' attack, major disasters, and other emergencies.''
Included in HSPD-9 were 18 ``line items'' which provide guidance to
address then-identified gaps in the Nation's ability to defend
agriculture and food. Twelve years later, progress has been made in
addressing some of the gaps including a star in the crown of
agriculture and food defense: Line Item 24 in HSPD-9--the design and
initiation of construction for ``safe, secure, and state-of-the-art
agriculture biocontainment laboratories that research and develop
diagnostic capabilities for foreign animal and zoonotic diseases,'' the
National Agro-Biodefense facility in Manhattan, Kansas. This
achievement notwithstanding, other gaps in HSPD-9 have not been
sufficiently addressed.
In the interest of full disclosure, prior to accepting my position
in North Carolina, I was fully engaged in ``providing oversight and
management of the Department's (DHS's) implementation of HSPD-9'' in my
role as branch chief, Food, Agriculture and Veterinary Defense Branch
of the Office of Health Affairs, Department of Homeland Security. Thus,
through my experiences with DHS and now as State veterinarian, I have
gained unique insight into what is/should be required at the State
level to defend agriculture and food. I will speak to 3 of North
Carolina's concerns today: Federal, State, and local response
capabilities, availability of vaccine for Foot-and-Mouth disease, and
National Animal Health Laboratory Network resources.
Line Item 14 of HSPD-9 directs the participating Departments/
Agencies to ensure ``that the combined Federal, State, and local
response capabilities are adequate to respond quickly and effectively
to a terrorist attack, major disease outbreak, or other disaster
affecting the National agriculture or food infrastructure.'' Even
before HSPD-9, members of the North Carolina Department of Agriculture
and Consumer Services (NCDA&CS), my predecessors, recognized the need
for such a capability. Today, as the North Carolina State Veterinarian,
I am the fortunate benefactor of their insight, vision, and planning to
prepare for and respond to agriculture and food incidents of any
magnitude. The need for this capability was precipitated by a series of
events in the State, in the Nation, and internationally. In September
1999, Hurricane Floyd made landfall in North Carolina. The hurricane,
and associated weather conditions before and after, resulted in the
most severe flooding and devastation in North Carolina's history. That
flooding resulted in an estimated $813 million in agricultural losses
affecting 32,000 farmers. In addition to crop losses, livestock
losses--almost 3 million poultry, 28,000 swine, and 600 hundred
cattle--created problems associated with disposal of the carcasses of
the animals.\3\ In February 2001, an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease
in the United Kingdom caused a crisis in British agriculture and
tourism. This epizootic saw 2,000 cases of the disease in farms across
most of the British countryside. Over 10 million sheep and cattle were
depopulated in an eventually successful attempt to halt the disease. By
the time that the disease was controlled, in October 2001, the crisis
was estimated to have cost the United Kingdom over US$6 billion.
Finally, the attacks of 9/11 and the subsequent 2001 anthrax attacks,
also known as Amerithrax, brought new concerns of attacks on our
agricultural and food systems. The likelihood of ``agroterrorism,''
``the deliberate introduction of an animal or plant disease for the
purpose of generating fear, causing economic losses, or undermining
social stability,'' took on new meaning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ North Carolina State Animal Response Team (SART) Animal Burial
Guidelines 2003.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the midst of these events, the director of the Veterinary
Division in NCDA&CS took on the task of developing capabilities to
better protect North Carolina's animal health and to formulate a plan
to meet the challenges of agriculture and food in the 21st Century. The
sum of the director's efforts in this regard created the Emergency
Programs Division within the Department. The mission of the Division is
to: ``Reduce the vulnerability and minimize the impact from any natural
or man-made disaster, disease outbreak, or terrorist attack for the
Department, the people and the agricultural interest of the State and
to facilitate a rapid return to normalcy.'' Obviously, given the
possible origins of a disaster, a broad spectrum of multi-hazard events
must be considered.
In 2002, the Agricultural Emergency Operations Center (AgEOC) was
completed and 4 primary activities were identified:
1. Continuation of the threat assessment and threat reduction
efforts within the Department and the agriculture community.
2. Training of AgEOC staff in operations and conduct of exercises
for Multi-Hazard events.
3. Completion of the Multi-Hazard Response Plan.
4. Securing adequate funding for the continued development of the
Multi-Hazard Threat Database (MHTD), and full implementation of
the NC Threat Reduction Plan.
The MHTD built by and for the use of the NCDA&CS, is a collection
of both secure and public facing web-based applications. It provides
detailed situational awareness in all events; examples would include:
Flooding and wind projections during hurricanes for the FA Sector;
visualization of disease spread; premises and facility locations for
isolation/quarantine within a control area; vehicle routing during
disease outbreaks; and food and feed firm's activities during recalls/
food illness outbreaks. Additionally, the MHTD facilitates and supports
all activities associated with strategic planning, emergency response,
incident command structure, and resource management during events.
NCDA&CS is currently in the process of developing a 5-year plan to
retool and bolster the effectiveness and complete integration of MHTD
into the North Carolina FA Sector; the end-product of this effort--a
MHTD tool capable of successfully guiding North Carolina through any
all-hazards event and returning/restoring the economy, the environment,
and the citizens to pre-event status.
Today, the Emergency Programs Division (EP Division) has reached
maturity and its sphere of operation is considered All-Hazards in
nature; as such, the EP Division is actively engaged in the support of
other divisions within the Department, collaborates and coordinates
with other departments and agencies across local, State, and Federal
government, with industry and academia, and has rendered assistance to
other States in a variety of instances. The EP Division's mission and
goals are now well-defined.
mission
The NCDA&CS Emergency Programs Division's mission is to reduce the
vulnerability to or the impact from, any disaster, disease, or
terrorist attack on the agriculture community of North Carolina. The
Division serves in a leadership capacity within the Department and
works closely with local communities to support agrosecurity,
agricultural emergency preparedness and recovery, and rapid response
technology efforts. The EP Division establishes public-private
partnerships between vital government agencies, industry, and
volunteers to carry out this mission.
goals

Preserve the ability of the N.C. agriculture community to
produce stable supplies of food and other agricultural
products.

Diagnose and investigate infectious animal and livestock
diseases, intentional plant pest introductions, unauthorized
biological control agent releases, and environmental health
problems and health hazards in the N.C. agriculture community.

Provide the full resources of the North Carolina Department
of Agriculture & Consumer Services to support the State of
North Carolina in any emergency situation.

Reduce the vulnerability of the staff, vital assets,
services, and operations of the North Carolina Department of
Agriculture & Consumer Services.

Reduce the vulnerability of State animal, livestock, plant,
crop, and other beneficial organism populations from the effect
of a Multi-Hazard emergency event.

Support the partners and customers of the North Carolina
Department of Agriculture & Consumer Services in reducing their
vulnerability to and recovery from the effect of a Multi-Hazard
emergency event.

Inform, educate, and empower people to respond to specific
agricultural community issues pertaining to a threatened or
actual Multi-Hazard emergency event.

Enforce laws and regulations that protect public, animal,
livestock, plant, crop, and other beneficial organism's health
and ensure their general safety in case of a Multi-Hazard
emergency event.

Evaluate the effectiveness, accessibility, and quality of
departmental and community-based agricultural services
available to respond to a Multi-Hazard emergency event.
The measure of success of the EP Division's efforts to accomplish
its All-Hazards Response mission is best characterized by the breadth
of its activities.
the castleberry food recall in north carolina
On July 18, 2007, Castleberry's Food Company announced that it was
voluntarily recalling several products and working with the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA), the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) to investigate possible contamination of these products with
Clostridium Botulinum, a bacterium which can cause botulism, a life-
threatening illness. Upon notification of this recall, NCDA&CS Food and
Drug Protection Division and Meat and Poultry Inspection Division
jointly initiated response actions on July 20, 2007 and began to
monitor the situation. At the time there was little data known about
the recall. As the seriousness of the situation became clearer through
communications with FDA, NCDA&CS initiated the formation of the
Castleberry Recall Incident Management Team (IMT) and activated the
Joint Food Emergency Operations Command Center. Food and Drug
Protection Division became the multi-agency coordinator for North
Carolina food defense agencies and set up the command center at the
NCDA&CS Constable Laboratory, in Raleigh, NC. The director instituted
the use of the Incident Command System (ICS) to manage the incident on
July 25, 2007 and began development of daily Incident Action Plans. The
initial planning process incorporated the Food and Drug Protection
Division, Meat and Poultry Inspection Division, Public Affairs
Division, Agricultural Statistics Division, and EP Division into the
event operations.
The early implementation of the ICS by the NCDA&CS and other State
agencies to manage the event was seen by all responding agencies as one
of the keys to the overall success of the operation. The activation of
the Joint Food Emergency Operations Command Center allowed the various
State and local agencies with response authority and capability to act
in a uniform and consistent manner, which contributed to the success
and positive mission outcomes of the operation. At the end of the
recall, over 35,000 cans of product were removed from outlets across
North Carolina, more that the total of all products collected by the
rest of the United States agencies engaged in the recall.
evans road fire
In June of 2008 a wildfire broke out in Eastern North Carolina
consuming over 40,000 acres. Utilizing the web-based Emergency
Operations Center (WebEOC), EP Division coordinated the NCDA&CS
response and support activities for this event. Logistical support was
provided in the form of a loan of 320 gallons of fire suppression foam
from EP Division's Avian Influenza (AI) response inventory, pumps, and
hoses. The Department also provided 2 trucks for dust abatement as well
as personnel from Plant Industries Division. Food distribution was also
supplied in the form of 2 refrigerated trailers to support food service
for the fire fighters.
tomato and pepper salmonella investigation
The NCDA&CS Emergency Program Division assisted the Food and Drug
Protection Division in its response to a National Salmonella outbreak
in various fresh produce products in the late summer 2008. Due to the
complexity of the event and potential serious consequences for
consumers and producers alike, EP Division assisted in the
establishment of a Multi-Agency Joint Operation Center at the Food and
Drug Division's Constable Laboratory. Specifically EP Division:
Developed and distributed daily Incident Action Plans; refined
procedures to address personnel, equipment, and safety issues;
facilitated daily conference calls; gathered, recorded, and
disseminated event documentation; developed and distributed daily
situation reports; provided secure web-based data and information-
gathering tools to facilitate situational awareness and operational
planning processes; implemented a web-based field reporting and time
and mileage websites; and acted as liaison to involved agency
administrators and North Carolina Emergency Management.
operation restore (peanut butter recall)
In the winter of 2009 the U.S. FDA issued a peanut butter recall
due to the recent outbreaks of Salmonella linked to peanut paste. The
North Carolina Food and Drug Protection Division conducted 569 checks
evaluating over 2,000 products subject to the recall with an
effectiveness rate in excess of 68%. The EP Division supported the Food
and Drug Division technologically with the creation of a web-based data
entry and reporting tools. These tools allowed inspectors in the field
to rapidly upload critical time-sensitive data which assisted decision
makers, allowing them to make informed choices quickly. Additionally,
websites were also developed for workers involved in the recall to
record time and mileage, allowing rapid accounting for reimbursement,
and an ``after-action'' website to gather feedback from participants.
emergency management assistance compact (emac) requested by the alabama
department of agriculture and industry to assist damaged producer
facilities
A poultry depopulation task force consisting of 6 NCDA&CS
personnel, resources including 2 foam depopulation units, supplies, and
materials deployed to Alabama on May 1, 2011. The focus of this event
was response to tornado-damaged poultry producer houses. The task force
traveled to Decatur, Alabama and reported to its assigned point of
contact. Team A encountered water delivery issues which limited
operations to 1 location for the day. This team was operating in
concert with a team deployed by others. Two and one-half houses in
partial collapse with approximately 24,000 birds were depopulated on
this site. Team B was better supplied with water and was able to
perform operations on 2 different farms. Two houses in partial collapse
on 2 sites with approximately 24,000 birds were depopulated. Operations
in both cases resulted in 100% depopulation of houses with no injury to
personnel or damage to the equipment.
On day 3 (5/3/2011) the task force was re-assigned to the Alabama
Department of Agriculture and Industry. Both teams were directed to a
farm on which 4 houses were in total destruction. One pump unit was
used to generate foam to depopulate approximately 7,000 birds located
in 2 of the houses.
ncda&cs emergency support function 11 hurricane irene response
Hurricane Irene was a large and powerful Atlantic hurricane that
left extensive flood and wind damage along its path through the
Caribbean, the U.S. East Coast and as far north as Atlantic Canada in
2011.
In North Carolina, tropical storm force winds began to affect the
coastal communities and the Outer Banks hours before landfall,
producing waves of 6-9 feet. In addition to the gales, Irene spawned
several tornadoes early on August 27 while approaching the coast.
Precipitation totals from Irene in the region were particularly high,
ranging between 10-14 inches.
Prior to landfall and in anticipation of evacuation in select
counties, NCDA&CS EP Division opened the Agriculture Emergency
Operations Center and formally established its incident command
structure on August 25, 2011, which mirrored the N.C. Emergency
Management's activation level. An initial Incident Action Plan was
produced and distributed for the operational period beginning at 0700
hrs August 26, 2011 by the NC Agriculture Incident Management Team with
the pre-landfall focus of actions centered on public information to
protect agricultural infrastructure and farms, the safety of NCDA&CS
staff and facilities, operational support of sheltering for animals,
and planning of proactive coordination of response actions following
landfall.
It's important to note that in April 2011, N.C. Agriculture had
another brutal assault by tornadoes that ripped through highly-
productive crop land which was just being planted. Agricultural
structures and equipment were damaged.
These two events in 2011 resulted in estimated damages of over $450
million to crops and infrastructure; much of which was either not
insured at all, or underinsured.
2014 ncda&cs emergency programs division accomplishments

Internal focus on how to be better prepared as a division to
work across lines with sister divisions and across State
borders with other agencies to improve capacity in the event of
natural or radiological disasters or a food illness outbreak.

Internally, the division identified an Incident Management
Team and invited the Food and Drug Protection Division to join
in team training specifically to build capability for managing
a large event affecting the food supply.

North Carolina hosted a training with the USDA APHIS
National Veterinary Stockpile team to improve collaboration
during disease outbreaks.

Early in the summer, with news of the West African Ebola
Virus (EVD) outbreak and the consequences of managing companion
animals of infected individuals coming to North Carolina, EP
division began internal discussions while working closely with
N.C. Division of Public Health on a strategy for responding to
a mission of this type. Through a formal agreement with N.C.
Department of Public Health, the EP division is the lead for
companion animal care for animals whose owners are exposed to
EVD.

EP division worked collaboratively with the National
Alliance for State Animal and Agricultural Emergency Programs
(NASAAEP) and the National Animal Rescue and Sheltering
Coalition to host their annual meeting and to co-join venues
with the 11th Annual One Medicine Symposium.

EP division staff inspected animal contact exhibits at
sanctioned agricultural fairs for compliance with Aedin's
Law,\4\ while also continuing their educational efforts with
fair managers and exhibitors regarding non-contact animal
exhibits.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ After a 2004 outbreak of E. Coli affected 27 people at the
North Carolina State Fair, North Carolina legislators passed Aedin's
Law, which placed new regulations on petting zoos and animal contact
exhibits at agricultural fairs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2015 ncda&cs emergency programs division accomplishments

Chief among the 2015 accomplishments are the multiple
deployments of depopulation task forces to Minnesota and Iowa
to assist in the depopulation of poultry infected with Highly
Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI). Early in the outbreak of
HPAI (March, April, and May 2015), both States found themselves
in desperate straits as the disease spread rapidly throughout
their States; North Carolina's assistance was sought and
provided and the State's task forces were able to provide
capable assistance to aid in the depopulation of infected
poultry/infected premise poultry enabling the spread of the
disease to be controlled.

In offering his thanks to North Carolina, the Minnesota
Incident Commander stated with certainty that North Carolina's
assistance had ``saved the poultry industry in Minnesota.''
In reference to North Carolina's second concern, Line Item 18(a) of
HSPD-9 speaks to the necessity of developing ``A National Veterinary
Stockpile (NVS) containing sufficient amounts of animal vaccine,
antiviral, or therapeutic products to appropriately respond to the most
damaging animal diseases affecting human health and the economy and
that will be capable of deployment within 24 hours of an outbreak. The
NVS shall leverage where appropriate the mechanisms and infrastructure
that have been developed for the management, storage, and distribution
of the Strategic National Stockpile.''
Foremost in the minds of States in which animal agriculture
production is of significant consequence is the possibility of a Foot-
and-Mouth Disease (FMD) outbreak. That is certainly the case in North
Carolina, home to 9 million hogs.

``Foot and mouth disease is the most important animal disease in the
world capable of crossing National boundaries and devastating animal
agriculture (a transboundary disease). FMD affects cattle, pigs, sheep,
goats, deer, elk, and other wildlife. Ninety-six countries are either
endemically or sporadically infected with the disease, therefore there
is a constant threat that it will be introduced into the United States
either accidentally or intentionally. FMD is extremely contagious and
can spread rapidly with devastating consequences. You probably remember
the outbreak in the United Kingdom in 2001 which is estimated to have
cost approximately $6 billion. The number of livestock and the
agriculture economy is much smaller in the United Kingdom than the
United States. We learned from their outbreak that we cannot depend on
stamping out the disease by killing all infected and exposed animals.
``The size, structure, efficiency, and extensive movement inherent in
the United States livestock industry will present unprecedented
challenges in the event of an FMD outbreak. No country with a livestock
industry comparable to that of the United States has had to deal with
an outbreak of FMD, and the impact would extend far beyond animal
agriculture.
``Once FMD is detected, an essential tool for control is to stop all
animal movement in the affected area. Livestock production in the
United States depends on extensive movement of animals. Approximately
400,000 cattle and 1 million swine are estimated to be on the road in
trucks each day, either being delivered to packing plants or to other
stages of production. Approximately 40 million swine are shipped into a
new State each year (110,000 each day). Many of those cross multiple
State lines. In an FMD outbreak, State Animal Health Officials may
prohibit animals from an FMD positive area from entering their State.
Modern swine production depends on extensive animal movement on a
regular basis. If animal movement is stopped, animals will need to be
euthanized for welfare reasons because facilities will rapidly become
overcrowded.
``An outbreak of FMD will shut down exports of fresh beef, pork, or
dairy products. In 2014, beef exports totaled $7.1 billion, pork
exports $6.7 billion and dairy exports totaled $7.1 billion.
Approximately 11% of U.S. beef production and 22% of U.S. pork
production are exported. In 2003, beef exports dropped due to a single
case of mad cow disease (BSE); the cumulative loss in U.S. beef trade
is estimated to have been $16 billion. The increasing export of beef
and pork products in recent years significantly contributes to the
value of cattle and swine. As exports increase, the industry becomes
more vulnerable to the sudden and extended loss of exports that would
result from an FMD outbreak. The price for pork and beef will drop
dramatically due to the excess product on the domestic market. That
will also impact the price of poultry products and the price of grain.
``In 2011, Dr. Dermot Hayes and colleagues at the Center for
Agricultural and Rural Development at Iowa State University published
``Economy Wide Impacts of a Foreign Animal Disease in the United
States'' which had been funded by the National Pork Board. They
estimated that over 10 years, the cumulative loss due to an
uncontrolled FMD outbreak would be $199.8 billion. Losses estimated
include: Pork--$57 billion; Beef--$71 billion; Poultry--$1 billion;
Corn--$44 billion; Soybeans--$25 billion; Wheat--$1.8 billion. The
impact would likely be larger now because of the increase in the value
of exports since 2011. Agriculture is a critical infrastructure in the
United States and is severely threatened by the potential of an FMD
outbreak.
``The USDA, along with many state and industry officials, recognized
that the approach of stamping out and stop movement of animals is
simply not possible given the realities of animal agriculture in the
United States. The USDA document `Foot-and-Mouth Disease Vaccination
Policy in the United States' (September 2014) illustrates the current
capacity of the United States to effectively implement vaccination
strategy for control of different types of FMD outbreaks (available
upon request). It clearly indicates that there is not sufficient
vaccine capacity to assist in controlling an FMD outbreak.
``Fully appreciating the size, structure, efficiency, and extensive
movement in the United States livestock industry demonstrates the
unprecedented challenges an FMD outbreak would bring about. Control of
an FMD outbreak in livestock dense areas without the rapid use of tens
of millions of doses of FMD vaccine will be impossible.''\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Testimony submitted to the U.S. House of Representatives
Agriculture Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture: ``Impact
of an Outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in the United States and
the Urgent Need for an Adequate Stockpile of FMD Vaccine.'' Submitted
by James A. Roth, DVM, PhD, Director of the Center for Food Security
and Public Health, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State
University, February 11, 2016.

That conclusion brings us face-to-face with the dilemma faced by
our Nation and our Nation's animal agriculture industry--there are not
tens of millions of doses of FMD vaccine available, not anywhere in the
world because there is no excess capacity for additional vaccine
production--current production capacity meets current day-to-day market
needs for FMD vaccine. This same reality was recognized in 2004 when
HSPD-9 directed the creation of the National Veterinary Stockpile to
respond to the most damaging animal diseases (including FMD) affecting
human health and the economy, but NVS has never received sufficient
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
funding to stockpile FMD vaccines.

``It is possible to have an FMD vaccine stockpile available for
immediate use. However, establishing and maintaining an FMD vaccine
bank is complex. There are 7 distinct serotypes of the virus that are
not cross-protective and approximately 65 subtypes. The World Reference
Laboratory for FMD recommends that FMD vaccine banks maintain 23
strains of FMD virus in the vaccine bank. Once the virus in the
outbreak is isolated, the serotype can be identified and the correct
vaccine selected for use.
``A plan to ensure that adequate supplies of FMD vaccine with multiple
strains of FMD virus are available in the event of an accidental or
intentional introduction of FMD virus into the United States is
urgently needed.
``At the request of the National Pork Board, National Cattlemen's Beef
Association, and National Milk Producers Federation I produced a white
paper entitled `FMD Vaccine Surge Capacity for Emergency Use in the
United States' outlining a potential plan to develop a National
Veterinary Stockpile (NVS) with sufficient quantities of FMD vaccine to
protect U.S. agriculture, food systems, and the economy. The white
paper is available at: www.cfsph.iastate.edu/pdf/fmd-vaccine-surge-
capacity-for-emergency-use-in-the-US.''\5\

Finally, I will address North Carolina's third concern, the issue
of veterinary diagnostic laboratory capacity in North Carolina and
across the Nation. Line Item 8 of HSPD-9 states ``the Secretaries of
the Interior, Agriculture, Health and Human Services, the Administrator
of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the heads of other
appropriate Federal departments and agencies shall build upon and
expand current monitoring and surveillance programs to:

``(c) Develop nation-wide laboratory networks for food, veterinary,
plant health, and water quality that integrate existing Federal and
State laboratory resources, are interconnected, and utilize
standardized diagnostic protocols and procedures.''

The National Animal Health Laboratory Network (NAHLN) was developed
as a result of this directive and is now part of a Nation-wide strategy
to coordinate the work of all organizations providing animal disease
surveillance and testing services. NAHLN is an early warning system for
emerging and foreign animal diseases and provides surge capacity for
the necessary testing during disease outbreaks and during the recovery
phase. This surveillance and emergency response system provides
critical and on-going resources for laboratory testing, information
management, quality assurance and the development and validation of new
tests. During the recovery phase testing is necessary to establish a
``disease-free status'' which also ensures international trading
partners of that status.
NAHLN's importance was amply demonstrated during the HPAI outbreaks
where thousands of samples were tested within hours in an effort to
achieve depopulation of infected flocks within 24 hours. NAHLN
performed surveillance in surrounding areas to halt disease spread, to
test premises to determine freedom of disease before repopulation could
occur, and allow resumption of international trade.
North Carolina's Rollins Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory, in
Raleigh, is one of 12 NAHLN ``core laboratories,'' (so designated
because it is one of the original 12 participating laboratories). A
Core Member Laboratory receives significant infrastructure support from
the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and conducts fee-for-service
testing for USDA. Their funding level enables these laboratories to be
fully committed to the NAHLN mission and able to respond to domestic or
foreign animal disease emergencies on a 24/7 basis.
NAHLN support comes from USDA-NIFA Food and Agro-Defense Initiative
and USDA APHIS. Note: 34 NAHLN labs receive direct State appropriations
of $100 million toward total National laboratory operation expenses of
$186 million.
As stated at the beginning of the discussion regarding ``Efforts to
Defend the Nation's Agriculture and Food,'' I have spoken to 3 HSPD-9
``line items'' that are of importance to North Carolina. The first,
concerned Line Item 14 of HSPD-9 which directs the participating
Departments/agencies to ensure ``that the combined Federal, State, and
local response capabilities are adequate to respond quickly and
effectively . . . ''. I trust this testimony allows you to appreciate
the wisdom of those in North Carolina who had the foresight to develop
the capability that has enabled the State to respond to the myriad
events that have transpired over the intervening years--floods, fires,
animal disease, human disease, food contamination, drought, and
hurricanes, our Emergency Programs Division has been on the forefront
of them all--we have been well-served by their efforts. That said, it
is also important to note the development of that capability has been
funded by the State and through various Federal grants--some $7.3
million in Federal money and $18 million in State money. It is
appropriate to note that a remarkable capability, and perhaps a unique
capability relative to other States, has been created for a relatively
small investment over the years. Consider what similar investments
might have meant to states so profoundly affected by HPAI--Iowa and
Minnesota experienced as much as $1.6-1.8 billion in economic losses as
a result of HPAI on 180 premises. Going forward, continued State and
Federal funding will be necessary to maintain current capability,
develop new capability, train, exercise, and replace equipment as
needed. Unfortunately, funding for North Carolina's Emergency Programs
Division continues to decline and places the State's preparedness and
response capability at risk.
Of greatest concern for North Carolina is the matter of Line Item
18(a) which speaks to the necessity of developing a National Veterinary
Stockpile (NVS) containing sufficient amounts of animal vaccine,
antiviral, or therapeutic products to appropriately respond to the most
damaging animal diseases--FMD stands alone as North Carolina's greatest
threat. The pork industry, the economy, communities, businesses, and
families of North Carolina would be devastated by an FMD outbreak;
recovery, if a recovery is possible, would be years in the making. A
cooperative, collaborative effort, which includes all stakeholders--
industry, Federal, State, and academic partners, must be initiated in
short order to develop and implement a plan for establishing an
effective FMD vaccine stockpile to protect American agriculture.
Lastly, Line Item 8 of HSPD-9 directs the responsible departments
and agencies ``to develop Nation-wide laboratory networks for food,
veterinary, plant health, and water quality that integrate existing
Federal and State laboratory resources, are interconnected, and utilize
standardized diagnostic protocols and procedures.'' North Carolina's
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, as a part of the NAHLN,
effectively surveilles for and diagnoses animal and zoonotic diseases.
However, State and Federal support of and full funding for the Nation's
NAHLN laboratory system are necessary to optimize service to
stakeholders and the Nation. The absence of full funding was recently
noted in the Bipartisan Report of the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on
Biodefense. The Report states ``The National Animal Health Laboratory
Network (NAHLN), an effort to detect biological threats to the Nation's
food animals, is necessary for effective biosurveillance. The NAHLN is
a public-private cooperative effort between the USDA, the American
Association of Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians, and publicly-
funded State veterinary diagnostic laboratories. The collective and
integrated work of its members allows for improved detection of
emerging and zoonotic diseases, which helps protect animal health,
public health, and the food supply. The veterinary diagnostic labs that
are members are quite literally on the front lines of disease
detection. Established in 2002, the NAHLN is funded through a
combination of grants, fee-for-testing services, and administrative
support from USDA. It has struggled to maintain even $10 million worth
of annual funding, its appropriations cut over the years to pay for
other programs. As a result, the laboratories are unable to meet the
threat and have at times eliminated positions and testing capacity for
foreign animal diseases. Ten million dollars is a very small price to
pay to protect one of America's major industries and portals for
disease emergence. After the NAHLN struggled for years to obtain
sufficient funding, in 2014 Congress authorized a specific funding line
at $15 million per year. NAHLN must be funded to this authorized level
in order to meet the need.'' It is important to note that $5 million
was added to NAHLN's budget in 2016 to aid in the response to HPAI;
that additional funding was not in the proposed budget for 2017. The
request for NAHLN in 2017 remains at $10 million.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today, on behalf of North
Carolina, about issues of concern related to the defense of agriculture
and food. I am happy to address any questions you might have.

Ms. McSally. Thank you, Dr. Meckes. The Chair now
recognizes Dr. Beckham for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TAMMY R. BECKHAM, D.V.M., PH.D., DEAN, COLLEGE OF
VETERINARY MEDICINE, KANSAS STATE UNIVERSITY

Dr. Beckham. Good morning, Chairman McSally, Ranking Member
Payne, and Members of the House Subcommittee on Emergency
Preparedness, Response, and Communication. My name is Tammy
Beckham, and I am the dean of the Kansas State College of
Veterinary Medicine. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to
you today about the role that academia plays in defending our
Nation's agriculture and food.
As I testify before you today, U.S. citizens reap the
benefits of a robust agricultural industry that provides them
with access to a safe, abundant, and affordable food supply.
The very elements that make the U.S. agricultural system robust
and productive also make it more vulnerable to a natural or
intentional introduction of a biological agent. In fact,
perhaps now more than ever in any time in our history, our
agricultural industries are at risk from a variety of threats
that have the potential to severely disrupt our economy, our
food supply, and cause great harm to our public health sector.
Threats to our U.S. agricultural sector can come in a
variety of forms to include a natural or intentional
introduction of a foreign animal emerging and/or a zoonotic
disease. Many of the agents that are on the list of those most
likely to be utilized execute an agroterror event, such as
foot-and-mouth disease, African swine fever or Ebola are
readily available in countries throughout the world, and, in
particular, in countries in which terrorist groups, such as the
Islamic State, al-Qaeda, al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, and others who
intend to harm the United States, operate.
Studies indicate the impacts from a natural intentional
introduction of any of these agents could lead to devastating
economic and public health implications, with the most recent
study that was completed by researchers at Kansas State
University predicting that the cost associated with foot-and-
mouth disease outbreak could result in a total of $188 billion
in losses.
Our ability to defend the U.S. livestock industries from
these threats is heavily dependent on a coordinated,
collaborative, and comprehensive approach involving State and
Federal Government, law enforcement industry, both biopharma,
and livestock, and academia. Since 2002, with the formation of
DHS and the release of HSPD-9 and HSPD-10, the role of academia
and supporting the Homeland Security mission has broadened.
Academia, and, in particular, Land Grand Universities play
a very unique and critical role in supporting the agricultural
defense mission. Working with our stakeholders and Federal
partners, we perform cutting-edge research, we innovate, we
develop countermeasures, and solutions, and technologies, that
can support our industry during peace time, as well as during a
disease outbreak.
Our ability to work in each segment of the development
pipeline provides subject-matter expertise, perform research to
address specific questions, and act as a hub for reach-back
capabilities are just some of the attributes that make academia
such a strong and vital partner.
Through our outreach mission, we work diligently to educate
producers, stakeholders, and the public about novel
technologies, policies, biosecurity practices, and threats to
the sector. We have strong relationships with our stakeholders
that are built on trust and understanding. Perhaps most
importantly, to Homeland Security, provide a venue for a
brokered, unbiased discussion and communication between the
State and Federal Government and our agriculture sector.
Academia is in a unique position to facilitate discussions
between the public and private sector, and oftentimes, works to
bridge the communication trust gap so that solutions to complex
challenges can be found. Simply stated, we are capable of
acting as a trusted partner in what can sometimes be a very
complex relationship.
Colleges of veterinary medicine and agriculture across the
United States are applying what is arguably their most
important role in Homeland Security, and that is teaching,
training, and preparing the next generation of Homeland
Security workforce. Our graduates do, indeed, understand the
role of animal health and success of an agent's agricultural
system. Further recognize that veterinarians serve as the first
line of defense in identifying incursions of transboundary,
emerging, and zoonotic diseases.
I would be remiss not to mention that on a site adjacent to
the Kansas State University College of Veterinary Medicine, DHS
is currently constructing the National Bio and Agro-Defense
facility. Needless to say, close collaboration between NBAF and
the KSU CVM and its allied partners presents an inestimal
opportunity to further strengthen resources for addressing the
threats to the U.S. agriculture and food systems.
There is a need to allocate adequate resources as well to
address the Nation's vulnerability in this area. Efforts such
as the DHS Centers of Excellence should receive additional
resourcing. Additional funds should be provided for agro-
defense-focused research through avenues, such as the USDA
National Institute for Food and Ag, or NIFA, the National
Institutes of Health.
Last, but certainty not least, through increased funding
for programs that will be housed within the National bio and
agro-defense facility. Indeed, with construction of a state-of-
the-art $1.25 billion facility, it is critical to ensure a
stable and appropriate level of resources and funding for the
research, training, and diagnostic missions that will be housed
within it.
Current budgets for the USDA APHIS, ARS, and DHS S&T at
Plum Island do not account for the planned expansion of the
programs in research, diagnostic, and training that will occur
in the new NBAF facility.
So, I urge you today to increase agency programmatic
budgets in the future for the NBAF mission so that the full
potential of the facility and its DHS and USDA programs and
partnerships to include the National Animal Health Laboratory
Network can be achieved.
In summary, addressing the threat posed by the intentional
or unintentional introduction of a high-consequence disease is
a collaborative process. The role of academia in this challenge
is but one component of a much broader solution. Preparedness
is and will be dependent on a holistic, all-of-enterprise
approach in solving this sector's complex problems, and
supporting our livestock in allied industries will depend on a
strong public-private partnership that is built on trust,
collaboration, and resolve.
Finally, Chairman McSally, Ranking Member Payne, and
Members of the subcommittee, I want to thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you today, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Beckham follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tammy R. Beckham
February 26, 2016
Thank you Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of
the subcommittee for the honor of addressing you today.
As the dean of the College of Veterinary Medicine at Kansas State
University, I am pleased to speak with you regarding ``Efforts to
Defend the Nation's Agriculture and Food.''
u.s. agriculture: strengths and vulnerabilities
As first designated in 2003 through Homeland Security Presidential
Directive-7, the Food and Agriculture Sector is 1 of 16 critical
infrastructures whose assets, systems, and networks are considered to
be so vital to the United States that its incapacitation or destruction
would have a debilitating effect on security, the National and global
economy, public health and safety, or any combination thereof.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Department of Homeland Security. Homeland Security Presidential
Directive 7: Critical Infrastructure Identification, Prioritization,
and Protection. http://www.dhs.gov/homeland-security-presidential-
directive-7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. Agricultural sector is a diverse, complex, and highly-
integrated enterprise whose health and productivity is vital to the
National economy. Agriculture in the United States is a $1 trillion
business and this sector alone employs approximately 9.2% of American
workers. In 2013, agriculture and agricultural-related industries
contributed $789 billion to the U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), and
in 2012 domestic animal agriculture (e.g., livestock and poultry
production) produced approximately 1.8 million jobs, $346 billion in
total economic output, and $60 billion in household income.\2\ \3\
Furthermore, in the United States, consumers spend on average,
approximately 6.4% of their annual expenditures on food. This
percentage is extremely low when compared to other countries whose
expenditures range from 11% (Switzerland) to 47% (Pakistan).\4\ U.S.
farmers and ranchers work hard to keep food prices low and are only
able to accomplish this through increased efficiencies in production,
achieved through technological advancements in industrial food
production. Threats that jeopardize our production and the security and
affordability of the U.S. food system have the potential to disrupt our
social structure and cause political instability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ USDA Economic Research Service. http://ers.usda.gov/data-
products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/ag-and-food-
sectors-and-the-economy.aspx.
\3\ Economic benefits of the Livestock Industry. iGrow, South
Dakota State University Extension. July 2014.
\4\ USDA Economic Research Service. http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/food-expenditures.aspx#.UuE9EHn0Ay5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The bulk of the agricultural enterprise is almost solely owned and
operated by the private sector, and the United States is currently the
world's leading exporter of food. When evaluating the impact on the
economy, the food supply and the Nation's jobs, it is clearly evident
why this industry is deemed a U.S. critical infrastructure. Any
disruption to the daily operations and/or productivity of this
enterprise would have significant impacts on Americans' livelihoods,
our food supply, the economy and our public health. Simply said, U.S.
agricultural security is National security.
threats and vulnerabilities of the u.s. agricultural system
As I testify before you today, U.S. citizens reap the benefits of a
robust agricultural industry that provides them with access to a safe,
abundant, and affordable food supply that is readily available on the
shelves of grocery stores Nation-wide. This is indeed a privilege that
as you well know, does not exist globally. However, the very elements
that make the U.S. agricultural sector robust and productive also make
it vulnerable to a natural or intentional introduction of a biological
agent. In fact, perhaps now, more than anytime in our history, the
agricultural industries are at risk from a variety of threats that have
the potential to severely disrupt our economy, our food supply, and
cause great harm to our public health sector.
Threats to our U.S. agricultural sector can come in a variety of
forms, to include a natural introduction of a foreign (transboundary)
animal, emerging, and/or zoonotic disease or an intentional
introduction of a biological agent (agroterrorism) into our
agricultural systems. These threats would result in significant
morbidity and/or mortality among livestock or poultry, cause great
economic harm, adversely impact and/or disrupt our food supply, and/or
contribute to an adverse public health event. Many of these agents do
not require weaponization, can be easily obtained, and exist naturally
in areas where terrorist groups such as the Islamic State (ISIS), al-
Qaeda, al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, and others who intend to harm the United
States operate. In addition, the risk from emerging infectious and/or
zoonotic diseases continues to threaten our animal, plant, and public
health sectors.
The U.S. agricultural and public health systems, while free from
devastating diseases such as Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD, since 1929),
African Swine Fever (ASFV), Rift Valley Fever (RVF), and other highly
pathogenic livestock and zoonotic diseases, are becoming increasingly
at risk for an introduction of these and/or other emerging and/or
zoonotic diseases. Impacts resulting from an introduction of a high-
consequence disease, agro-terrorist and/or bioterrorist agent into U.S.
agricultural systems have been studied and published in peer-reviewed
journals. Studies indicate that the magnitude and severity of an
introduction of a high-consequence disease into U.S. livestock or
poultry herds/flocks would be large. For example, the authors of a
study recently completed by Kansas State University predicted that
costs associated with an FMD outbreak in the Midwestern United States
could result in a total of $188 billion in losses to the livestock and
allied industries and up to $11 billion to the U.S. Government.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Economic impact of alternative FMD emergency vaccination
strategies in the Midwestern United States. Ted C. Schroeder, Dustin L.
Pendell, Michael W. Sanderson, and Sara McReynolds. Journal of
Agricultural and Applied Economics. Volume 47, Issue 01, Feb. 2015. PP
47-78.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to publications highlighting the economic and social
impacts of a disease incursion, we have learned first-hand from recent
experiences that the social, economic, and political fall-out from
emerging disease incursions can be devastating. Most recently, the
United States has witnessed incursions of porcine epidemic diarrhea
virus (PEDV) in our swine populations (2013) and highly pathogenic
avian influenza (HPAI) in our poultry populations (2015), as well as
Ebola virus (EBOV; 2014) and Zika virus (2016) outbreaks in our public
health sector. Each of these events further demonstrates our
vulnerability to newly emerging and re-emerging pathogens that can be
naturally or intentionally introduced.
In the case of PEDV, the cause and route of introduction into the
U.S. swine population has still not clearly been elucidated.
Nevertheless, over half of the U.S. sow population was infected with
PEDV, and the industry lost 10% (7 million) of the piglets born to
these sows during this outbreak.\6\ More recently, the introduction of
HPAI virus into the U.S. poultry population resulted in the destruction
of approximately 7.5 million (7.5%) of the U.S. turkey population and
41.1 million (10%) of the commercial chicken population. The total
indemnity cost for this outbreak was approximately $191 million.\7\ The
PEDV and HPAI outbreaks have reminded us that although we have made
significant progress as a Nation and as a sector in preparing for both
natural and intentional introductions of transboundary, emerging, and
zoonotic diseases, they remain continual threats to the U.S.
agricultural system and we still have a tremendous amount of work to
accomplish.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ PEDv Dominates the Pig World. Gene Johnston. September 11,
2014. http://www.agriculture.com/livestock/hogs/health/pedv-dominates-
pig-wld_284-ar45068.
\7\ Update on H5Nx, Mia Torchetti, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, National Veterinary
Services Laobratories, August 18, 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The increased risk of the above-mentioned threats to the U.S.
agricultural and public health systems can be attributed to several
social, environmental, and economic factors. First, there is increased
movement of people, animals, plants, and products globally. Global
commerce and air traffic moves at speeds that defy the ability to
detect and prevent movement of diseases from their source in the early
stages before detection. Indeed, animals and people can move and travel
prior to clinical signs of a disease, thus arriving in another country
already infected and able to spread the disease to people or animals
they may contact. Second, trends in livestock production in the United
States have resulted in more specialized, intensive, and concentrated
farming practices, where large numbers of animals are produced on a
much smaller number of premises. These vertically-integrated systems
manage movements of animals and animal products to ensure a ``just-in-
time'' delivery to the next location (e.g., feedlot, finisher, packer,
and retailer) in the food production system. Our livestock production
systems execute a large number of animal movements daily. As an
example, it is estimated that approximately 1 million swine and 400,000
cattle are in transit to the next location in the production system at
any one time during the day. An introduction of an agent, either
naturally or intentionally, into these intensive farming systems could
lead to wide-spread distribution through these movements within hours
of its introduction. Furthermore, in the event of a disease outbreak in
which a ``standstill'' or quarantine of animal premises is implemented
as the primary control strategy, maintaining business continuity
through the controlled movements of animals is critical for food
security and animal health and welfare.
Next, advanced technical capabilities are not required to obtain
agents that can be utilized to promulgate an agro-terrorist event and/
or a bioterrorist event against our agriculture and public health
systems. Many of the agents on the list of those most likely to be
utilized to execute an agro-terrorist and/or bioterrorist event (such
as FMDV, ASFV, and Ebola) are readily-available in countries throughout
the world and do not need special handling or weaponization. As
mentioned previously, these agents are readily available in countries
in which terrorist groups such as the Islamic State (ISIS), al-Qaeda,
al-Shabaab, Boko Haram, and others who intend to harm the United States
operate. Last but certainly not least, we must not overlook the natural
occurrence and emergence of diseases whether agricultural or zoonotic.
Factors that lead to the emergence of disease include changes in socio-
economic, environmental, and/or ecological circumstances.\8\ It has
been estimated that over 75% of all emerging pathogens are zoonotic and
that zoonotic pathogens are twice as likely to be associated with an
emerging disease than non-zoonotic pathogens.\9\ In addition, there are
approximately 320,000 unknown viruses that infect mammals and that have
not yet been identified and/or characterized.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature. Kate E.
Jones, Nikkita G Patel, Marc A Levy, Adam Storeygard, Deborah Balk,
John L Gittleman, Peter Daszak. Volume 451; 21FEB2008.
\9\ Taylor, L.H., Latham, S.M., Woolhouse, M.E. 2001. Risk factors
for human disease emergence. Phil Trans R Soc Lond 356:983-989.
\10\ Anthony, S.J., et. al. 2013. A strategy to estimate unknown
viral diversity in mammals. MBio 4:e00598-13; doi: 10.1128/mBio.00598-
13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over the last decade, members of the agricultural sector have made
tremendous progress in preparing for a natural and/or intentional
introduction of a transboundary, emerging and/or high-consequence
disease agent. Public and private partnerships have been forged that
have paved the way for significant advancements in the development of
countermeasures (vaccines, immunomodulators, and diagnostic assays) for
high-risk/high-priority agro-terror agents. For example, through a
public/private partnership led by the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security Science and Technology Directorate (DHS S&T) Agriculture
Defense Branch, a conditional U.S. license for the first FMD vaccine
that can be manufactured in the United States has been obtained. In
addition, we have developed, validated, and deployed (to the National
Animal Health Laboratory Network [NAHLN]) molecular assays that are
capable of supporting early detection and response for many of the
high-risk agro-terror agents. And last, but certainly not least,
Federal, State, academic, and private partners have worked
collaboratively to identify and prioritize risks, scan the global
environment, perform comprehensive pathways analysis, and exercise
disease outbreak response plans, all in an effort to enhance resiliency
within each component of the sector.
While each of these accomplishments are noteworthy because of their
ability to better position our sector to respond to an agro-terror
event, they are perhaps more noteworthy because of the breadth of
partners that were assembled and worked together collaboratively to
accomplish each and every milestone. In the case of the FMD vaccine,
DHS S&T, U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service (USDA APHIS) and Agricultural Research Service (USDA
ARS), biopharma, the livestock industries, and academia were all
essential players in ensuring development, transition, and ultimate
licensure of this product. Indeed, many more of these unique
partnerships are needed and are, in fact, critical to ensuring our
success. We have enjoyed many successes, but still have much to
accomplish if we are to be fully prepared when, not if, a devastating
natural or intentional introduction of one of these agents occurs.
public and private-sector prevention, planning & preparedness
activities: the academic role
Our ability to defend U.S. Agriculture and Food from the threat of
intentional, unintentional, or inadvertent introduction of high-
consequence disease is heavily dependent on a coordinated,
collaborative, and comprehensive approach involving both State and
Federal government, law enforcement, industry (biopharma and animal
producers), and academia. We must work together as members of the
agricultural enterprise to leverage expertise, develop technologies and
networks and/or systems that will ultimately produce a more resilient
agriculture and food system.
Building on my previous roles with the Federal Government and
academia, and in my current role as the dean of the KSU College of
Veterinary Medicine, I take the security of our livestock and poultry
systems very seriously, and respect the role of academia in this
broader partnership. Furthermore, I know that preparedness stems from
true partnerships and collaborations across the enterprise and it is
only through leveraging expertise throughout all levels of the sector
that we will meet the challenge of securing our Nation's agriculture
and food supply.
Since the formation of DHS in 2002, and with the release of
Homeland Security Presidential Directive 9: Defense of United States
Agriculture and Food (HSPD-9), DHS has assumed the responsibility to
coordinate the overall National effort to protect the critical
infrastructure and key resources of the United States, which includes
agriculture. However, the USDA still has the primary responsibility for
protecting the agricultural sector \11\ and does so with support from
additional agencies to include the Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS), the Department of Interior (DOI), the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the Department of Defense (DOD), and
the Attorney General (AG).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Public Health Security and Bioterrorism Preparedness Response
Act, 2002. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ188/pdf/PLAW-
107publ188.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Academia, and in particular the Land Grant Universities, play a
very unique and critical role in supporting the agricultural defense
mission. Working with our stakeholders and Federal partners (USDA, DHS,
and other State and Federal agencies), we perform cutting-edge and
innovative research to develop countermeasures (e.g., vaccines,
diagnostics, and immunomodulators), solutions, and technologies that
can support our industry during peacetime, as well as in the event of a
high-consequence disease and/or agro-terror event. Furthermore, through
our teaching and outreach missions, we work diligently to train the
next generation workforce and educate producers, stakeholders, and the
public about novel technologies, policies, biosecurity practices,
animal welfare, threats to the agricultural sector and much more. It is
through these activities that our faculty and staff have developed
strong relationships with producers, stakeholders, livestock owners,
the allied industries and other National associations (e.g., National
Pork Board, National Cattlemen's Beef Association). These relationships
are built on trust and understanding and perhaps most importantly to
homeland security and protection of the agricultural sector, provide a
venue for a brokered, unbiased discussion and communication between the
State and Federal Government and our agricultural sector. Academia is
in a unique position to facilitate discussion between the public and
private sector and oftentimes works to bridge the communication and
trust gap so that solutions to complex challenges can be found. Simply
stated, we are capable of acting as a ``trusted partner'' in what can
sometimes be a complex relationship.
Since 2002, with the formation of DHS and the release of HSPD-9
(Defense of the United States Agriculture and Food) and HSPD-10
(Biodefense for the 21st Century), the role of academia in supporting
the homeland security mission and, more specifically in protecting our
agriculture and food sector from an agro-terror threat, has broadened.
HSPD-9 not only called for DHS to accelerate and expand development of
current and new countermeasures against the intentional introduction or
natural occurrence of catastrophic animal, plant and zoonotic diseases,
it also called for the Secretaries of Homeland Security and Agriculture
to establish university-based Centers of Excellence (COEs) in
agriculture and food security. As a result of this directive, there are
two COEs within the DHS S&T Office of University Programs (OUP) that
are focused on agriculture and food security: The Zoonotic and Animal
Disease Defense (ZADD), co-led by Kansas State University and Texas A&M
University, and the Food Protection and Defense Institute (FPDI),
formerly the National Center for Food Protection and Defense (NCFPD),
led by the University of Minnesota. The primary mission of each of
these Centers is to work across the agricultural enterprise to create
novel solutions to homeland security challenges. Each of these Centers
works closely with State and Federal partners, as well as the
industries to ensure portfolio alignment with Nationally-identified
priorities. Each COE has a robust set of partner universities, National
and international collaborators and stakeholders that are routinely
brought together in multi-institutional, multi-disciplinary teams to
address the complex challenges that face our industries today.
In light of the aforementioned roles and responsibilities, and in
the context of a broadening academic presence in supporting homeland
security, I would like to highlight a few instances in which academia
has worked with other members of the agricultural enterprise to deliver
products and/or technologies that have strengthened our Nation's
ability to respond to and recover from a potential agro-terror event.
In addition, I would like to touch on several on-going activities, each
with a strong academic role, that demonstrate the power of partnerships
and strength of a holistic approach to combatting a potential terror
event.
Over the past decade, the University COEs have worked closely with
DHS S&T, USDA (APHIS and ARS), State Animal Health Officials (SAHOs),
biopharma, and our livestock industries to identify and address
National gaps in agriculture and food security. In particular DHS has
sponsored multiple COE-led workshops that have convened producers,
livestock owners, National organizations, State and Federal agencies,
as well as industry and academia to identify and prioritize gaps,
provide recommendations for addressing those gaps and help set National
priorities for policy development and funding. For example, the
agricultural screening tools workshops, designed to identify gaps in
screening tools and diagnostics for high consequence agro-terror
agents, helped develop and guide a robust program in diagnostic assay
development. As a result of this program, multiple assays for early
detection and/or recovery were developed, validated, and either
accepted by the NAHLN for use during an animal disease event (FMD bulk
tank milk assay), or transitioned to an industry partner for production
and licensure (3B FMD ELISA). It was through intensive planning and
partnership that each of the steps in development of these assays was
accomplished. Academia, and in particular the COEs worked with DHS,
USDA APHIS, and ARS, the livestock industry and biopharma to lead the
development and transition of each assay, working diligently to ensure
the assays met each of their requirements.
The role that academia plays in the development, piloting, and
transitioning of veterinary countermeasures and/or technologies cannot
be overstated. Our ability to work in each segment of the development
pipeline makes us unique in our capability to support the homeland
security enterprise. During the last 6 years, the ZADD Center has
enjoyed tremendous success in working with our Federal and State
partners, biopharma, and the livestock industries to develop,
transition, pilot, and ultimately license multiple products to aid in
the detection or response to an agro-terror event. For example, the
Center of Excellence in Emerging and Zoonotic Animal Diseases (CEEZAD),
which is housed within the CVM at Kansas State University, is currently
working with an animal health company to develop, test, and evaluate a
novel recombinant vaccine for Rift Valley Fever virus (RVFV), a high-
consequence transboundary/zoonotic disease agent. If successful, this
product will be produced, licensed, and available for purchase by the
USDA APHIS National Veterinary Stockpile, should the need arise.
CEEZAD's unique relationships with the biopharmaceutical industry
allows for early input and buy-in regarding the products being
developed within the Center. This increases the likelihood of
acceptance, production, and eventual licensure of DHS S&T OUP sponsored
research.
In addition, the DHS S&T Agriculture Defense Branch has engaged the
COE at Texas A&M University, the Institute for Infectious Animal
Diseases (IIAD), and tasked them with working to develop a template,
obtain permits, and forge relationships that will allow for the first-
ever international field trial of the newly-licensed FMD vaccine. If
successful, this template will provide a robust guideline for
performing a successful field trial, but more than that, it will
provide a template, standard operating procedures, and solidify
relationships that will be critical for supporting additional testing
of future DHS S&T products in an international field-trial setting.
Both of the aforementioned projects are excellent examples of how the
DHS S&T Chemical and Biological Division (CBD) and DHS S&T OUP are
working with a broad spectrum of partners, both individually and
through academia, to enhance our Nation's agriculture and food
security.
Next, the USDA APHIS has worked closely with the Center for Food
Security and Public Health (CFSPH) at Iowa State University to develop
the Secure Food Supply Plans (eggs, turkeys, milk, pork, and beef). In
the event of an animal disease outbreak, our industries must be able to
resume movements from disease-free premises within a short amount of
time. Any delay in this ability will result not only in product
shortages but also in serious animal welfare issues. Supported by the
USDA APHIS and led by an academic partner (CFSPH), the livestock and
poultry industry, allied industries, State and Federal partners, and
other stakeholders worked cooperatively to develop and vet each
individual sector-specific plan. This multi-partner effort has resulted
in the development of robust templates and guidance documents that can
be utilized by State animal health officials for permitting movements
of animals and animal products from disease-free premises in the event
of an animal disease emergency.
In addition to the examples given above, DHS S&T, SAHOs and the
USDA engage academia for expertise in epidemiology, modeling,
surveillance, pathology, immunology, and many other fields. Our ability
to provide subject-matter expertise, perform research to address
specific questions, and act as a hub for reach-back capabilities are
just some of the attributes that make us a strong and vital partner.
Last but certainly not least, Colleges of Veterinary Medicine and
Agriculture across the United States are playing what is arguably their
most important role in homeland security, and that is: Teaching,
training, and preparing the next-generation homeland security
workforce.
The State of Kansas has a proud history of agricultural production,
and it continues to be among the leading States in the Nation for crop
and animal industry. For example, in 2014, Kansas ranked first among
the States for production of sorghum for grain (200 million bushels),
second for wheat (250 million bushels), third for commercial red meat
production (5 billion pounds), and third in production of cattle and
calves (6 million head).\12\ At K-State's College of Veterinary
Medicine, we instill a respect for this agricultural enterprise and its
relevance in feeding our Nation and the world among our students. The
KSU CVM is one of the oldest veterinary colleges in the United States,
and has graduated more than 5,000 men and women veterinarians. As
opposed to many other veterinary schools, where the majority of
students pursue small animal medicine, KSU prides itself on a strong
focus on production animal medicine, which is put into practice by our
Department of Clinical Sciences. Indeed, these graduates understand the
role of animal health in the success of the Nation's agricultural
system, and further recognize that veterinarians serve as the first
line of defense in identifying incursions of transboundary, emerging,
and zoonotic diseases.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Kansas Department of Agriculture. Kansas Farm Facts. http://
agriculture.ks.gov/docs/default-source/Kansas-Farm-Facts-2015/
kansasfarmfacts2014final.pdf?sfvrsn=4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the interest of developing the next generation of animal health
professionals, the KSU CVM maintains a number of educational programs,
including those in veterinary medicine, advanced clinical training, and
research in animal health and related disciplines. The CVM's Department
of Diagnostic Medicine/Pathobiology encompasses a number of research
program thrusts that are directly relevant to defense of U.S.
Agriculture. For example, a number of programs are focused on all
aspects of infectious disease and include viral and bacterial
pathogenesis of endemic and emerging diseases, vaccine and antiviral
development and evaluation, diagnostic assay development and
validation, epidemiology and ecology of infectious disease, and the
study of vector-borne diseases. Researchers within the CVM also work
closely with the KSU Biosecurity Research Institute (BRI), a
biocontainment research and education facility. The BRI supports
comprehensive ``farm-to-fork'' infectious disease research programs
that address threats to plant, animal, and human health. The BRI
facilitates diverse and multidisciplinary research and training
opportunities, with the capability for research on foreign animal
diseases in both large and small animal models, and basic and applied
research. Faculty at the KSU CVM are working collaboratively with the
BRI on projects addressing many of the highest-threat disease agents
(e.g., Classical Swine Fever, African Swine Fever, and Rift Valley
Fever).
On a site adjacent to the KSU CVM and BRI, DHS is currently
constructing the National Bio and Agro-Defense Facility (NBAF). This
facility will serve to replace and augment the mission currently being
performed by the Plum Island Animal Disease Center. The NBAF will ``be
a state-of-the-art biocontainment laboratory for the study of diseases
that threaten both America's animal agricultural industry and public
health . . . [offering capabilities] to conduct research, develop
vaccines, diagnose emerging diseases, and train veterinarians.''\13\
Needless to say, close collaboration between the NBAF and the KSU CVM
and its allied partner programs, presents inestimable opportunities to
further strengthen local and regional resources for addressing threats
to U.S. Agriculture and Food.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Department of Homeland Security. National Bio and Agro-Defense
Facility. http://www.dhs.gov/science-and-technology/national-bio-and-
agro-defense-facility.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion and recommendations
As I've described, addressing the threat posed by the intentional
or unintentional introduction of a high-consequence disease is a
collaborative process. The role of academia is only part of a much
broader solution. Across the Federal Government, programs in agencies
such as Health and Human Services (HHS), the Department of Defense,
U.S. Agency for International Development, U.S. Geological Survey, and
the Environmental Protection Agency must come together with USDA (APHIS
and ARS) and DHS. Similarly, engagement of industry stakeholders from
dairy, pork, beef, and poultry, as well as the allied industries, must
occur to ensure that technological solutions and operational response
measures are viable. Given the availability of high-consequence
infectious agents abroad, a holistic approach to bio- and agro-defense
must also involve threat reduction at the global level. This should
involve multi-national collaborators such as the Defense Threat
Reduction Agency (DTRA), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (UN FAO) and the World Organization for Animal Health
(OIE) to name a few.
In addition to the need for collaboration there is also a need to
allocate adequate resources to address the Nation's vulnerability in
this area. Considering the significance of agriculture to the American
public's well-being, measures should be taken to correct the drastic
imbalance in research and countermeasure funding for agriculturally-
focused threats, versus human-centric ones. For example, during fiscal
year 2014, 61% of Federal funding for biodefense was allocated to HHS,
while USDA received only 1%.\14\ Similarly, the Strategic National
Stockpile, which houses the Nation's repository of antibiotics,
vaccines, chemical antidotes, antitoxins, and other critical medical
equipment and supplies, received approximately $510 million, while the
National Veterinary Stockpile received approximately $4 million. As
further evidence of this imbalance, in 2007, the Laboratory Response
Network, an integrated network of State and local public health,
Federal, military, and international laboratories that can respond to
bioterrorism, chemical terrorism and other public health emergencies,
had an annual budget of approximately $50 million\15\ while the NAHLN
receives only $6 million dollars annually to support its operations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Sell, T.K. and Watson, M. Federal Agency Biodefense Funding,
FY2013-FY2014. Biosecurity and Bioterrorism: Biodefense Strategy,
Practice, and Science. Volume 11, Number 2, 2013. PP 196-216.
\15\ State Public Health Laboratories: Sustaining Preparedness in
an Unstable Environment. March 2009, Association of Public Health
Laboratories.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is also a need to increase emphasis on educational programs
to further support U.S. Agriculture and Food. Efforts such as the DHS
Centers of Excellence should receive additional resourcing, and U.S.
veterinary curricula should emphasize the changing role of the
veterinarian as part of a global defense against high-consequence
transboundary, emerging, and/or zoonotic diseases. Additional funds
should be provided for agro-defense-focused research, through avenues
such as the USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA), the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) and lastly but not least, through
increased funding for programs that will be housed within the National
Bio and Agro-Defense Facility (NBAF). Indeed, with construction of a
state-of-the-art $1.25 billion facility, it is critical to ensure a
stable and appropriate level of resources and funding for the research,
training and diagnostic missions that will be housed within it.
Currently, budgets for the USDA APHIS, ARS, and DHS S&T at PIADC do not
account for the planned expansion of research/diagnostic/training
programs that will occur in the new NBAF facility. I urge you to
increase agency programmatic budgets for the NBAF mission, so that the
full potential of the facility, and its DHS and USDA programs, can be
achieved.
Preparedness for a natural or intentional introduction of a high-
consequence agricultural event is dependent on a holistic, all-of-
enterprise approach. Solving this sector's complex problems and
supporting our industries will depend on a strong public/private
partnership that is built on trust, collaboration, and resolve.
Finally, Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of the
subcommittee, I want to thank you for this opportunity to speak to you
regarding efforts to defend the Nation's agriculture and food. I look
forward to your questions.

Ms. McSally. Thank you. The Chair recognizes Mr. Acord for
5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BOBBY ACORD, FORMER ADMINISTRATOR, ANIMAL PLANT
HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE,
TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE NATIONAL PORK PRODUCERS COUNCIL

Mr. Acord. Madam Chairwoman, Ranking Member Payne, Members
of the subcommittee, the U.S. Department of Agriculture
industry and the U.S. food supply always have been at great
risk from pest and disease. That risk has continued to increase
over the years because of increases in travel, tourism, and
trade, each passenger handbag, each piece of luggage brought
into the United States poses a risk. Every parcel mailed to the
United States poses a risk. Large volumes of commodities and
products from a wide range of countries are transported
legally, and some illegally, to the United States every year by
different conveyances, all of which may be carrying a disease
or hitchhiking pest.
Now the country faces a new risk: Terrorists weaponizing
disease to inflict harm on the U.S. economy. Of particular
concerns of the livestock industry is foot-and-mouth disease.
It is a highly contagious viral disease affecting all cloven-
hoofed animals. The structure of the U.S. livestock industry
makes the United States particularly vulnerable to a large-
scale foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. There are an estimated 1
million pigs and 400,000 cattle moved daily in the United
States, some over long distances. There are numerous auctions,
fairs, exhibits that concentrate large numbers of animals in a
single location. Those movements and concentrations provide
opportunities for just one infected or exposed animal to infect
many others.
The U.S. industry is also concerned about African swine
fever that has reared its ugly head in Russia, Belarus, and
eastern European countries that border Russia and those other
countries. It is a disease for which there is no means of
control. As Dr. Meckes mentioned, there is an insufficient
quantity of foot-and-mouth vaccine. With support of the
livestock industry, APHIS changed its policy on managing a
foot-and-mouth disease outbreak from culling all infected and
exposed animals to one of vaccination in all but the smallest
of outbreaks.
When discussing how this policy would be implemented, it
became apparent that there is not enough vaccine to deal with
an outbreak, and there is no capability of producing a
sufficient quantity to deal with an outbreak in the United
States.
The livestock industry has made it clear that a solution to
the vaccine shortage must include a contract for an offshore
vendor-maintained bank that includes antigen for all 23 FMD
types that are currently circulating in the world, and that a
contract be awarded for surge capacity to produce sufficient
quantities of vaccine in the event of an outbreak in the
livestock herd.
There are gaps in the U.S. biosecurity system. Most
outbreaks, the first problem encountered is the lack of
biosecurity, which contributes to the spread of the disease.
One solution to this problem is that in addition to test
exercises, the Federal and State agencies need a more robust
review of biosecurity measures in each section of the
agriculture industry.
We need more robust scrutiny of imports. Federal agencies
are relying too much on the ports of entry as the first line of
defense against pest disease introduction. More emphasis must
be placed on what happens during processing production of
products in the countries of origin.
We had an outbreak of Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea in the
United States in 2013, and the means and the method by which
that introduction was brought to the United States has never
been discovered. If that gap in the security system is still
open, then it is open for FMD and all other diseases as well.
We have a serious problem with animal traceability in this
country. It is inadequate for the use in an animal disease
outbreak. In fact, it is not even recognized as adequate to
meet the requirements of some of the major U.S. trading
partners. Many of the shortfalls identified today are the
result of lack of adequate resources, risks to U.S. agriculture
and the U.S. food supply have increased dramatically over the
last few years, and have now been exacerbated by the threat of
terrorist targeting agriculture production. At the same time,
funding provided to maintain the country's safeguarding system
has been reduced. We simply can't have it both ways.
In conclusion, there seems to be a growing consensus that
there are serious flaws in the country's preparedness to deal
with threats to the U.S. agriculture and the food supply. The
bipartisan report of the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense
highlighted the need for improvements in the system for
protecting U.S. livestock herd in the Nation's food supply.
A lot of information has been gathered from that report,
from the hearings that you have held, from hearings that have
been held at the Department of Agriculture--excuse me, by the
Committee on Agriculture. There is a lot of information that
has now been developed, and it seems that from the perspective
of the National Pork Producers Council and probably, more
largely, the livestock industry, it is now time to catch and to
work with the Obama administration to let's fill these gaps,
and let's not continue to just look, let's act at this point.
Thank you, and I would be happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Acord follows:]
Prepared Statement of Bobby Acord
February 26, 2016
introduction
The National Pork Producers Council (NPPC) is an association of 43
State pork producer organizations that serves as the global voice in
Washington, DC, for the Nation's pork producers. The U.S. pork industry
represents a significant value-added activity in the agricultural
economy and the overall U.S. economy. Nation-wide, more than 68,000
pork producers marketed more than 110 million hogs in 2014, and those
animals provided total gross receipts of $23.4 billion. Overall, an
estimated $22.3 billion of personal income and $39 billion of Gross
National Product are supported by the U.S. pork industry.
Economists Daniel Otto, Lee Schulz, and Mark Imerman at Iowa State
University estimate that the U.S. pork industry is directly responsible
for the creation of more than 37,000 full-time equivalent pork-
producing jobs and generates about 128,000 jobs in the rest of
agriculture. It is responsible for approximately 102,000 jobs in the
manufacturing sector, mostly in the packing industry, and 65,000 jobs
in professional services such as veterinarians, real estate agents, and
bankers. All told, the U.S. pork industry is responsible for nearly
550,000 mostly rural jobs in the United States, and U.S. pork producers
today provide 23 billion pounds of safe, wholesome, and nutritious meat
protein to consumers world-wide.
disease and pest introductions
The U.S. agriculture industry and the U.S. food supply always have
been at great risk from pests and disease. That risk has continued to
increase over the years because of increases in travel, tourism, and
trade. Each passenger handbag and piece of luggage brought into the
United States and every parcel mailed to this country presents a risk
of transporting disease to some sector of the agriculture industry.
Large volumes of commodities and products from a wide range of
countries are transported legally and illegally to the United States
each year by different conveyances, all of which may be carrying a
disease or hitchhiking pest. Now the country faces a new risk:
Terrorists weaponizing disease as a means of inflicting harm on the
U.S. economy. Whether by accident or deliberate introduction, the
impact of a disease or pest on U.S. agriculture and the food supply
could be devastating.
Over the last few years, the United States has seen numerous
introductions of pests and diseases that have affected agriculture
production. Citrus Canker and Citrus Greening are wrecking havoc on the
Florida citrus industry. Other pests that serve as disease vectors have
had a serious impact on fruit and vegetable production in other parts
of the country, particularly California. In April 2013, Porcine
Epidemic Diarrhea infected a swine herd in Ohio, and it spread rapidly
through most of the U.S. swine industry, resulting in an estimated loss
of more than 8 million newborn pigs, which took an emotional toll on
producers and ultimately increased prices to consumers. Subsequently 2
other swine diseases of Asian origin were discovered, Delta Corona
Virus and Orthoreovirus. In 2015, High Pathogenic Avian Influenza
(HPAI) was discovered in poultry flocks in the Midwest, resulting in
the culling of millions of turkeys and laying hens, particularly in
Iowa and Minnesota.
current threats
When compared with many countries in the world, U.S. agriculture is
relatively free of pests and disease. Through cooperation between the
Government and agriculture industries, some of the most serious pests
and diseases have been eradicated. Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD),
Classical Swine Fever (CSF), Pseudorabies in swine, Screwworm, Cotton
Boll Weevil, and numerous fruit fly infestations have all been
successfully eradicated but at great cost to taxpayers and the affected
industries. Yet all these diseases and pests still lurk around the
world, some very close to the U.S. mainland, and are still serious
threats.
Of particular concern to the livestock industry is FMD, a highly
contagious viral disease affecting all cloven-hoofed animals. FMD is
easily spread by livestock movement, wind currents, on vehicles that
have traveled to and from infected farms and on inanimate objects that
have come in contact with the virus. This economically devastating
disease is endemic in 113 countries around the world. In 2014, the
World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) reported 779 FMD outbreaks
in member countries. The structure of the U.S. livestock industry makes
the United States particularly vulnerable to a large-scale FMD
outbreak. There are an estimated 1 million pigs and 400,000 cattle
moved daily in the United States, some over long distances, and there
are numerous auctions, fairs, and exhibits that concentrate large
numbers of animals in a single location. Those movements and
concentrations provide opportunities for 1 infected or exposed animal
to spread disease to a large number of animals and over long distances.
The U.S. swine industry also is very concerned about the emergence
of African Swine Fever (ASF) in Russia, the Ukraine, Belarus, and the
Eastern European countries of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland.
ASF is a highly contagious viral disease for which there is no vaccine
or method of control except strict biosecurity and culling of infected
animals. The disease has become endemic in those countries' feral swine
populations, with occasional spread to backyard pigs and commercial
production. An ASF introduction in the United States would be
devastating to the U.S. pork industry.
Also of great concern is CSF. Previously eradicated from the United
States, it lurks very close to the U.S. mainland in Hispaniola. It is
also prevalent in Central and South America and other countries around
the world. Vaccines are available and stockpiled for use, but an
outbreak in the United States would have serious economic consequences.
While the above highlighted diseases are the livestock industry's
worst fears, the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service (APHIS) focuses on preventing 160 animal
diseases from entering the United States. Animal and plant diseases can
be devastating to agriculture production, but the high value of animal
agriculture makes introduction of animal diseases far more economically
significant. Pests and diseases of concern are monitored by U.S.
authorities through port-of-entry inspections and surveillance by APHIS
and State departments of agriculture.
consequences of pest and disease introduction
Introduction of pests and diseases can have severe economic
consequences for agriculture production, consumer prices and,
potentially, food availability. Also of great concern is the loss of
export markets. The United States is required by the International
Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and the OIE to report pest and
disease introductions that are listed by those international bodies as
economically significant or trade limiting or that are new or emerging
diseases. In most cases, such reporting would result in an immediate
loss of exports for the affected commodity or products, causing a
precipitous drop in U.S. market prices.
The economic consequences of disease introduction are often not
limited to just one agriculture sector. Iowa State University economist
Dermot Hayes estimates that an FMD outbreak in the United States would
result in revenue losses to the beef and pork industries of $12.9
billion per year over a 10-year period; the corn and soybean industries
are estimated to lose $44 billion and $24.9 billion, respectively.
These estimates do not include losses to the dairy industry. Also, they
do not include the costs, which are likely to be millions of dollars,
to the Federal and State governments for culling, vaccinating, and
other activities associated with controlling the disease.
improved protection
There have been several improvements in the systems to safeguard
U.S. agriculture. Creating the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection
(BCBP) and combining APHIS's agriculture inspectors into that single
agency has been a positive development. In the early stages of the
reorganization, there appeared to be a lack of focus by BCBP on the
importance of agriculture inspections, but pressure from the
agriculture industries and Members of Congress resulted in significant
improvements over time. Anecdotal evidence gathered through interviews
with agriculture inspectors formerly housed in APHIS suggests improved
enforcement of agriculture regulations through use of the broader
enforcement authority of BCBP. However, much remains to be done to
improve the ability of the United States to exclude plant and animal
pests and diseases from entering the country.
APHIS has worked with the animal agriculture industries to develop
Secure Food Supply Plans for pork, beef, milk, turkeys, and eggs. The
plans, which are in various stages of development, focus on tightened
biosecurity and compartmentalization of diseases to allow movement of
animals to slaughter and products to the marketplace. They also allow
for movement of live animals within a compartment. If the United States
can gain acceptance of these plans by its trading partners, it will
lessen the economic impact of a disease.
Communications among State and Federal agencies also have improved,
and the Department of Homeland Security has assisted with exercises to
test the country's preparedness for disease outbreaks. Additionally,
creation of the Food and Agriculture Sector Coordinating Council has
raised awareness of the need for biosecurity throughout the food chain.
vulnerabilities
Even though there have been significant improvements in the systems
for safeguarding U.S. agriculture and the Nation's food supply, there
are still significant vulnerabilities and challenges that must be
addressed. They include:
An insufficient quantity of FMD vaccine.--With support of the
livestock industry, APHIS changed its policy on managing an FMD
outbreak from culling all infected and exposed animals to one of
vaccination in all but the smallest of outbreaks. Based on experience
with outbreaks in the United Kingdom and Korea, the United States
simply cannot euthanize its way out of an outbreak; vaccination is the
only realistic alternative. When discussing how this policy would be
implemented, it became apparent that to deal with an outbreak there was
not enough vaccine available nor could a sufficient quantity be
obtained in time to implement an effective control program.
The United States is the only country in the world that maintains
its own vaccine antigen bank, and it serves all of North America. The
bank is maintained at the Plum Island Animal Disease Center (PIADC) on
Plum Island, NY, and has a limited number of antigens. Under the
current manufacturer(s)' contract, antigen is shipped to Europe where
it is made into finished vaccine that then is shipped back to the
United States. After 3 weeks, this process would produce only 2.5
million doses of vaccine. Dr. James Roth, professor and researcher at
Iowa State University, estimates that at least 10 million doses would
be needed during the first 2 weeks of an outbreak. Currently, there is
no surge capacity to produce additional doses of vaccine. All the
vaccine production capacity in the world is currently in use by other
countries.
Current law prohibits live FMD virus from being introduced onto the
U.S. mainland, so foreign production companies are the only source of
finished vaccine. It has been suggested that recombinant DNA vaccines
that do not use live FMD virus can be produced in the United States,
thus avoiding the legal prohibition of having live virus on the
mainland. However, current data is not sufficient to determine how
quickly, and indeed whether, such vaccines provide protection outside
the laboratory environment and for all species. The United States is
likely years away from the development and commercialization of such
novel vaccines. While developing such a vaccine would be a positive
move, the reality is that the U.S. livestock industry must have
vaccines that are protective against the strain of FMD that might be in
a sample sitting at the PIADC for analysis at this very moment!
The House Agriculture Committee's Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture held a hearing Feb. 11, 2015, on the FMD vaccine
shortage. The livestock industry made it clear that a solution to the
vaccine shortage must include a contract for an offshore, vendor-
maintained bank that includes antigen for all 23 FMD types that are
currently circulating in the world and that a contract be awarded for
surge capacity to produce sufficient quantities of vaccine for an
outbreak in the U.S. livestock herd.
Gaps in U.S. biosecurity.--Both USDA and DHS focus a lot of
attention on test exercises, and those are very beneficial activities.
In most outbreaks, the first problem encountered is the lack of
biosecurity, which contributes to the spread of disease. By the time
adequate biosecurity is established the disease has been spread over
much larger areas and control becomes much more challenging and costly.
Test exercises do not accurately reveal what happens during an actual
outbreak.
Current pork production methods concentrate large numbers of
animals in a single location, and the pork industry has always prided
itself on having a robust biosecurity system. However, during the PEDv
outbreak in 2013, the industry discovered serious gaps in biosecurity
that contributed to spreading the disease. The same problem was also
identified in the HPAI outbreak in 2015.
One solution to this problem is that, in addition to test
exercises, Federal and State agencies need a more robust review of
biosecurity measures in each sector of the agriculture industry.
Producers and their allied industries should be provided resources to
increase training on the importance of biosecurity and how to identify
gaps in their systems. While this would require additional resources,
the potential savings to the Government are significant, providing a
very favorable cost/benefit ratio.
More robust scrutiny of imports.--Federal agencies are relying too
much on the ports of entry as the first line of defense against pest
and disease introduction. More emphasis must be placed on what happens
during processing and production of products in the countries of
origin. With most cargo being moved in containers, thorough inspection
at the port of entry is virtually impossible. APHIS prepares risk
assessments for all plant- and animal-origin products moving into U.S.
territory, and in many cases those assessments are based on information
supplied by Government officials and do not always include a site
visit. Further, because of resource constraints, there is not enough
follow up to assure that risk mitigations are being followed.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is responsible for inspection
of feed and feed ingredients produced in foreign countries and in the
United States. Not enough resources are being made available to APHIS
and FDA to do a thorough inspection of foreign manufacturers to
determine if they are following good manufacturing practices and if
Government regulation and oversight are effective. That shortfall
increases the risk to U.S. agriculture of disease introduction.
The strain of the PED virus introduced into the United States was
determined to be of Chinese origin. But Government officials
responsible for overseeing port-of-entry inspections and disease risk
management have been unable to specifically identify the source or
means of introduction of the virus even though APHIS conducted a root
cause investigation. If there were a gap in the U.S. safety net that
allowed the recent introduction of PEDv and Delta Corona virus, it also
remains open for FMD!
Traceability.--The U.S. pork industry has been a vocal advocate for
a robust Nationally-standardized mandatory system for animal
traceability. APHIS spent years working on a system of individual
animal identification to allow accurate tracing of the movement of
livestock, which is an absolutely critical component of any system for
managing disease. Unfortunately, opposition from some sectors of the
livestock community resulted in a compromise that provided only a
State-based system that requires each State to be able to trace
livestock movements within its State. The current traceability system
is inadequate for use in a disease outbreak. In fact, it is not even
recognized as adequate to meet the requirements of some major U.S.
trading partners.
Resource constraints.--Many of the shortfalls identified in this
testimony result from of a lack of adequate resources. Risks to U.S.
agriculture and the U.S. food supply have increased dramatically over
the last few years and have now been exacerbated by the threat of
terrorists targeting agriculture production. At the same time, funding
provided to maintain the country's safeguarding systems have been
reduced. It is hard to conceive that enough efficiencies can be found
to address an increasing threat and save money at the same time.
Collectively, the agriculture industry, the Obama administration and
Congress must face the reality that addressing these serious
shortcomings in the U.S. safety net will require a significant outlay
of additional funds. We can't have it both ways! The history of
Government involvement in disasters such as disease outbreaks is that
once an outbreak occurs unlimited resources are committed to getting
control of the situation. The savings everyone wants to make can be
achieved by investing now in the Nation's preparedness and avoiding a
more costly disease eradication program in the future.
Gaps in early detection.--Early disease detection and rapid
response to any outbreak provide the best opportunity to limit the
spread of Foreign Animal Diseases (FADs). Even though there is
surveillance in place for CSF, ASF, and FMD, it is apparent that the
funding is wholly inadequate to provide a high level of confidence that
one of these trade-limiting FADs will be rapidly detected in time to
make a difference. This is evidenced by the discontinuation in 2015
because of a lack of funding of a pilot project conducted by USDA's
Veterinary Services, using the surveillance infrastructure built for
CSF to actively detect ASF and FMD.
Data sharing for regulated diseases.--As evidenced during the HPAI
outbreak, the amount of movement, testing, and premises data that needs
to be captured, analyzed, and visualized by the APHIS incident
command--responsible for dealing with animals disease outbreaks--to
support disease response and business continuity activities is
staggering. While the various pieces of this type of data exist, much
of it resides in disparate databases that do not readily and easily
communicate, which hinders the response and jeopardizes animal welfare.
The industry is very concerned that this lack of connectivity will have
direct and negative effects that will hinder the response to a foreign
animal disease of swine.
conclusion
There seems to be a growing consensus that there are serious flaws
in the country's preparedness to deal with threats to U.S. agriculture
and the U.S. food supply.
The Bipartisan Report of the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense,
co-chaired by former DHS Secretary Tom Ridge and former Sen. Joe
Lieberman and released Oct. 28, 2015, highlighted the need for
improvements in the system for protecting the U.S. livestock herd and
the Nation's food supply. Concerns about the adequacy of the country's
preparedness also were raised in a Nov. 4, 2015, hearing of the House
Agriculture Committee.
NPPC urges Congress to use the information gathered in that hearing
and in the Blue Ribbon Study Panel report to work with the Obama
administration on finding solutions to improve the preparedness of the
United States to deal with any pest or disease outbreak.

Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Acord. The Chair now recognizes
Dr. Williams for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN R. WILLIAMS, ASSISTANT EXTENSION PROFESSOR,
MISSISSIPPI STATE UNIVERSITY

Mr. Williams. Chairman McSally and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today to
talk about the risk that our Nation faces from agroterrorism.
As an ag economist from Mississippi State University, I spend a
large portion of my time researching ag markets and the impacts
that shocks can have to those markets. Our country's ag and
food production system faces many challenges today, one of
which is a risk of major disruption to the system. It is
essential that we be prepared to face these threats to prevent
and/or minimize the impacts they may have on our food system.
As mentioned by my fellow witnesses, our poultry industry
faces devastating Avian influenza outbreak in 2015. In Iowa
alone, 30 million layers were lost, and 1.5 million turkeys
were lost, resulting in a direct impact of $658 million.
Other industries are also impacted. This is known as a
multiplier effect, and that multiplier effect resulted in a
total economic impact of $1.2 billion, and more than 8,000 jobs
lost.
On a positive note, some of those losses in Iowa were
partially offset with increases in sales in other States.
Mississippi alone, ag producers in the State saw 40 percent
year-over-year increase in sales. Keep in mind, those increased
egg prices were also passed on to consumers. So there is a
negative on that side as well.
Prior to the Avian influenza outbreak, the poultry industry
already had several biosecurity measures put in place by
companies such as Sanderson Farms and Tyson, who owned the
birds and contract the producers to grow and raise those birds.
The State and Federal agencies also helped to develop those
guidelines.
Despite all of these measures that were already in place,
the industry was not prepared for an outbreak when disasters
strike. In the time since the outbreak, industry leaders, State
agencies and Federal agencies have all come together to develop
a plan to quickly and efficiently address future outbreaks.
This can also be applied to agroterrorism and provides an
excellent framework for other industry to work from.
One benefit of agriculture is that production is spread
over a wide area. As a result, natural disasters and other
disruptions are quite common, but typically have minimal
impacts. For example, the snowstorm about a month ago that hit
the States of Nebraska, Iowa, Colorado, and Kansas, all but
shut down the meat-packing industry for nearly 2 days. Yet the
markets didn't respond to that shock.
Another example, a similar snowstorm earlier this year in
Texas and New Mexico, killed more than 30,000 dairy cows, and
caused significant damage on a local level. Yet Nationally, the
milk futures only increased for a week before returning to
their previous levels.
One of the greatest threats from agroterrorism that we face
is an introduction of something that could shut down our export
industry. An example of this is in 2003 when had a BSE, a cow
test positive for BSE in Washington State that shut down our
export industry on our beef cattle. It took 7 years for exports
to return back to the level that they were before that positive
test of BSE. But despite that shutdown in exports, the cattle
markets really were not impacted on a large scale.
Moving on to our crop industry. With fruits and vegetables,
the biggest threat that we really face is something that can
potentially harm us as humans: The introduction of E. Coli, or
salmonella. Our fruits and vegetables are typically grown
outdoors, in the ground, many of them very close to the ground
so they are susceptible to contamination, whether it be natural
from birds or introduced from terrorists. While there is a
system in place to detect and track these introductions, there
is still definitely room for improvement in that area.
Row crops are much less susceptible to agroterrorism and
natural disasters. The damage must be on a large scale to have
a significant impact on the Nation's economy. The biggest
threat that we face right now is drought, a wide-spread drought
as we saw in 2012. The 2012 drought took nearly 3 years for our
Nation's row crop industry to really get back to normal levels.
The other thing to keep in mind on that side of things is
the conditions have to be nearly perfect at the field level for
a terrorist to introduce a pathogen that would really take hold
and spread. So, the likelihood of that is not very high.
In conclusion, past incidences of disruption have shown the
U.S. ag sector is remarkably resilient. In most cases, it would
be difficult for a producer to inflict damage on a large enough
scale, with the exception of possibly our foot-and-mouth
disease, and some of these diseases in the livestock sector, to
cause a National impact. What is really key to minimizing these
effects is to take measures to keep them at a localized level.
If these impacts are at a localized level, our ag sector has
shown a remarkable ability to bounce back from these types of
incidences.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Williams follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brian R. Williams
February 26, 2016
Chairman Donovan and Members of the Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Communications Subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to appear today to talk about the risk that our Nation
faces from individuals or organizations who wish to disrupt our
agricultural and food system. I am an agricultural economist from
Mississippi State University and spend a large portion of my time
researching agricultural markets and the impacts of various shocks to
the markets. Our country's agricultural and food production system
faces many challenges today, one of which is the risk of a major
disruption to the system; whether it be in the form of a terrorist
attack or from a natural disruption. It is essential that we be
prepared to face these threats to prevent and/or minimize the impacts
they may have on our food system.
learning from recent events
In August of 2015, an outbreak of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza
(HPAI) hit several States in the Midwest and Pacific Northwest,
inflicting a significant amount of damage in its path. Iowa alone lost
30 million layers and pullets as well as 1.5 million turkeys with
direct impact of just over $658 million (Iowa Farm Bureau, 2015). In
addition to the direct impact of lost production, there are also
indirect impacts that need to be considered. For example, suppliers and
vendors that normally market goods and services to the poultry
operations will see reduced income. As a result, they will make fewer
household purchases, hurting the sales of additional businesses;
creating a multiplier effect. According to a study commissioned by Iowa
Farm Bureau, this multiplier effect resulted in a total economic impact
of $1.2 billion to the State of Iowa's economy, including 8,444 lost
jobs.
Agricultural production in the United States is dispersed across a
large area, which helps to mitigate impacts on a National level. In the
case of egg production, while Iowa saw significantly reduced
production, other States saw increases in their sales. I have estimated
that the State of Mississippi alone, egg producers benefited from an
increase of $93.6 million in production, a 40 percent year-over-year
increase, as a result of increased egg prices. It is highly likely that
several other States experienced similar increases in egg sales. Of
course, the increased egg prices are ultimately passed on to consumers,
increasing the average American's grocery bill. This phenomenon is also
pointed out by Pendell et al. in their study of the potential release
of foot-and-mouth disease from the future National Bio and Agro Defense
Facility in Manhattan, Kansas.
Much can be learned from the HPAI outbreak in the spring of 2015.
Prior to the outbreak, the poultry industry already had several bio-
security measures in place. Many of those measures had been put into
place by companies such as Sanderson Farms and Tyson, who own the birds
but are contracting producers to grow and raise them, as a protection
for their investment. Many of the protocols already in place by the
bird owners were developed with the assistant of State agencies. The
USDA and APHIS also had several simple, commonsense guidelines in
place. Despite all of these measures that were already in place, the
industry was ill-prepared for actually dealing with a disastrous event
such as HPAI. In the time since the outbreak in 2015, industry leaders,
State agencies, and Federal agencies have all come together to develop
an elaborate plan to quickly and efficiently address future outbreaks.
The plan includes a quarantine of the infected area, testing of all
birds within a 3-mile radius, and requiring a written permit for anyone
entering and/or exiting the area. The model that the poultry industry
has put into place can easily be applied even in the case of agro-
terrorism and provides an excellent framework for other industries as
well.
economic impacts in animal agriculture
There are several things to consider when trying to estimate the
economic impact of a terrorist attack on animal agriculture. First, how
wide-spread is the damage? If the damage is localized to a single
county or even multi-county area, the impact will likely be minimal. In
some cases, insurance will pay indemnities to producers for the value
of the animals that are lost. Indemnities may also be paid by the USDA.
If facilities must be quarantined or sterilized before introducing new
animals, insurance will not reimburse producers for lost future
production. That could compound the economic impact of a disease
outbreak, whether natural or introduced by terrorists. As mentioned
above, there are also multiplier effects that must be factored in. For
example, in the State of Mississippi the multiplier effect for jobs is
2.32 (Henderson et al. 2015). In other words, for every job lost in the
agricultural sector there are 1.32 additional jobs lost in the rest of
the economy.
One benefit of agriculture is that production is spread over a wide
area. As a result, natural disasters and other disruptions to
production are quite common but typically have minimal impacts on the
economy and markets. For example, the February 2, 2016 snowstorm that
hit much of Nebraska and Iowa prevented many cattle from being
transported from feedlots to packers and all but shut down the meat
packing industry for 2 days, but the Fed Cattle markets did not deviate
from their normal patterns. A similar early January snowstorm in Texas
and New Mexico killed more than 30,000 dairy cows, and caused
significant local damage. Market fundamentals tell us that when supply
is decreased, prices should shift higher, yet milk futures only
increased slightly and the higher prices lasted less than a week before
declining again. The impact of the Texas snowstorm was only temporary
because although the storm brought significant local damage, 30,000
head of dairy cattle is relatively small when compared to the more than
9.3 million head of dairy cattle in the entire United States.
One of the greatest threats from agro-terrorism that we face is the
introduction of a disease or pathogen that causes our export markets to
be shut down. We saw one such incident in 2003 when a cow from
Washington State was found to be infected with BSE, shutting down the
majority of our beef exports (See figures 1 and 2 below). It took over
7 years for U.S. beef exports to return to levels seen before the first
BSE case was discovered. Despite a complete shutdown in U.S. beef
exports that took several years to recover, cattle prices showed
little-to-no impact as shown in figure 3 below.
impacts in plant-based agriculture
Plant-based agriculture can be broken down into two general groups:
Fruits and vegetables that are grown for direct human consumption and
row crops that are typically grown for animal consumption or for
additional processing that ultimately leads to human consumption. In
the fruit and vegetable category, the biggest threat we face is the
introduction of food-borne illnesses such as e-coli or salmonella.
Leafy greens are of particular vulnerability due to their fragile
nature that makes them difficult to clean as well as a consumer's
tendency to eat them uncooked. Many fruits and vegetables are grown
outdoors in the ground, where they are susceptible to contamination
from natural sources such as birds, but are also easy to access by
terrorists interested in introducing food-borne illnesses into the food
system. While there is a system in place to detect, track, and recall
contaminated foods, there is still room for improvement (Coates and
Trounce, 2011).
Row crop agriculture may also be susceptible to agro-terrorism and
natural disasters, however the damage must be on a wide scale to have a
significant impact on the economy. The biggest threat to our row crops
is a wide-spread drought such as the one experienced in 2012. As shown
in figure 4, the 2011 drought that hit the Southern Plains and then the
2012 drought that swept through much of the Corn Belt and Southern
Plains caused a substantial drop in corn production as well as a spike
in corn prices. It took U.S. corn producers nearly 3 years to rebuild
corn stocks to the point where markets have returned to a new
equilibrium. The high grain prices caused by the 2011-2012 droughts
were also responsible for the agricultural boom that the United States
experienced in 2013 and into 2014. Farm incomes hit a record high in
2013, which provided a boost to other agricultural businesses, caused
farmland values to rise, and boosted the economies in several rural
States. While the impact of the 2012 drought help some in the
agricultural industry, others were harmed. Higher corn prices drove up
costs for livestock producers, the ethanol industry, and ultimately it
drove up food prices for consumers. While unlikely, a terrorist attack
that can reduce production any individual row crop could cause similar
impacts as the 2012 drought. However, if harm is inflicted on only one
crop I would expect markets to return to normal much more quickly than
they did following a drought that impacts the production of not just
one crop, but several.
In conclusion, upon examining past incidences of disruptions in
production and trade across a variety of commodities, the U.S.
agricultural sector has demonstrated a remarkable resilience. In most
cases, it would be difficult for a terrorist to inflict damage on a
large enough scale to have a lasting detrimental impact on the U.S.
economy. If a terrorist were to succeed in inflicting damage on a large
scale, the agricultural industry has proven that it can recover quickly
from most threats. With the cooperation of individual industry groups,
State governments, and the Federal Government in devising plans to
respond to potential terror attacks or natural disasters, evidence
suggests that damage from such disasters can be mitigated.
references
Coates, A. and M. B. Trounce. ``FDA Food Safety Modernization Act: Is
it Enough?'' Journal of Bioterrorism and Biodefense. 2:109. 2011.

Decision Innovative Solutions, ``Economic Impact of Highly Pathogenic
Avian Influenza on Poultry in Iowa.'' Prepared for Iowa Farm Bureau.
August 17, 2015.

Henderson, James E., James N. Barnes, and Lawrence L. Falconer. ``The
Economic Contribution of Agriculture and Forestry Production and
Processing in Mississippi.'' Mississippi State University Extension
Service. Publication No. 2879.

Pendell, Dustin L., Thomas L. Marsh, Keith H. Coble, Jayson L. Lusk,
and Sara C. Szmania. ``Economic Assessment of FMDv Releases from the
National Bio and Agro Defense Facility.'' PLoS ONE 10(6): June 2015.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. McSally. Great, thank you, Dr. Williams. As Chair, I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. A lot of them
stewing here, but I want to be efficient with my time and give
my colleagues the opportunity to ask questions.
This committee has very much been focusing on fusion
centers and information sharing, not just between Federal
partners, but between Federal, State, and local; not just on
the Government side, but with private sector and others that
would need a place, or maybe can be a place, regionally or
State-wide, to come together and get the information that they
need on threats and sharing information in both directions.
I would love to hear perspectives from any of the witnesses
on whether you have been invited or involved in any of the
fusion centers, or whether that is an area that we also need to
be improve to be inviting members related to the agriculture
industry to address the agroterrorism threat, to have that
information be shared at the fusion centers.
Dr. Meckes. Chairman McSally, I will speak to our situation
in North Carolina. As I indicated, the emergency programs
division came into being in 2002, and they have been intimately
involved with law enforcement, with our emergency management
response teams all across the State of North Carolina with the
fusion centers. Again, I would suggest that the emergency
programs division model might be something that other States
would consider, because it has taken the burden of trying to
manage that piece of agriculture and food defense off of our
veterinary division, in that this group focuses solely on what
is needed for response. Of course, we are integrated with them
on a day-to-day basis in all the activities. So yes, in answer
to your question, North Carolina does have input and does
receive input from the fusion centers and the emergency
management.
Ms. McSally. Is that all virtual, or do you have somebody
who is invited there or sits there if something were to break
out? Are there tactics, techniques, and procedures, TTPs, for
you to have somebody there or how does that work?
Dr. Meckes. In our planning for high-pathogen influenza, we
actively engaged immediately our emergency operations center
for the State of North Carolina, and we would have run the
incident out of that emergency operations center.
Ms. McSally. Okay, great. Any other witnesses care to
comment on the fusion center? Mr. Acord.
Mr. Acord. To my knowledge, there has been no discussion or
contact from those centers with the pork industry. I haven't
heard of any.
I can make you aware of one circumstance where
communication is not good, and that is with the National Animal
Health Laboratory Network. The challenge that we have there is
that most of the laboratories can't communicate with each
other, and that is a serious, serious consequence of not being
able to immediately post what you find in a laboratory in
Minnesota, in Iowa, in Kansas, and that has to be fixed if we
are going to have an effective system, and it currently doesn't
work.
Ms. McSally. Interesting. Dr. Beckham.
Dr. Beckham. That goes back to biosurveillance and having
the ability for systems to communicate with each other to
include the laboratory systems. As currently stands right now,
the ability for those labs to message test results and
communicate with one another, as Dr. Acord says, is not as
robust as it could be. In addition, getting information from
the field, from the veterinarians to the State animal health
official, or to other officials who need to have that
information, right now there is not a really robust system out
there for that. There are some efforts underway that are all-
of-enterprise efforts from the industry to the State animal
health official, to the Federal Government that have been
funded by the Department of Homeland Security and that are
being coordinated with USDA to develop surveillance systems
that ultimately can talk between each other in the diagnostic
labs, but to date, obviously that is still underway, and that
has not reached its full potential, much less even broached the
idea of communicating with our public health sector.
Ms. McSally. So, we had a hearing about 2 weeks ago taking
a look at biosurveillance systems, and particularly, looking at
the National Biosurveillance Integration Center. So is that a
place where--I mean, there is a lot of shortfalls and
shortcomings to that, but in Nirvana, in a perfect world, is
that a place that should be integrating this information in a
two-way, and across regionally as well?
Dr. Beckham. So I think there are some challenges
associated with that. I think some of the challenges are the
willingness to share information. Someone has to act as a
trusted agent, which is kind of what I alluded to in my
testimony. The industries, I believe, are willing to share
information, but that information has to be protected, and
there has to be clear policies and procedures on how one will
react to certain types of information.
So those things need to be worked out, and, I think, you
know, one of the projects that I had previously worked on in
academia with industry was really headed that way so that you
could get people to share information. But more importantly
than getting them to share, you have to give them something
back for it. They can't just give you information and you not
give anything back.
So, it is a two-way street, there has to be good
communication and there has to be trust, and I am not sure that
NBAF is the place for that. I would let my other witnesses up
here comment on that. I think Doug is ready to do that. But I
can sure tell you that academia is a good place, or maybe
another third party that can act as a trusted agent would be a
great place to hold information, or to share information.
I will say one more thing, and the unique thing about some
of the systems out there now is that you actually don't even
have to hold the information, you can reach back to that
information and gather that information and only use it when
you need to use it; therefore, it stays with the owner, the
actual owner of the information. So that is another way getting
access to information and being able to utilize information,
but not storing information in big databases, which can
sometimes be very vicarious.
Ms. McSally. When you were saying that, it made me think of
a parallel that we had with a cybersecurity and information
sharing among the private sector and with the Government, and
we actually passed legislation out of this committee providing
some protections to the private sector to build that trust in
liability issues so that there could be sharing of what the
appropriate threat information is. So I wonder if that is a
model to look at for a similar challenge within this industry.
I have some more questions but I am out of time. So I will go
on a second round here. So I want to give some time to Ranking
Member Payne for 5 minutes.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Madam Chair.
This question is for all the witnesses. What is the biggest
gap in our ability to prevent and mitigate the effects of an
agroterrorism event? What is the most critical investment we
can make to prevent such an event?
Dr. Beckham. Early detection, early detection is key,
right? So we have got to know something is here. We have got to
be able to localize it, keep it localized. So early detection,
biosurveillance, the National Animal Health Laboratory Network,
the investment on these laboratories, the investment of that
infrastructure is absolutely critical.
You heard earlier today vaccines are an issue for foot-and-
mouth disease. I will take that one step further: Look at the
funding we put into HHS and the funding in the Strategic
National Stockpile, and then compare that to what we put into
the National Veterinary Stockpile. We do not have the funding
to prepare this Nation to respond to with vaccines and
diagnostics that we need. So I would say that is a large gap as
well.
So for me, it is early detection and then the
countermeasures to respond, but the funding has to be there
similar to what we see on the human side of the house. We have
a zoonotic disease incursion, we have got to have the
capabilities to respond. In order to do that, we have to have
the resources allocated before. We cannot be reactive, we have
to be proactive.
Dr. Meckes. Just to provide an order of magnitude of the
funding for the National Veterinary Stockpile, $1-2 million per
year, contrast that to the strategic National stockpile, which
is $3-4 billion a year. I suspect the strategic National
stockpile throws away more drugs that are expired on an annual
basis than the entire budget of the National veterinary
stockpile. We have to begin to address that issue. Foot-and-
mouth disease is the barbarians at the gate. It is just a
matter of time before it is introduced into this country, and
we cannot stop the spread of that disease.
Mr. Acord. For the livestock industry, I think it would
have to be an adequate supply of foot-and-mouth disease
vaccine, that is really the thing that scares us the most. I
agree with Dr. Beckham that early detection and rapid response
is the mantra that we have to follow. But we know right now
that we do not have an adequate supply of FMD vaccine, nor do
we even have a vaccine for something like African swine fever
that has spread rapidly through Russia and into eastern Europe.
It is only a matter of time before it moves elsewhere. We have
to address those things. We can't continue to talk about it.
USDA puts in about $1.9 million into the vaccine bank. That is
a pittance compared to the loss that we would suffer with a
foot-and-mouth disease outbreak.
Mr. Williams. I would mirror what Dr. Beckham and Mr. Acord
have said. The key is early detection and taking care of things
as soon and as quickly as possible. The quicker that we stop
the spread of any such disease, the less economic impact that
we are going to have. So, that is, to me, really the key, is
getting on top of this as quickly as possible and doing
everything we can to have a response plan in place, whether its
vaccination, or other measures, to really get on top of this
and prevent it from spreading.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Mr. Acord, in your testimony, you
acknowledge that every passenger and handbag entering the
United States has a potential to import a disease that could
harm the agriculture industry. In your opinion, is the United
States doing enough to keep diseases and pests out of the
United States? What should be done--what more should be done?
Mr. Acord. Well, I think the effort has improved
dramatically to address this issue. We are looking at an almost
impossible job when you--I have spent a lot of time at the
Miami International Airport, and I take pork producers there
all the time so that they can see what is intercepted at the
Port of Miami. In a few days, in a few days, you have a
mountain of intercepted material, and it is unbelievable what
people want to bring in, and they have all kinds of opportunity
to declare that they have something, but they don't. I saw one
passenger from Venezuela was literally bringing a grocery store
in a suitcase, and said they have nothing. Thank goodness for
the dogs.
One of positive things that has happened, and I never
thought I would say this at the time, but moving the
agriculture inspectors to the Bureau of Customs and Border
Protection was a very, very smart move. When I talked to those
inspectors now, they tell me that the improved enforcement
authority that they have through the Customs laws has
contributed immensely to their ability to do their job. We have
to spend more time at the country of origin, and the country of
departure rather than the border. That is literally our second
line of defense.
We are going to have to put more people in these countries
if we expect to have any possibility of finding out what is
going into these products in the first place that is, like I
say, about the PED, however that got in, that same pathway is
still open for FMD for which we have no vaccine. So we just
have to direct more resources to country of origin, I think.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Ranking Member Payne. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Donovan from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Acord, Mr. Payne,
and I would like you to visit Newark International Airport as
well, please, that is our airport.
Everyone here has spoken about early detection, and it is
so multifaceted when you think about home-grown products and
livestock, imported products and livestock. How are we doing
this early detection? First, maybe we could do it domestically.
Are the people on the ground trained to detect, or do we wait
until someone gets sick and then try and find out the origin of
that illness? How is it that we are doing early detection?
Certainly, if we are doing it, whatever methods we are using
now, how can they be improved? I open that up to the panel.
Dr. Meckes. Member Donovan, I would suggest that that takes
place at the State and local level. The State animal health
officials, my team within the veterinary division that is on
the ground every day with pork producers, with poultry
producers, with beef and dairy producers, we are out there
seeing animals, we are talking to the producers, we are working
closely with private practitioners. That is where we will
detect the disease. Rightly, that should be the case. We are in
touch with everything that goes on in our respective States.
Dr. Beckham worked closely to develop a program 3 years ago
called enhanced passive surveillance, which was a means of
identifying diseases early in animal agricultural production.
It was almost like emergency room visits that were recorded and
tracked on a day-to-day basis.
So, we have to make sure that capability exists. I am going
to suggest that DHS has a unique role in all of this, and, of
course, I draw upon my 7 years in the Office of Health Affairs,
but USDA has a significant regulatory responsibility. DHS has a
significant threat reduction responsibility, and it should work
to enhance capabilities all across the country in preparedness
and response.
A perfect example of that would have been the Center for
Domestic Preparedness in Anniston, Alabama. The Ag Earth
program, the Ag Emergency Response Training Program. After 5
years of successful operation, FEMA discontinued funding for
that program because it was perceived as a non-issue for our
country.
Obviously, it remains an issue and will be an issue. So DHS
should step up, and appropriately so, work on the threat side,
work on the preparedness side, and work on the response side
with States all over the country.
Mr. Donovan. Doctor.
Dr. Beckham. I would just echo what Dr. Meckes said, and
say that, of the veterinarians we are training every day, and
the colleges of veterinary medicine, and the ones that are out
practicing, are really the first line of response.
Early detection is multifaceted, so it is heavily dependent
on the producers recognizing there is something wrong, calling
that veterinarian, getting them out there. Then through this
system, that Dr. Meckes mentioned, we have the capability of
collecting that information on multiple devices and bringing
that in and having veterinarians have the capability to share
that through multiple devices as well, so if they are seeing
something that is unusual in one area, they can share it with
each other and say: Hey, is anybody else seeing this?
Those are the kinds of systems we have to develop, and
those are the kinds of systems we have to implement if we are
going to have a comprehensive program for early detection that
really relies on the first responders, the veterinarians, and
the producers that then works with our State veterinarians to
and get all that information back.
Mr. Donovan. Is it more difficult to detect a disease in
our grown products, our agriculture products, than it is
livestock? It sounds like, not that it is easy to detect with
livestock, but it seems like there may be more signs.
Dr. Beckham. You will see clinical signs, right, exactly.
Mr. Acord. I would agree with Dr. Beckham and Dr. Meckes. I
think the private practitioner is the first person that is
going to be the one to find a foreign animal disease in the
United States.
The pork industry spends a great deal of time talking to
our producers. We have educational material, that they were
provided, that encourages them to report any unusual
conditions, that they observe, to both their local veterinarian
and subsequent to their veterinarian, to the State
veterinarian.
We have a foreign animal disease diagnostic training
program, at Plum Island Animal Disease Center, where foreign
animal disease diagnosticians are trained to recognize the
symptoms of disease. That certainly could be expanded to
include a larger number of people because it is very unique
training where they actually get to see the disease. These
animals are infected with foot-and-mouth disease, so they can
see first-hand the symptoms. I think we have a start, I guess
that is how I would characterize it.
Mr. Donovan. My time is expired. I would like to, if we do
a second round, ask you about how we do this detection for
things that we import. But, Madam Chair, I yield the rest of my
time, which isn't any.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Mr. Donovan. The Chair now
recognizes Ms. Watson Coleman from New Jersey for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much. I have a number
of questions which have been prompted from just listening in
and out. We talked about detection, and we are talking about
elimination, and we are talking about vaccines. I want to go
before that. Are there standards that people who grow crops
have to follow, people who grow livestock have to follow?
Are there standards to ensure that these products are being
grown and these livestock are being bred and surviving under
certain standards for safety? Is there such a thing, and if so,
who is responsible for policing that or monitoring that? What
is the process for that?
Dr. Meckes. Well, I will say first and foremost that the
marketplace drives those standards. If you are a producer of
pork, if you are a beef producer, if you are a dairyman
producing milk every day, you want to meet those market
standards to be assured that your product can go to market.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yeah, that is taste and stuff. I am
talking about are there standards that you can only grow in
this kind of soil this? You have to do this in order to protect
a plant that is growing. If it is livestock, it can only be
bred under certain circumstances. They can only be fed under
certain circumstances. Ways that you would prevent diseases and
things of that nature, as opposed to waiting until something
happens and then having the capacity to detect it. I just want
to know if there is any such thing?
Mr. Acord. Well, in the pork industry, we have the Pork
Quality Assurance Program, which sets some standards that
determine issues like animal welfare, animal health monitoring,
those kind of things. That does exist, and there is a great
deal of education of producers that goes into implementing that
program.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Who monitors that that is actually
happening? Are those Federal standards?
Mr. Acord. No, ma'am. They are not Federal standards.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. They are industry standards?
Mr. Acord. They are industry standards. I would suggest to
you that there would be a great reluctance, and an absolute
opposition, by producers to be confined by any kind of Federal
standards as to how they raise livestock and produce crops. I
think the industry would view that as probably un-American,
quite honestly, to see that.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Even if the goal is to make sure that
livestock and veggies and whatever are produced in a healthy
way so that you don't have these various diseases?
Mr. Acord. I don't think you can regulate industry or
production of anything to that extent. There aren't enough
resources to monitor how that is done and, quite honestly, we
can pass all kinds of regulations. It is the ability to enforce
those regulations that makes a difference.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Yeah. I was kind of trying to get at
that also. Are there standards? Who monitors? Should there be
monitoring? You are saying that such a thing isn't very viable
in the industry. I know that the producers would probably
resist it, but I am just wondering, does Government have a role
in that, and if so, what would it be?
I can go on to some other areas because--and I think it was
you, Mr. Acord, I think you said that there is no FMD vaccine?
Does that mean you have none stockpiled or that none exists
because there is no vaccine? I don't know.
Mr. Acord. Well, there is a limited availability of
vaccine.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So there is a vaccine, but it is not
available?
Mr. Acord. At Plum Island Animal Disease Center is where
the United States maintains its bank. That is the bank for
North America. You know, Canada, Mexico, and United States, all
would use it. The antigen is stored there because the law
prohibits live FMD virus on the U.S. mainland. That antigen is
shipped to Europe where it is manufactured into finished
vaccine and shipped back to the United States, but it has such
few strains. The problem with it is that the antigen has a
shelf life.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. That is what I was going to ask you.
Does it have a shelf life?
Mr. Acord. After 5 years, the potency of vaccine starts to
go down, and after 10 years it is not all that effective quite
honestly, and the companies don't even want to touch the
manufacture at that point.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So one thing that I read, is that,
there are so many entities and agencies involved in this whole
discussion that we are having today, Madam Chairman, and I need
to understand what would be the most efficient involvement of
agencies and the most efficient collaboration that could take
place that is information sharing and facilitated and not
impeding and not delayed because there are just so many cooks
in that pot.
I guess I will have to wait until the next round to hear
the answer to that, but that certainly is something that I
think we need to be exploring. Thank you very much.
Ms. McSally. Thank you. The gentle lady yields back. The
Chair now recognizes Mr. Walker from North Carolina.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman. Insider threat,
seems to be a significant danger. If there was an attack, would
it be able to establish a chain of command? Is there any kind
of protocol? Maybe, Dr. Beckham, would you touch on that, or
Dr. Meckes, either one----
Dr. Beckham. I am going to let Dr. Meckes because they
handle it at the State level typically.
Dr. Meckes. We follow the incident command structure to
respond to any incident, whether it is a hurricane, a tornado.
We have just spent the last 7 months preparing for the
introduction of High Path AI in North Carolina, which
thankfully has not come to pass; but we developed our entire
incident command structure to address every issue associated
with an outbreak of High Path Avian Influenza.
Everything from burial and disposal to the movement of
samples to the laboratory for testing, routing of vehicles to
make certain that we can effectively continue to move product
and maintain some continuity of business, even in the face of a
disease outbreak. So FEMA's incident command structure is the
hierarchy by which we will operate, and practically speaking,
every Department of ag across the country is familiar at some
level with this incident command structure.
Mr. Walker. Being a little privileged to the North Carolina
situation, being your home base, North Carolina is ranked at
the top, or at least in the top 5, really in all areas of this
emergency preparedness. I commend your work on behalf of doing
your part in the agriculture side to keep it so highly ranked.
Dr. Meckes. Well, it hasn't been my work. It has been my
predecessors'. I thankfully walked into a well-oiled machine to
respond to incidents.
Mr. Walker. Well as we have seen around here at the State
level, you have to have good people to keep those machines
going. Otherwise they can end abruptly.
Getting outside of North Carolina, are you familiar--does
anybody want to address that--across the country, in our
Agriculture Emergency Operations Center, are we seeing good
capability across the country? Are we being followed as a
model--can anybody address that?
Dr. Meckes. There is a spectrum of capability across the
country, a wide spectrum. I think, again, that is where DHS has
a role in working towards, with USDA--now when I say DHS, we
always were diligent in making sure that we cooperated,
cooperated, coordinated, and collaborated with our sister
departments and agencies in addressing any of these issues. So
we held a Foot-and-Mouth Disease outbreak with FEMA Region 7 in
December 2013, and every player was at the table, the States,
the locals, and DHS, and HHS for that matter.
So it has to be an integrated effort, but DHS does have a
significant role and an important role in driving preparedness
and response capability.
Mr. Walker. I have a final question, but I am not so sure I
want to ask it publicly. It may come back with you. Where it
talks about America's food, agricultural sector, where is the
most vulnerable target that we have to agroterrorism, but that
may be a question better not shared publicly.
So with that I am going to I yield back the balance of my
time, back to you, Madam Chairwoman.
Ms. McSally. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. We will,
I think, be voting soon, but I want to give an opportunity for
second round here until votes are called. I appreciate the
thoughtful questions and discussion so far.
One concern we have seen across many industries with the
rise of terrorism, and ISIS, and the home-grown extremism, is
the potential use of drones for some sort of attack, and it
doesn't take much imagination to consider how, I mean, people
are getting these for Christmas, and they are much cheaper and
easier to buy now, how that could be used in such a way to
deliver something to a crop or to a farm to have an
agroterrorism attack.
Is that something that is even being looked at, at all by
any of you, and any ideas and considerations for addressing
this difficult threat?
Mr. Acord. While it is an additional potential for
introduction of disease, I don't see it creating anything new,
because agriculture is so open. Animal production is so open.
There is access to farmland and to barns rather easily, so I
don't think that is going to pose anything additional in terms
of worry for the agriculture industry.
Dr. Meckes. Chairwoman, I will share with you that during
the past virus outbreak which began in April 2013, and arrived
in North Carolina shortly thereafter, that our colleagues in
the environmental realm used drones to surveil disposal of
piglets that had died all throughout eastern North Carolina, so
that was a concern.
We obviously did our best to make certain that we didn't
create an environmental problem associated with an agricultural
disease outbreak, but who knows where this goes in the future.
It may well be a concern.
Ms. McSally. I mean, they can be used positively as well
obviously for surveillance.
One question, Dr. Beckham. I have a lot of friends who are
veterinarians, so this is more anecdotal, both small animal and
large animal, but one thing they share is there are fewer and
fewer people that are choosing that field of work. It is
becoming more and more expensive. They are going, like a lot of
higher education, but they are going significantly into debt,
and so it is a bit of a deterrent to even choose the field. So
part of making sure that we are ready in this area is making
sure that we have the next generation being trained up.
I know at the University of Arizona anyway, they are trying
to do a bit of an innovative program to compress the number of
years for the Bachelor's and moving on from there, and also
something innovative that would impact rural communities where
an individual would graduate as a Doctor of Veterinary
Medicine, but also have a Nurse Practitioner license so that
the human-animal bridge could be addressed in some of these
rural areas. I think some of those innovations would actually
help in this area as well.
Are there any other innovative ideas out there? I think
that is an interesting model perhaps. Are you concerned about
the pipeline and training of the next generation?
Dr. Beckham. So I am incredibly concerned about it, which
is actually why I went to Kansas State University to be the
dean there. I think it is something as a profession we have to
address. We are producing about 80 percent small animal
veterinarians for a variety of reasons, and we are losing the
expertise that is going back to detect the work in the
livestock systems and production animal medicine. There is a
whole host of reasons why that is happening.
We as a profession have to come together and look at novel,
innovative ways to get students in and out with less student
loan debt. We have to give them additional skill sets, like you
mentioned the nurse practitioner. We at Kansas State University
pride ourselves on the fact that we still have one of the
locations that produce quite a bit of students that go out into
production animal medicine. We have a rural veterinary loan
program where we will pay tuition for those that agree to go
back into Kansas and work in rural areas. We have to continue
to look at novel, innovative ways to do that.
So we are starting to look at that as well; how do you
compress the time it takes a student to get in and then get
out; are there ways that we can do it more efficiently, and
those types of things. But we as a profession have to take a
look at that across the United States. That is something I
think we are starting to do, but I don't know that we have done
that aggressively enough.
Ms. McSally. I encourage you to take a look at what they
are doing from the bottom up, you know, groundbreaking, at the
University of Arizona, because it seems likes it is pretty
innovative. Where a program doesn't exist, it is easier to
create an innovative one as opposed to trying to change a
program, so that kind of sharing best practices I think would
help.
I know we are going to vote, so I yield back the balance of
my time, and I will recognize Mr. Payne for another 5 minutes.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Madam Chair. Mr. Williams, you
mentioned biosecurity measures developed by the poultry
industry following the Avian Flu outbreak and how the model
developed by the poultry industry can be applied across various
agriculture industries. Can you elaborate on the best way for
the public and the private sectors to help drive participation
and adopt biosecurity measures that are mutually beneficial to
each other?
Mr. Williams. Well, just to kind of talk a little bit more
about what I have seen in the State of Mississippi. After the
Avian Influenza outbreak a year ago, producers were incredibly
concerned and so they were very willing to come to the table
and to work with the State veterinarian, to work with the USDA,
to work with APHIS, in developing these plans.
I think really what it comes down to is we need a boots-on-
the-ground approach. These producers that we were talking to,
that we were discussing this with over the summer, we were
giving them signs to look for. That is something that our
veterinarians can really help with, is not only with poultry,
but with beef cattle, with the pork industry, tell them and
inform them, what do we need to look for, for signs of a
potential outbreak? Then when you see these signs, when you see
these symptoms, report them immediately to your State
veterinarian, to your local veterinarian, and have it
investigated.
We were even talking about backyard birds, backyard poultry
farmers, or backyard poultry operations, if you see something,
report it immediately. That is really the system that they have
started to get in place to recognize things as quickly as we
possibly can, to get on top of it, to quarantine the area, and
to localize it as much as possible.
Mr. Payne. So if you see something, say something, right?
Mr. Williams. Exactly.
Mr. Acord. May I comment, sir?
Mr. Payne. Sure.
Mr. Acord. The pork industry has always prided itself on
having a very good biosecurity system. That is because of the
structure of the industry, we know that we are more vulnerable
to disease. But at the same time, while we thought we had the
perfect system, when we had the PED outbreak, we discovered a
lot of holes in that system, and we have begun working on
those.
The other point I want to make, and it hasn't been brought
up here, is we have a huge threat from urban animal
agriculture. It is unbelievable how much poultry, even now into
potbelly pigs, to sheep and goats in some places are kept in
urban environments. They totally escape the animal health
network, and are the most vulnerable to disease introduction,
and that is an area that we have to start paying much more
attention to than we have up to this point.
We have had problems with live bird markets in New York and
places like that, but that is nothing compared to what we saw
in Los Angeles when we had exotic Newcastle disease in poultry
there. So that is another vulnerability that we haven't looked
at hard enough.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Dr. Beckham, it is my understanding
that Kansas State partnered with FEMA to develop an animal
disease outbreak training course. Can you describe how KSU is
working with FEMA to push out this training opportunity?
Dr. Beckham. I think that falls under the Biosecurity
Research Institute, where they are actually using that facility
to train veterinarians on signs and clinical symptoms for
foreign animal diseases, and so it is a novel use of that
facility to be able to bring veterinarians in and provide that
kind of training there in Kansas, so it is really unique, and
it aligns closely obviously with what happens at the Plum
Island Animal Disease Center.
So the more we can do those kinds of things outside of
containment in Plum Island and demonstrate those types of
diseases and whether it is using plasticized material or
tissues to do that, that is at least one component of training
a cadre of veterinarians that can go out there and do that.
There are many of those foreign animal disease diagnostic
practitioner courses that happen at Colorado State as well. So
they also happen other places in the United States, so there is
the FADD course, the Foreign Animal Disease Diagnostician
course at Plum Island; and then there is other courses that
happen around the United States, at K State, at Colorado State,
that use different technologies to teach the same type of
information.
Mr. Payne. Thank you. Madam Chair, I yield back.
Ms. McSally. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr.
Donovan from New York.
Mr. Donovan. We are being told votes are going to be in
about 2 minutes, so let me just ask the question I wanted to
ask in the first round. We spoke about domestic protection.
Since we import so many products, where is our importation
detection? Where are we making the detections internationally
for products being brought into the country?
Mr. Acord. I can speak from the Animal and Plant Health
Inspection Service standpoint that a risk assessment is done
anytime there is a request to import or to export a commodity
from another country to the United States. They are asked to
provide a lot of information about the existence of disease
within their country. What kind of surveillance do they have,
do they have competent authority, do they have enough
veterinarians to deal with disease? Those kind of fundamental
questions. Sometimes it results in a site visit, most often
actually it is a site visit to go look at the country and see
if what they are telling the United States is true, and then
there is a formal risk assessment that is done.
But there are a lot of products, that are getting into this
country, that are not getting the kind of review in country
that they need from the standpoint of the manufacture of those
products. So we have a gap in that area and not enough is being
done. We cannot rely on the port of entry as being the first
line of defense. That is not going to work. We have proven
that.
Mr. Donovan. You are speaking about cooperative countries.
If something is introduced into our imported foods
purposefully, all the help, with the exporting country, isn't
going to help, so are we doing any detection methods for
products coming in aside from relying on the exporting country,
that you are aware of?
Dr. Meckes. There is a group within DHS that, as Bobby
mentioned, reviews product shipping invoices on a day-to-day
basis and inspects those that have the greatest risk or the
greatest perceived risk. But that being said, less than 2
percent of all products imported in the United States are
physically inspected in any form or fashion.
So Mr. Donovan, you are correct, that someone with less
than stellar intent could intentionally bring something into
this country that would never be physically observed.
Mr. Donovan. Maybe as my colleague, Mark Walker said, maybe
we shouldn't have said that publicly. Madam Chair, I think that
was the roll call. I will waive the remainder of my time.
Ms. McSally. Okay. Great, Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields
back.
Just in closing, in my time in the military, we always
would talk about threat equals capability plus intent. Clearly
we have heard today from our witnesses the capabilities are
there. We do also know that the intent is there for potential
agroterrorism attack.
We do know, I was looking back at my notes, in 2002 we had
a Navy SEAL team raid al-Qaeda storehouse caves in Afghanistan,
finding documents how to carry out a terror attack on America's
agriculture. As you mentioned, Dr. Beckham, these types of
agents naturally exist in places controlled by ISIS, Boko
Haram, al-Shabab, and others. I quote former Secretary of
Health and Human Services, Tommy Thompson, when he, in his
farewell address, when he left in 2004, which is 12 years ago,
he said: ``For the life of me I cannot understand why the
terrorists have not targeted our food supply, because it is so
easy to do.'' Again, we hold this hearing not to instill fear
in the American public, but to raise awareness on what the
threats are, what the capabilities are, and what the intent is,
and identify what we can do as a Federal Government, but
working closely with the private sector, States, local
authorities, and academia in order to address these
vulnerabilities and these threats in order to keep our country,
our food supply, our agricultural system, safe and secure from
these types of threats.
That was a great hearing, and I appreciate all the
witnesses' testimony today.
I do want to say, closing out my final hearing here, you
are all in good hands. I am handing over the gavel to Mr.
Donovan. It has been a pleasure to be chairing the
subcommittee. I enjoyed working with Ranking Member Payne.
Again, I will be remaining on the subcommittee, but we will
continue to move forward on some of these really pressing
issues.
I want to thank all the witness for their expertise in this
area and your hard work and your testimony today. The Members
of the subcommittee may have some additional questions for the
witnesses. We will ask that you respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 7(e), the hearing record will be
open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:34 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
