- OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS ELECTROMAGNETIC RISKS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS ELECTROMAGNETIC RISKS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT AND
MANAGEMENT EFFICIENCY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 17, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-69

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
22-763 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2017

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT AND MANAGEMENT EFFICIENCY

Scott Perry, Pennsylvania, Chairman
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Curt Clawson, Florida                Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia    Norma J. Torres, California
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia            Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Ryan Consaul, Subcommittee Staff Director
Kris Carlson, Subcommittee Clerk
Cedric C. Haynes, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Scott Perry, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Pennsylvania, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight
and Management Efficiency:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Bonnie Watson Coleman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Oversight and Management Efficiency:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Mr. Chris P. Currie, Director, Homeland Security and Justice
Issues, U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Mr. Brandon Wales, Director, Office of Cyber and Infrastructure
Analysis, National Protection and Programs Directorate, U.S.
Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Mr. Joseph McClelland, Director, Office of Energy Infrastructure
Security, Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, U.S. Department
of Energy:
Oral Statement.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    24
Mr. Judson M. Freed, Director, Emergency Management and Homeland
Security, Ramsey County, Minnesota, On Behalf of the National
Association of Counties:
Oral Statement.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    28

For the Record

The Honorable Scott Perry, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Pennsylvania, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Oversight
and Management Efficiency:
Statement of Patricia Hoffman, Assistant Secretary, Office of
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, U.S. Department
of Energy....................................................     6

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Scott Perry for Chris P. Currie..........    45
Questions From Chairman Scott Perry for Brandon Wales............    47
Question From Chairman Scott Perry for Joseph McClelland.........    47

OVERSIGHT OF FEDERAL EFFORTS TO ADDRESS ELECTROMAGNETIC RISKS

----------

Tuesday, May 17, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Oversight and
Management Efficiency,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Scott Perry
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Perry, Duncan, Clawson, Carter,
Loudermilk, Watson Coleman, and Torres.
Also present: Representative Franks.
Mr. Perry. The Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee
on Oversight and Management Efficiency will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony
regarding the Federal Government's efforts to address risks
associated with electromagnetic pulse, or EMP, events.
The Chair asks unanimous consent to allow the gentleman
from Arizona, Mr. Franks, the opportunity to participate in
today's hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
The Chair now recognizes himself for an opening statement.
America's energy infrastructure is the heart that pumps the
American economy. Long-term power outages resulting from an
attack on our critical infrastructure could cripple our
Nation's economy and put America's health and safety in
jeopardy. Because the Nation's critical infrastructure is so
vital to America's way of life, the Federal Government has
recognized the necessity of securing our infrastructure from an
array of risks, including the threat of EMP, electromagnetic
pulse, attack.
The most serious EMP risk would come in the form of an EMP
resulting from a nuclear detonation at high altitude. Such an
attack could cause long-term damage to the power grid. While
many believe the likelihood of such an attack is low, the
damage and economic aftershocks that would follow demand that
we address these risks. We cannot discount that other nation-
states, such as North Korea, or sophisticated terror groups
might want to utilized EMP to wreak havoc on our economy.
The Departments of Homeland Security and Energy and the
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission have an active role in
protecting our critical infrastructure. According to a GAO,
Government Accountability Office, report released last month,
Federal agencies have taken action--it is important to note--
have taken action to prepare and mitigate EMP risks, but there
is still room for improvement, as always.
According to GAO, DHS and Department of Energy have
addressed some but not all of the recommendations in a 2008
report from the Congressionally-authorized EMP Commission.
Unfortunately, DHS has yet to clearly identify a lead office or
official within the Department to coordinate efforts internally
and with other Federal and industry stakeholders. How can DHS
protect us against EMP risks if they don't know who is in
charge? I expect to hear from DHS's witness today on how the
Department has corrected this failure.
GAO has also found that Federal partners must do a better
job of collaborating their planning activities. Additionally,
GAO made recommendations to improve how DHS analyzes EMP risks
and how DHS and DOE identify and implement key research and
development priorities.
Overall, GAO found that the Federal Government's efforts to
prepare for and mitigate EMP risks are at best a mixed bag. The
progress made to date is certainly due in part to Congress'
oversight efforts and the recommendations made in 2008 by the
EMP Commission. DHS and DOE must make more headway in their
efforts to address EMP. Effectively engaging the private sector
to assist with planning and building system resiliency will be
an essential component of these efforts.
Congress must also do its part. In November 2015, the House
passed H.R. 1073, the Critical Infrastructure Protection Act,
authorized by Congressman Trent Franks of Arizona, which would
require better planning research and development for EMP risks.
Unfortunately, like many other bills passed by this committee,
it remains stuck in the Senate.
I certainly appreciate the hard work of our watchdogs at
GAO for their report and the witnesses for appearing before
this subcommittee today. I look forward to hearing how Federal
agencies will work to improve themselves in light of GAO's
findings to better protect the American people from EMP risks.
[The statement of Chairman Perry follows:]
Statement of Chairman Scott Perry
May 17, 2016
America's energy infrastructure is the heart that pumps the
American economy. Long-term power outages resulting from an attack on
our critical infrastructure could cripple our Nation's economy and put
Americans' health and safety in jeopardy. Because the Nation's critical
infrastructure is so vital to Americans' way of life, the Federal
Government has recognized the necessity of securing our infrastructure
from an array of risks, including the threat of an electromagnetic
pulse (EMP) attack. The most serious EMP risk would come in the form of
an EMP resulting from a nuclear detonation at high altitude. Such an
attack could cause long-term damage to the power grid. While many
believe the likelihood of such an attack is low, the damage and
economic aftershocks that would follow demand that we address these
risks. We cannot discount that other nation-states, such as North
Korea, or sophisticated terror groups might want to utilize an EMP to
wreak havoc on our economy.
The Departments of Homeland Security and Energy, and Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission have an active role in protecting our critical
infrastructure. According to a Government Accountability Office (GAO)
report released last month, Federal agencies have taken action to
prepare and mitigate EMP risks, but there's still room for improvement.
According to GAO, DHS and the Department of Energy have addressed some
but not all of the recommendations in a 2008 report from the
Congressionally-authorized EMP Commission.
Unfortunately, DHS has yet to clearly identify a lead office or
official within the Department to coordinate efforts internally and
with other Federal and industry stakeholders. How can DHS protect us
against EMP risks if they don't know who is in charge? I expect to hear
from DHS's witness today on how the Department has corrected this
failure. GAO also found that Federal partners must do a better job of
collaborating their planning activities. Additionally, GAO made
recommendations to improve how DHS analyzes EMP risks and how DHS and
DOE identify and implement key research and development priorities.
Overall, GAO found that the Federal Government's efforts to prepare
for and mitigate EMP risks are at best, a mixed bag. The progress made
to date is certainly due, in part, to Congress's oversight efforts and
the recommendations made in 2008 by the EMP Commission. DHS and DOE
must make more headway in their efforts to address EMP. Effectively
engaging the private sector to assist with planning and building system
resiliency will be an essential component of these efforts.
Congress must also do its part. In November 2015, the House passed
H.R. 1073, the Critical Infrastructure Protection Act, authored by
Congressman Trent Franks of Arizona, which would require better
planning, research, and development for EMP risks. Unfortunately like
many other bills passed by this committee, it remains stuck in the
Senate.
I appreciate the hard work of our watchdogs at GAO for their report
and the witnesses for appearing before the subcommittee today. I look
forward to hearing how Federal agencies will work to improve
themselves, in light of GAO's findings, to better protect the American
people from EMP risks.

Mr. Perry. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Member of
the subcommittee, the gentlelady from New Jersey, Mrs. Watson
Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Perry. Thank you for
holding today's hearing.
Thank you to Messrs. Chris Currie, Brandon Wales, Joseph
McClelland, and Jud Freed for your testimony today.
The Department of Homeland Security is tasked with the
overall safety and security of the United States. Last week,
the Department revealed a new mission statement: ``With honor
and integrity, we will safeguard the American people, our
homeland, and our values.''
One risk to the homeland is an EMP, or electromagnetic
pulse--is a burst of electromagnetic radiation that results
from suddenly fluctuating magnetic fields. An EMP can be either
man-made or natural and can damage high-voltage transformers
and possibly contribute to grid failure and electric power
blackouts.
EMPs are considered a high-impact, yet low-probability risk
occurrence. As DHS tries to prioritize its efforts across a
wide spectrum of potential dangers to the Nation, it should
take seriously all risks impacting the homeland, not only EMPs
but also climate change impacts, solar storms, and a wide range
of natural disasters.
Last month, the Government Accountability Office released a
report reviewing the Department's assessment and coordination
efforts in the EMP space. According to GAO, DHS components,
including NPPD, FEMA, and S&T, conduct independent activities
addressing EMPs, including research and development,
stakeholder coordination, and mitigation. However, no specific
component has been tasked with lead responsibility for
coordinating activities within the Department or with Federal
and industry stakeholders. Further, the Department has not
fully leveraged opportunities to collect key inputs often used
in a risk assessment, such as threat vulnerability and
consequences information.
Risk assessments are a beneficial means of incorporating
methods or tools to reach a specific identifiable conclusion.
Specifically, with the use of a risk assessment, the Department
can better characterize the risk of EMPs in the overall
protection mission.
In 2007, this committee passed the 9/11 Commission Act,
which required the Department to produce the Quadrennial
Homeland Security Review, a document produced every 4 years for
the purpose of comprehensively examining the Department's
homeland security strategy and risk priorities. Thus far, 2
QHSRs have been created, and it is my view that the latest 2014
release showed improvement from the 2010 review, but the
Department still needs improvement in the way it assesses its
risk, such as EMPs.
In the coming weeks, I will introduce legislation that
addresses the importance of risk assessment in the development
of the QHSR, specifically the need for detailed documented
methods for gauging homeland security threats. In order to
determine roles and responsibilities for the Department, as GAO
suggests, DHS must first determine where EMP fits in the
overall protective strategy for the Department.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my
time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Watson Coleman follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bonnie Watson Coleman
May 17, 2016
The Department of Homeland Security is tasked with the overall
safety and security of the United States. Last week, the Department
revealed a new mission statement: With honor and integrity, we will
safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our values.
One risk to the homeland, an EMP, or Electromagnetic Pulse, is a
burst of electromagnetic radiation that results from suddenly
fluctuating magnetic fields.
An EMP can be either man-made or natural and can damage high-
voltage transformers and possibly contribute to grid failure and
electric power blackouts. EMPs are considered a high-impact, low-
probability risk occurrence.
As DHS tries to prioritize its efforts across a wide spectrum of
potential dangers to the Nation, it should take seriously all risks
impacting the homeland, not only EMPs but also climate change impacts,
solar storms, and a wide range of natural disasters.
Last month, the Government Accountability Office released a report
reviewing the Department's assessment and coordination efforts in the
EMP space. According to GAO, DHS components, including NPPD, FEMA, and
S&T conduct independent activities addressing EMPs including research
and development, stakeholder coordination, and mitigation.
However, no specific component has been tasked with lead
responsibility for coordinating activities within the Department or
with Federal and industry stakeholders. Further, the Department has not
fully leveraged opportunities to collect key inputs often used in a
risk assessment, such as threat, vulnerability, and consequences
information.
Risk assessments are a beneficial means of incorporating methods or
tools to reach a specific, identifiable conclusion. Specifically, with
the use of a risk assessment, the Department can better characterize
the risk of EMPs in its overall protective mission.
In 2007, this committee passed the 9/11 Commission Act, which
required the Department to produce the Quadrennial Homeland Security
Review, a document produced every 4 years for the purpose of
comprehensively examining the Department's homeland security strategy
and risk priorities.
Thus far, 2 QHSRs have been created. It is my view that the latest
2014 release showed improvements from the 2010 review, but the
Department still needs improvement in the way it assesses its risks,
such as EMPs.
In the coming weeks, I will introduce legislation that addresses
the importance of risk assessments in the development of the QHSR,
specifically the need for a detailed, documented method for gauging
homeland security threats.
In order to determine roles and responsibilities within the
Department as GAO suggests, DHS must first determine where EMPs fit in
the overall protective strategy for the Department.

Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
Other Members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 17, 2016
An electromagnetic pulse or EMP is a burst of electromagnetic
radiation created when a nuclear weapon is detonated or when a non-
nuclear EMP weapon is used. Additionally, naturally-occurring solar
weather can generate effects similar to other EMP events.
An EMP could cause catastrophic damage to our Nation's critical
infrastructure. An EMP is a high-impact, low-probability risk. Over the
past 10 years, 92 percent of counties have had at least 1 Presidential
disaster declaration issued; however, none of them were for an EMP.
This does not mean that we should be dismissive of the threat;
however, we have the responsibility to examine the Federal Government's
efforts, while making sure that we do not use our platforms to promote
fear in the minds of the American public.
As the lead agency coordinating the Federal Government's efforts to
promote the security and resiliency of the Nation's critical
infrastructure, the Department of Homeland Security must take this
threat, and all threats to the Nation's critical infrastructure,
seriously.
Last month, the Government Accountability Office issued a report
detailing the Department's work in the EMP space and determined that
DHS has not fully identified its risk assessments when it comes to an
EMP attack.
GAO also found that DHS officials could not identify any DHS
representatives or offices as having broader designated responsibility
for performing key oversight or coordination roles regarding
electromagnetic risks within DHS's overall infrastructure protection
efforts. According to GAO, stakeholders are unclear who within DHS is
responsible for addressing electromagnetic risks.
This leaves me to ask an age-old question that I have asked the
Department on several occasions with regard to various responsibilities
across several components--``Who's in Charge?'' While the Department of
Homeland Security is 2 years into its ``Unity of Effort'' initiative,
GAO's findings, while not shocking, are concerning.
This is also troubling because as part of the Department's effort
to become more unified, the National Protection and Programs
Directorate is looking to Congress for authorization for a
reorganization. This reorganization includes having an infrastructure
directorate that works with the public and private sectors on threats
to physical and cyber infrastructure.
Congressional leaders need to know what if any impact a NPPD
reorganization would have on the Department's responsibilities with
oversight of the threat from EMP and where EMP fits in the Department's
overall infrastructure protection strategy. We also need to know how
the infrastructure directorate would plan on working with Federal,
State, and local stakeholders when it comes to infrastructure security.
I look forward to the testimony from today's witnesses that can
provide greater context to how the Government, in particular DHS, is
dealing with the threat from EMP, including how DHS will address risk
assessments and continue to work with outside stakeholders.
Finally, I am pleased that the Ranking Member of this subcommittee
has taken the initiative to introduce legislation that addresses the
importance of risk assessments, and I look forward to cosponsoring her
legislation.

Mr. Perry. We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today. The witnesses' entire written
statements will appear in the record. The Chair will introduce
all of the witness first and then recognize each of you for
your statements.
At this time, I ask unanimous consent that the statement
from the Department of Energy for the record from Patricia
Hoffman is entered in the record.
Without objection.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Patricia Hoffman, Assistant Secretary, Office of
Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, U.S. Department of Energy
May 17, 2016
Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson Coleman, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for continuing to highlight the importance of a
resilient electric power grid. I appreciate the opportunity to address
the Department of Energy's role in in helping to ensure a resilient,
reliable, and flexible electricity system in an increasingly
challenging environment.
Our economy, National security, and even the health and safety of
our citizens depend on the reliable delivery of electricity. The
mission of the Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability
(DOE-OE) is to strengthen, transform, and improve energy infrastructure
to ensure access to reliable, secure, and clean sources of energy. We
are committed to working with our public and private-sector partners to
protect the Nation's critical energy infrastructure, including the
electric power grid, from disruptions caused by natural and man-made
events, such as severe weather, physical attacks, cyber attacks, and
electromagnetic pulses (EMP).
The electrical grid is more than just infrastructure. It is an
ecosystem of asset owners, manufacturers, service providers, and
Government officials at Federal, State, and local levels, all working
together to run one of the most reliable power grids in the world.
Ninety percent of the Nation's energy infrastructure is in private
hands, and 3,306 electricity providers serve approximately 148 million
customers \1\ through a network of 450,000 miles of high-voltage
transmission lines.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ American Public Power Association (APPA), ``U.S. Electric
Utility Industry Statistics'' http://www.publicpower.org/files/PDFs/
USElectricUtilityIndustryStatistics.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There are plenty of risks beyond cyber, including physical, severe
weather, natural disasters, aging infrastructure, and infrastructure
interdependencies. In the face of these diverse threats, we can help
ensure that the grid is poised to recover quickly following an
incident. Fostering partnerships with public and private stakeholders
plays a critical and necessary role in this work.
the ecosystem of resilience
A crucial factor to meeting these challenges is to be proactive and
cultivate what I call an ecosystem of resilience: A network of
producers, distributors, regulators, vendors, and public partners,
acting together to strengthen our ability to prepare, respond, and
recover. We continue to partner with industry, other Federal agencies,
local governments, and other stakeholders to quickly identify threats,
develop in-depth strategies to mitigate those threats, and rapidly
respond to any disruptions.
Our resilience efforts are further bolstered by our broader grid
modernization activities, including our support of the research,
development, and demonstration of advanced technologies and our work
with State, local, Tribal, and territorial stakeholders to help them
improve their local resilience and energy emergency response
capabilities. Of the $4.5 billion that we invested in grid
modernization through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
(ARRA), $3.4 billion was used to help industry accelerate the
deployment of advanced technologies that are now reducing costs and
keeping the lights on more reliably and efficiently. This smarter grid
is helping to prevent outages, reduce storm impacts, and restore
service faster when outages occur.
Our model is partnerships first. We are all in this together. It is
through working together that we continue to strengthen our ability to
bounce back following an event.
partnerships for readiness
DOE-OE has been working with utility owners and operators,
regulators, and State and local officials across the country concerning
threats to cybersecurity and other risks. Through these partnerships,
we are providing tools, best practices, new technologies, and funds to
support their many on-going efforts.
We directly support preparedness efforts at the community level, in
part through products and tools produced by our Infrastructure Security
and Energy Restoration (ISER) division, to inform and educate State and
local officials in their energy emergency preparedness activities. This
is done through forums, training, and tabletop exercises for Federal,
State, and local energy officials.
In early February, DOE Secretary Ernest Moniz signed an updated
Energy Emergency Assurance Coordinators (EEAC) Agreement with the
National Association of State Energy Officials (NASEO), National
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC), National
Governors Association (NGA), and National Emergency Management
Association (NEMA). This updated EEAC Agreement lays out concrete items
to improve our collective ability to share information, which is
essential for making sound response and restoration decisions during
emergencies. To support this effort, DOE and State officials will
develop information-sharing protocols and processes to streamline
response operations. We will also test these processes and information-
sharing mechanisms through routine drills and exercises.
The President's fiscal year 2017 budget request includes $15
million for a State Energy Assurance program to foster regional hazard
preparedness. This program would focus on providing State, local,
Tribal, and territorial governments with analysis, training, and
exercising of shared regional risk factors where entities depend on
each other for energy supplies and must work together to resolve energy
disruptions to restore energy infrastructure.
This new program would be facilitated through competitive regional
cooperative assistance awards to State and local partners. As needed,
DOE, including our National Laboratory expertise and capability, would
be available to the awardees to enhance preparation and allow for real-
world energy emergency support. Lessons learned would be shared with
other communities to leverage the program across the Nation and help
improve resiliency planning.
DOE-OE also focuses on enabling our State, local, and utility
partners with information. EAGLE-I (Environment for Analysis of Geo-
Located Energy Information), for example, is a DOE-designed and
operated web tool that automatically gathers electrical grid service
status data from company websites every 15 minutes, and organizes it
into an easy-to-read picture of electrical service status Nation-wide.
Now covering 75 percent of all U.S. electricity customers, it provides
real-time information about the grid--what is up, what is down, the
number and location of outages, when service is restored--to DOE and,
through our information-sharing efforts, with other Federal agencies.
Geomagnetic Disturbances (GMD) or Space Weather
President Obama and the administration recognize the threat posed
by a GMD from space weather and the administration continues to
prioritize work to address these concerns. In April 2015, the
Quadrennial Energy Review highlighted methods to reduce our electric
grid's vulnerabilities to multiple forms of risks. The Secretary of
Energy has prioritized DOE efforts to help understand and mitigate
these risks for the electricity subsector (subsector).
In 2015 the administration issued the National Space Weather
Strategy and follow-up National Space Weather Action Plan to better
understand and address the risks of geomagnetic storms. The plans gave
DOE primary responsibility for 2 of the actions in the Action Plan.
First, by the end of 2016, DOE will coordinate with regulatory agencies
and the electric power industry to define data requirements that
facilitate a centralized reporting system to collect real-time
information on the status of the electric power transmission and
distribution system during geomagnetic storms. Second, also by the end
of 2016, DOE, in coordination with Departments of Homeland Security and
Commerce, and stakeholders in the subsector, will develop plans to
provide monitoring and data collection systems to inform a system-wide,
real-time view of geomagnetically induced currents (GICs) at the
regional level and, to the extent possible, display the status of power
generation, transmission, and distribution systems during geomagnetic
storms.
For several years DOE has taken actions and funded efforts to
better understand the risk from space weather. Our space weather
strategy included analysis, enhancing science, and collaboration with
stakeholders both domestically and internationally. Efforts include:

Encouraging the development of a North American Reliability
Corporation (NERC) GMD task force and supporting it to better
understand space weather. The task force developed standards
for GMD. In addition to monitoring geomagnetic disturbances,
industry is prepared to take action as needed, including
reducing load if necessary and changing operational settings to
respond to system needs.

Funding the Electric Power Research Institute's (EPRI)
SUNBURST program, a geomagnetically-induced current monitoring
system. When our support began there were only 10 monitors, all
in the Eastern Interconnection. Now there are over 40 and they
are in all 3 major grids in the Continental United States

Funding a new program to evaluate and install variometers to
collect and share data on changes on magnetic fields during
GMDs. Our program will put in 12 variometers to help system
owners and operators better model the expected potential
currents going into transformers causing grid and possible
system damage. With the data grid operators can take informed
risk-based decisions on actions to mitigate and protect against
GMDs. Prior to the deployment of the first variometer, the
United States Geological Survey had only 6 magnetometers to
measure such data.

Funding a study at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) to
evaluate the susceptibility of the eastern grid to GMD. The
study will be completed by year's end.

Organizing, attending, and participating in several space
weather workshops with government and industry stakeholders,
including those from some of our allies such as Canada, the
United Kingdom, and Ireland.
Electromagnetic Pulses (EMP)
DOE has increased its efforts to better understand the EMP threat
to the electric grid and what measures can mitigate its potential
adverse impacts. DOE plans to take the necessary steps to develop cost-
effective strategies for all hazards to mitigate, respond to, and
recover from potential disruptions. We have a multi-pronged approach to
addressing EMP threats, allowing the subsector to advance readiness for
potential EMP impacts through research to quantify the threat,
scientific development of mitigation strategies, and analysis of the
policies needed for the future.
A recent GAO Report 16-243 from March 2016 presented
recommendations to Federal agencies on methods to address EMP. DOE
concurred with the report's recommendations to DOE, including that the
``Secretary of Energy direct responsible officials to engage with
Federal partners and industry stakeholders to identify and implement
key EMP research and development priorities, including opportunities
for further testing and evaluation of potential EMP protection and
mitigation options.''
The Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act of 2015 (FAST Act,
Pub. L. 114-94) also gives the Department impetus to enhance planning
for events such as EMP. In the Act, Congress enhanced the Secretary of
Energy's abilities to take emergency actions related to grid operations
during a grid security emergency caused by any high-impact event such
as an EMP attack.
Other on-going or planned activities related to EMP include:

The Department is analyzing the vulnerability of the grid to
an EMP event and the potential impact on reliability and
delivery of electric power. The analysis will examine options
such as hardening, blocking, stockpiles, and planning.

The Department is conducting a risk analysis for ``extreme
events'' including EMP electricity industry planning.

The Department is working jointly with the Department of
Homeland Security through Los Alamos National Laboratory and
DHS's National Infrastructure Simulation and Analysis Center to
begin developing methods to analyze the impact and consequences
of different sources of EMP and GMD events on U.S. electric
power infrastructure and to use those methods to determine
events of concern.
DOE is committed to helping forge the grid of the future that will
be more resilient to all hazards, including EMP. Continued progress in
grid modernization is vital to helping us protect the grid from EMP.
partnerships for response
Our partnerships with private and public stakeholders also focus on
quickly identifying threats, developing in-depth strategies to mitigate
them and rapidly responding to any disruptions. With 90 percent of the
Nation's power infrastructure privately held, coordinating and aligning
efforts between the Government and the private sector is the only
viable path to success.
Under Presidential Policy Directive-21: Critical Infrastructure
Security and Resilience and the FAST Act, DOE is the Sector-Specific
Agency (SSA) for electrical infrastructure. The SSA plays the pivotal
role of ensuring unity of effort and message across Government
partners, including the Department of Homeland Security, the Department
of Defense, and DOE offices.
As the Energy SSA we also serve as the day-to-day Federal interface
for the prioritization and coordination of activities to strengthen the
security and resilience of critical infrastructure in the electricity
subsector. This involves building, maintaining, and advancing our
relationships and collaborative efforts with the energy sector. We have
invested in public/private partnership programs and initiatives that
involve sharing real-time information, assessing vulnerabilities,
clarifying responsibilities, and engaging in training and exercises.
In addition, the Department of Energy serves as the lead agency for
Emergency Support Function 12 (ESF-12) under the National Response
Framework. As the lead for ESF-12, the DOE is responsible for
facilitating the restoration of damaged energy infrastructure. During a
response operation, the Department works with industry and Federal/
State/local partners to:

Assess disaster impacts on local and regional energy
infrastructure;

Coordinate asset delivery to repair damaged infrastructure;

Monitor and report on restoration efforts; and

Provide regular situational awareness updates to key
decision makers in the administration and our interagency
partners.
To achieve these operational priorities, the Department deploys
responders who work directly with the affected utilities and local
officials on the ground during a disaster. The responders provide
expertise on a variety of energy issues, and have direct access to our
subject-matter experts in Washington, DC who work with our interagency
partners to coordinate the appropriate waivers, when needed, to further
speed restoration efforts. In extreme cases, the Department can use its
legal authorities under the Federal Power Act, Defense Production Act,
and other statutes to assist in response and recovery operations.
The National electricity infrastructure spans 19,000 power plants,
450,000 miles of transmission lines, 55,000 substations, and 6 million
miles of distribution lines. The grid is truly a National system of
complex systems, where small variations in power output or quality can
be felt almost instantly several States away. That said, every piece of
that infrastructure is local.
Threats ranging from a fallen tree to a dedicated hacker from
overseas can threaten the broader transmission system and the
distribution system. When the power goes out, the local utility is the
first responder. Should any threat or emergency exceed local public or
private resources or require a full-blown National response, a utility
CEO, a representative trade association member of the Electricity
Subsector Coordinating Council (ESCC), the Electricity Information
Sharing and Analysis Center (E-ISAC), or the Federal Government can
request what is called a Crisis State Activity. Crisis State Activities
are coordinated through the ESCC because, as with preparedness, we
respond through partnerships. The ESCC is a group of leaders from
across the electricity subsector that meet regularly with Government to
coordinate and share information. Together, we work toward collective
actions to address the threat or risk.
Congress enacted several important new energy security measures in
the FAST Act. The Secretary of Energy was provided a new authority,
upon declaration of a Grid Security Emergency by the President, to
issue emergency orders to protect or restore critical electric
infrastructure or defense critical electric infrastructure. This
authority allows DOE to respond as needed to the threat of cyber and
physical attacks on the grid. DOE is developing a proposed rule of
procedure regarding this new authority.
The FAST Act codifies DOE's role as the lead SSA for energy sector
cyber incident coordination. These actions provide a central point of
contact for the energy sector and can expedite recovery from cyber and
physical incidents.The FAST Act protections afforded to critical
electric infrastructure information provide essential information-
sharing tools to enhance the Federal Government's situational awareness
while assuring the private sector that sensitive information on
vulnerabilities will be safeguarded. DOE looks forward to consulting on
the forthcoming Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) critical
electric infrastructure information ruling.
The FAST Act will also enable a more robust response for energy
incidents, and DOE is on track to implement the energy security
provisions.
partnerships for innovation
Innovation and preparedness are vital to grid resilience. In
January 2016, the DOE built upon its Grid Modernization Initiative--an
on-going effort that reflects the Obama administration's commitment to
improving the resiliency, reliability, and security of the Nation's
electricity delivery system--by releasing a comprehensive new Grid
Modernization Multi-Year Program Plan (MYPP). The MYPP, developed in
close collaboration with a wide range of key external partners, lays
out a blueprint for DOE's research, development, and demonstration
agenda to enable a modernized grid, building on concepts and
recommendations from the first installment of the Quadrennial Energy
Review (QER) and Quadrennial Technology Review (QTR).
For example, large power transformers are critical to grid
resilience, and are ripe for innovation. These important grid assets
can weigh hundreds of tons, are expensive, and are typically custom
made with procurement lead times of a year or more. A significant
number of damaged transformers from any type of hazard could result in
a long-term impact on the overall resilience of the grid. The QER
recognized the risks associated with the loss of large power
transformers. The QER recommended that DOE work with other Federal
agencies, States, and industry on an initiative to mitigate these
risks. Approaches envisioned in the QER include the development of 1 or
more strategic transformer reserves through a staged process, beginning
with an assessment of technical specifications and whether new Federal
regulatory authorities or cost-share are necessary and appropriate.
The Transformer Resilience and Advanced Components (TRAC) program
includes a number of R&D activities to improve the resilience of
transformers. Replacing aging grid assets with outdated technology
leads to infrastructure lock-in that increases the total cost of grid
modernization. The typical lead time between a large power transformer
order and delivery ranges from 5 to 12 months for domestic producers
and 6 to 16 months for producers outside the United States. The
President's fiscal year 2017 budget request of $15 million for TRAC
will help develop cost-effective, next-generation components that are
inherently more resilient.
The FAST Act (Sec. 61004) also addressed this issue and requires
DOE in consultation with FERC, the ESCC, Energy Reliability
Organization (ERO), and owners and operators of critical electric
infrastructure to submit a plan to Congress evaluating the feasibility
of establishing a Strategic Transformer Reserve for the storage, in
strategically-located facilities, of spare large power transformers in
sufficient numbers to temporarily replace critically damaged large
power transformers. The plan is to include an analysis of the degree to
which electricity subsector initiatives including utility ownership,
sharing agreements, etc., satisfy needs and funding options including
fees on owners and operators and public-private cost share with
industry. In January, DOE-OE awarded the analysis project to a team led
by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The team includes researchers
from the University of Tennessee-Knoxville, Sandia National
Laboratories, the Electric Power Research Institute, and Dominion
Virginia Power.
Secretary Moniz also announced last January an award of up to $220
million over 3 years, subject to Congressional appropriations, to DOE's
National Laboratories and partners to support critical research and
development in advanced storage systems, clean energy integration,
standards and test procedures, and a number of other key grid
modernization areas. This Grid Modernization Laboratory Consortium
effort recognizes regional differences and will strengthen regional
strategies while defining a diverse and balanced National strategy. In
addition to projects that address the needs of incorporating individual
grid technologies like solar or energy storage, DOE is also developing
cross-cutting projects that have an impact across multiple
technologies. As Secretary Moniz said at the announcement,
``Modernizing the U.S. electrical grid is essential to reducing carbon
emissions, creating safeguards against attacks on our infrastructure,
and keeping the lights on.''
Energy storage is a key technology for whole-grid resilience.
Energy storage fundamentally changes the relationship between when
energy is produced and when it is consumed. The President's fiscal year
2017 budget request supports OE's work on materials research, device
development, demonstrations, and grid analysis to help transition
selected energy storage technologies from R&D to industrially relevant
scales with improved safety, industry acceptance, and reduced cost.
Improved energy storage technologies will enable the stability,
resiliency, and reliability of the future electric utility grid, as
well as increased deployment of variable renewable energy resources.
We have been proactive in advancing technologies to modernize and
make our grids smarter and more adaptive to the challenges posed by
threats to the grid. For example, DOE-OE has made key investments in
the area of synchrophasor technology, which reduces grid
vulnerabilities by providing timely and accurate power outage
information and better self-healing capabilities, and has also invested
in microgrids, which keep local communities up and running during
regional and other outages and help supply power to affected areas.
Many of these projects are working in local jurisdictions
throughout the United States. Supporting the research, development, and
deployment of next-generation technologies enhances the grid's ability
to recover quickly from disruptions.
conclusion
Threats continue to evolve, and DOE is working diligently to stay
ahead of the curve. The solution is an ecosystem of resilience that
works in partnership with local, State, and industry stakeholders to
help provide the methods, strategies, and tools needed to help protect
local communities through increased resilience and flexibility. To
accomplish this, we must accelerate information sharing to inform
better local investment decisions, encourage innovation and the use of
best practices to help raise the energy sector's security maturity, and
strengthen local incident response and recovery capabilities,
especially through participation in training programs and disaster and
threat exercises.
Building an ecosystem of resilience is--by definition--a shared
endeavor, and keeping a focus on local communities remains an
imperative. Because DOE has spent decades building--and continues to
build--local partnerships and investing in technologies to enhance
resilience, the grid is better able to withstand and recover quickly
from disasters and attacks.

Mr. Perry. All right. Mr. Chris Currie is the director of
GAO's Homeland Security and Justice Team, where he leads the
agency's work on emergency management, National preparedness,
and critical infrastructure protection issues. In this role, he
evaluates Federal efforts and programs to prevent, plan for,
and respond to natural and man-made disasters. Prior to this
position, he served as an acting director in GAO's Defense
Capabilities and Management Team, where he led reviews of
Department of Defense programs.
Welcome.
Mr. Brandon Wales is the director of the Office of Cyber
and Infrastructure Analysis at the Department of Homeland
Security. His office provides integrated analysis of cyber and
physical risk to the Nation's critical infrastructure.
Previously, Mr. Wales was the director of the Homeland
Infrastructure Threat and Risk Analysis Center.
Welcome.
Mr. Joseph McClelland is the director of the Office of
Energy Infrastructure Security at the Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission, or FERC. His works with Federal and State agencies
and the energy industry to minimize risk to the Nation's energy
infrastructure. Mr. McClelland joined the Commission in 2004
and has more than 20 years of experience in the electric
utility industry. He is a graduate of the Pennsylvania State
University.
Welcome.
Mr. Judson Freed is the director of the Office of Emergency
Management and Homeland Security for Ramsey County, Minnesota--
thanks for traveling here today, sir--and is testifying on
behalf of the National Association of Counties in his capacity
as the vice chair of its subcommittee on homeland security and
emergency management. The association represents elected and
appointed officials in over 3,000 counties across the Nation.
Thank you all for being here today.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Currie for your statement,
sir.

STATEMENT OF CHRIS P. CURRIE, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND
JUSTICE ISSUES, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Mr. Currie. Well, thank you, Chairman Perry, and thank you,
Ranking Member Watson Coleman, as well, and other Members of
the subcommittee. I appreciate the chance to be here to discuss
our recent report on Federal efforts to address electromagnetic
risks.
Within the United States, there are 16 critical
infrastructure sectors--for example, water, transportation,
communications, and, of course, energy. The energy sector ties
all of these sectors together, and without it the others can't
function. This makes protecting it a National security
priority.
One of the greatest threats to the electric grid is an EMP,
or electromagnetic pulse; also, a natural solar weather event.
These are also called GMDs, or geomagnetic disturbances. Both
could cause large power outages over a long period of time.
The concern was so great that Congress established the EMP
Commission in 2001. It issued reports in 2004 and 2008, and
most of the recommendations were aimed at the Departments of
Homeland Security and Energy.
Now, DHS and DOE are not required in law to implement the
Commission recommendations; however, we found that many of the
recommendations align with responsibilities that both
departments already have. For example, various laws and
Presidential directives already require DHS and DOE to assess
the risks to critical infrastructure assets and prioritize
those.
DHS, DOE, and FERC have all taken some action, as the
Chairman noted, to address electromagnetic risks. Most of these
actions are indirect, since electric infrastructure is mainly
owned by the private sector. But here are some examples:
DHS and DOE have invested in research to study the
vulnerability of large, high-voltage transformers to EMPs,
GMDs, and other natural disasters. These transformers are
particularly critical to our electric grid. They are also
expensive, large, and difficult to replace quickly.
In the response area, FEMA is developing a specific plan to
address long-term power outages, and while it is not specific
to electromagnetic risks, this plan would describe how the
Federal Government would respond and recover from a long power
outage.
Just to be clear, while some of these actions align with
certain EMP Commission recommendations, there has not been a
comprehensive, holistic effort to address them. There are still
whole or part recommendations that remain open.
Now, the next question is, what more should we expect the
Federal Government to do? We found several areas where Federal
efforts need to be strengthened.
First, it wasn't clear and, frankly, there was a bit of
confusion within DHS for who exactly should be responsible for
electromagnetic risks. As I mentioned, various components took
action, but there is no designated lead for coordinating all of
these efforts together. We think this is important, not just to
clarify things within DHS, but also so DHS's partners, like
DOD, DOE, FERC, and the industry, know who to work with. We
recommended that DHS designate roles and responsibilities, and
they fully agreed with that.
We also found that much more needs to be done to identify
and prioritize key electric-sector infrastructure. Neither DHS
nor DOE could identify actions in this area. While FERC did
conduct a review in 2013 of certain critical electric-sector
substations, DHS and DOE were not involved at that time. What
we recommended is that DHS and DOE review FERC's assessment and
determine what more needs to be done to assess and prioritize
assets. Both agencies fully agreed with us and are now taking
some action to address that.
Last, more needs to be done to coordinate and prioritize
efforts across the departmental stovepipes. This includes areas
like research and the testing and development of mitigation and
protection technologies. Recently, there's been more focus and
coordination on natural solar events through efforts like the
White House National Space Weather Action Plan, but this plan
addresses only natural events, not EMPs.
We recommend that DHS and DOE better coordinate with each
other and the industry--and that is critical--to identify and
implement EMP research and development priorities. Importantly,
this would include coordinating to test and evaluate potential
EMP protection options. Both agencies agreed and told us they
plan to work with industry over the next year or so to develop
that.
So we will continue to monitor DHS and DOE's progress in
implementing these recommendations moving ahead. That completes
my prepared remarks. I would be happy to answer your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Currie follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chris P. Currie
May 17, 2016
critical infrastructure protection.--federal efforts to address
electromagnetic risks
gao-16-641t
Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson Coleman, and Members of the
subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss our March 2016
report on Federal efforts to address electromagnetic risks to the
electric grid.\1\ Electromagnetic risks caused by a man-made
electromagnetic pulse (EMP) or a naturally-occurring solar weather
event could have a significant impact on the Nation's electric grid as
well as other infrastructure sectors that depend on electricity, such
as communications. The impact of these events could lead to power
outages over broad geographic areas for extended durations. Addressing
these events necessitates effective collaboration among multiple
Government agencies and industry partners, as no single Federal program
or entity has sole responsibility for addressing electromagnetic risks.
In April 2008, the Commission to Assess the Threat to the United States
from Electromagnetic Pulse Attack (EMP Commission)\2\ issued a report
that included over 90 recommendations addressing the preparation for,
and protection and recovery from, a possible EMP attack against U.S.
critical infrastructure. The majority of these recommendations were
made to the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and to the Department
of Energy (DOE).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Federal Agencies Have
Taken Actions to Address Electromagnetic Risks, but Opportunities Exist
to Further Assess Risks and Strengthen Collaboration, GAO-16-243
(Washington, DC: Mar. 24, 2016).
\2\ Established pursuant to the National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2001, the EMP Commission was responsible for assessing
the following: (1) The nature and magnitude of potential high-altitude
EMP threats to the United States; (2) the vulnerability of U.S.
military and civilian systems to an EMP attack in terms of emergency
preparedness; (3) the capability of the United States to repair and
recover from damage inflicted by an EMP attack; and (4) the feasibility
and cost of hardening selected military and civilian systems against
EMP attack. See Pub. L. No. 106-398,  1401-09, 114 Stat. 1654, 1654A-
345-348 (2000). See also Pub. L. No. 109-163,  1052, 119 Stat. 3136,
3434-35 (2006) (reestablishing the EMP Commission to continue its
efforts to monitor, investigate, make recommendations, and report to
Congress on the evolving threat to the United States in the event of an
EMP attack resulting from the detonation of a nuclear weapon or weapons
at high altitude) and Pub. L. No. 110-181, Div. A,  1075 122 Stat. 3,
333 (2008) (providing, among other things, that the EMP Commission and
the Secretary of Homeland Security shall jointly ensure that the work
of the EMP Commission with respect to EMP attack on electricity
infrastructure, and protection against such attack, is coordinated with
DHS efforts on such matters). The National Defense Authorization Act
for Fiscal Year 2016 once again reestablishes the EMP Commission but
with an expanded purpose that includes the evolving threat from, among
other things, non-nuclear EMP weapons and natural EMP generated by
geomagnetic storms. See Pub. L. No. 114-92,  1089, 129 Stat. 726,
1015-16 (2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to experts, a nuclear EMP is the burst of electromagnetic
radiation resulting from the detonation of a nuclear device, which can
disrupt or destroy electronic equipment. Non-nuclear EMP weapons can
also be designed to intentionally disrupt electronics, but these
generally have short range and are not a threat to multiple assets. In
addition to man-made EMPs, naturally-occurring solar weather events of
sufficient intensity can also cause electromagnetic impacts that can
adversely affect components of the commercial electric grid, as well as
other infrastructure such as satellites and undersea cables. The
resulting impact of a solar weather event is commonly referred to as a
geomagnetic disturbance (GMD). In 1989, a GMD caused wide-scale impacts
on the Hydro-Quebec power system in Canada which caused this regional
electric grid to collapse within 92 seconds and left 6 million
customers without power for up to 9 hours.
The National Infrastructure Protection Plan (NIPP) outlines the
roles and responsibilities of DHS and applicable sector-specific
agencies for each of the 16 critical infrastructure sectors.\3\ DHS has
the lead role in coordinating the overall Federal effort to promote the
security and resilience of the Nation's critical infrastructure and
DOE--as the sector-specific agency for the energy sector, which
includes critical electrical infrastructure--shares responsibility with
DHS. Other Federal agencies working to address the threat of EMP and
GMD include the Department of Defense (DOD) and the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC), as well as the National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS),
and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ DHS, National Infrastructure Protection Plan, Partnering for
Critical Infrastructure Security and Resilience (Washington, DC:
December 2013). Sector-specific agencies are the Federal departments
and agencies responsible for providing institutional knowledge and
specialized expertise, as well as leading, facilitating, or supporting
the security and resilience programs and associated activities of their
designated critical infrastructure sector in the all-hazards
environment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As noted in Presidential Policy Directive 21, the energy and
communications sectors are uniquely critical due to the enabling
functions they provide to other critical infrastructure sectors.\4\ The
U.S. electric power delivery system is a highly complex network of
substations and electric lines that transport electricity from
generators to residential, commercial, and industrial consumers.
Approximately 85 percent of the Nation's critical electrical
infrastructure is owned and operated by private industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Presidential Policy Directive-21, Critical Infrastructure
Security and Resilience (Feb. 12, 2013) (identifying, among other
things, the 16 critical infrastructure sectors and the sector-specific
agencies).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My statement today summarizes the findings from our March 2016
report, and like the report, addresses: (1) The extent to which key
Federal agencies have taken actions to address electromagnetic risks to
the electric grid, including how these actions align with selected
recommendations from the 2008 EMP Commission report and (2) the extent
to which additional opportunities, if any, exist to enhance Federal
efforts in addressing those risks to the electric grid. To conduct this
work, we reviewed program documents, research reports, applicable risk
assessments, and other supporting documentation related to
electromagnetic risks and interviewed agency officials at DHS, DOE,
DOD, FERC, and NOAA. We also interviewed officials from industry
associations, subject-matter experts from research organizations,
product manufacturers, and electric utility operators. More detailed
information on our scope and methodology can be found in our March 2016
report.\5\ We conducted the work on which this statement is based in
accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO-16-243.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
federal agencies have taken various actions to address electromagnetic
risks; some actions align with the 2008 emp commission recommendations
DHS, DOE, and FERC have taken various actions to address
electromagnetic risks to the electric grid, and these actions generally
fall into 4 categories: (1) Standards, guidelines, tools, and
demonstration projects; (2) research reports; (3) strategy development
and planning; and (4) training and outreach. Additionally, some of the
actions DHS and DOE have taken generally aligned with recommendations
made by the EMP Commission.
Because Federal agencies generally do not own electric grid
infrastructure, Federal actions to address GMD risks are more indirect
through such things as developing standards and guidelines, and
conducting research that could benefit electric grid owners and
operators. Federal agencies have also been involved in strategy
development and planning, as well as training and outreach efforts, as
a means of preparing Federal officials and others to respond to both
EMP and GMD events, and enhancing knowledge about electromagnetic
risks. For example, DHS's Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) led
the design and development of a prototype transformer that can be more
easily transported to another location to help restore electric power
in a timelier manner. DHS has also participated in various training and
outreach events to enhance understanding of EMP and GMD events. DOE's
primary efforts include supporting research to enhance the
understanding of the potential impacts to the electric grid from
electromagnetic events. More detailed information on key Federal
agencies' actions taken since 2008 to address electromagnetic risks can
be found in Appendix II of our March 2016 report.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO-16-243.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although DHS and DOE did not report that any of their actions were
taken in response to the EMP Commission recommendations, some actions
taken by both agencies have aligned with some of the recommendations.
Specifically, of the 7 recommendations made by the EMP Commission
related to the electric grid,\7\ some of the actions that DHS and DOE
took aligned with 4 of them: Conducting research to better understand
the interdependencies of critical infrastructures, addressing the
vulnerability of control systems to an EMP attack; identifying
responsibilities for responding to an EMP attack; and utilizing
industry and other Governmental institutions to assure the most cost-
effective outcomes.\8\ For example, with respect to the recommendation
on conducting research to better understand interdependencies of
critical infrastructures, DHS's Sector Resilience Report: Electric
Power Delivery includes some assessment of how various critical
infrastructures--including the energy, communications, and
transportation sectors, among others--are interdependent in maintaining
operations. For more detailed information regarding how identified
Federal actions align with these 7 EMP Commission recommendations, see
Appendix III of our March 2016 report.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ The 7 EMP Commission recommendations related to the electric
grid include the following: (1) Conducting research to better
understand infrastructure systems and interdependencies; (2) expanding
activities to address the vulnerability of control systems; (3)
identifying clear authority and responsibility to respond to an EMP
attack; (4) engaging Federal and industry entities to determine
liabilities and funding; (5) establishing monitoring efforts and
defining testing standards and metrics; (6) providing capabilities to
help protect the electric grid from an EMP attack and recover as
rapidly and effectively as possible; and (7) utilizing industry and
Governmental institutions to assure cost-effective outcomes.
\8\ With regard to the last multi-part recommendation identified
above, DHS and DOE took some actions that aligned with 5 of the 15
subparts of this recommendation. Some of the sub-parts include such
efforts as developing National and regional restoration plans and
assuring the availability of critical communication channels, among
other efforts.
\9\ GAO-16-243.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
additional opportunities exist to enhance federal efforts to address
electromagnetic risks to the electric grid
DHS Has Not Clearly Identified Roles and Responsibilities for
Addressing Electromagnetic Risks
In our March 2016 report, we found that DHS had not clearly
identified internal roles and responsibilities for addressing
electromagnetic risks to the electric grid or communicated these to
external Federal and industry partners. While multiple DHS components
and offices, including the National Protection and Programs Directorate
(NPPD), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and S&T, had
each conducted independent activities addressing electromagnetic risks
to the electric grid, none had been tasked with lead responsibility for
coordinating related activities within the Department or with Federal
and industry stakeholders. As a result, during the course of our review
for our March 2016 report, we experienced on-going challenges in
identifying applicable DHS personnel and related Departmental actions.
For example, NPPD officials had difficulty identifying their specific
roles and activities addressing electromagnetic risks to the electric
grid, including efforts to collect or synthesize available risk
information to provide input into Department-wide risk assessments.
Furthermore, industry representatives and other Federal officials
told us it is not clear who within DHS is responsible for addressing
electromagnetic risks. The 2008 EMP Commission report recommended that
DHS make clear its authority and responsibilities, as well as delineate
the functioning interfaces with other Governmental institutions,
regarding EMP response efforts. We concluded that designating internal
roles and responsibilities within DHS regarding electromagnetic risks
and communicating these to Federal and industry partners could provide
additional awareness of related activities and help ensure more
effective and coordinated engagement with other Federal agencies and
industry stakeholders, and could help reduce the risk of potential
duplication, overlap, or fragmentation within the Department or across
Federal agencies.
In our March 2016 report, we recommended DHS designate roles and
responsibilities within the Department for addressing electromagnetic
risks and communicate these to Federal and industry partners. DHS
concurred with our recommendation and reported that their Office of
Policy is coordinating across the Department to identify and document
applicable roles and responsibilities regarding electromagnetic issues
to ensure full mission coverage while minimizing potential overlap or
redundancy and expects to complete this effort by December 2016. These
actions, if implemented effectively, should address the intent of our
recommendation.
DHS and DOE Have Not Fully Addressed NIPP Requirement to Identify Key
Electrical Infrastructure Assets
In our March 2016 report, we found that DHS and DOE had not taken
actions to identify key electrical infrastructure assets as required
given their respective critical infrastructure responsibilities under
the NIPP. The NIPP explicitly states that to manage critical
infrastructure risk effectively, partners must identify the assets,
systems, and networks that are essential to their continued operation,
considering associated dependencies and interdependencies of other
infrastructure sectors. The 2008 EMP Commission report also recommended
that DHS and DOE prioritize nodes that are critical for the rapid
recovery of other key sectors that rely upon electricity to function,
including those assets that must remain in service or be restored
within hours of an EMP attack. Neither DHS nor DOE reported any
specific actions taken to identify critical electrical infrastructure
as part of risk management efforts for the energy sector, including any
systematic review of a 2013 FERC analysis of critical substations, or
any further collaboration to determine the key elements of criticality
that they believe should be considered when evaluating the vast array
of infrastructure assets constituting the U.S. electric grid. The
extensive size and scope of the electric power system necessitates
collaboration among partners to ensure all individual expertise is
effectively leveraged.
As a result, we recommended in our March 2016 report that DHS and
DOE direct responsible officials to review FERC's electrical
infrastructure analysis and collaborate to determine whether further
assessment is needed to adequately identify critical electric
infrastructure assets. DHS and DOE each concurred with our
recommendation. DHS reported that NPPD is to collaborate with FERC to
identify critical electrical infrastructure assets beginning with the
evaluation of critical substations identified by FERC, and will explore
elements of criticality that might not have been considered by FERC, in
coordination with DOE. DOE stated that its Office of Electricity
Delivery and Energy Reliability will review FERC's electrical
infrastructure analysis and will work with FERC and DHS to identify any
additional elements of criticality and determine if further assessment
is needed. Both DHS and DOE expect to complete these efforts by March
2017. These actions should address the intent of our recommendation.
DHS Has Not Fully Leveraged Existing Opportunities to Collect and
Analyze Information on Electromagnetic Risks
We found in March 2016 that although DHS components had
independently conducted some efforts to assess electromagnetic risks,
the Department had not fully leveraged available risk information or
conducted a comprehensive analysis of these risks. Within the Office of
Policy, there is recognition that ``space weather'' and ``power grid
failure'' are significant risk events, which DHS officials have
determined pose great risk to the security of the Nation. However, DHS
officials were unable to provide detailed information about the
specific risk inputs--namely threat, vulnerability, and consequence
information--that were used to assess how electromagnetic events
compared to other risk events, or how these inputs were used to inform
DHS's applicable risk-management priorities. Further, officials within
NPPD were unable to identify any specific actions taken or plans to
systematically collect or analyze risk information regarding
electromagnetic impacts to the electric grid as part of Department-wide
risk assessment efforts.
According to the NIPP, to assess risk effectively, critical
infrastructure partners--including owners and operators, sector
councils, and Government agencies--need timely, reliable, and
actionable information regarding threats, vulnerabilities, and
consequences. Additionally, the electric grid remains vulnerable to
other potential threats, such as physical and cyber attacks. We
concluded that better collection of threat, vulnerability, and
consequence information through existing DHS programs and strengthened
collaboration with Federal partners could help DHS better assess the
relative risk ranking of electromagnetic events versus other risks and
help inform asset protection priorities. Moreover, according to
subject-matter experts, the impact to the electric grid from
electromagnetic threats may vary substantially by location, network,
and operating characteristics, and other factors. For example, key
reports on GMD indicate that high-voltage transformers located at
higher latitudes in the United States are likely subject to increased
potential for adverse impacts from GMD events than those at lower
latitudes. Further collection of information on sector
interdependencies could also help DHS to assess the potential economic
consequences associated with long-term power outages and provide
information to help assess the cost-effectiveness of various mitigation
strategies.
In our March 2016 report, we recommended that DHS's NPPD and Office
of Infrastructure Protection (IP) work with other Federal and industry
partners to collect and analyze key inputs on threat, vulnerability,
and consequences related to electromagnetic risks. DHS concurred with
our recommendation and reported that the Department has initiated
efforts to assess electromagnetic risk and help determine priorities.
For example, DHS stated the Department has a joint study with DOE under
way that will analyze the hazard environments, impacts, and
consequences of different sources of EMP and GMD on the electric grid
to determine events of concern and potential means of mitigation. DHS
expects to implement these efforts by December 2016 and if implemented
effectively, should address the intent of our recommendation.
Federal Agencies Have Not Fully Coordinated Efforts to Implement EMP
Risk Management Activities
We also found in March 2016 that key Federal agencies, including
DHS and DOE, as well as industry partners had not established a fully
coordinated approach to identifying and implementing risk management
activities to address EMP risks. According to the NIPP Risk Management
Framework, such activities include identifying and prioritizing
research and development efforts, and evaluating potential mitigation
options, including the cost-effectiveness of specific protective
equipment. The publication of the National Space Weather Action Plan in
October 2015 identified many key Federal activities in these areas
regarding the GMD risk; however, no similar efforts had been proposed
regarding EMP risks to the electric grid.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ White House, National Space Weather Action Plan (Washington,
DC: October 2015). Among other actions, the National Space Weather
Action Plan lays out responsibilities for Federal entities to establish
benchmarks for space weather events, which are intended to serve as
inputs into such activities as developing vulnerability assessments,
creating engineering standards, and developing more effective
mitigation practices and procedures.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS officials stated an EMP attack generally remains a lower-risk
priority compared to other risk events with higher probability such as
natural disasters or cyber attacks. DOE officials also noted resource
limitations and competing priorities as the key driver for not pursuing
additional risk management activities specifically related to EMP
events. However, we found that even if an EMP attack is not determined
to be among the highest-resource priorities for DHS and DOE relative to
other risk events, there are opportunities for enhanced collaboration
among Federal agencies and industry stakeholders to address identified
gaps and help ensure that limited resources are more effectively
coordinated and prioritized. For example, recent reports issued by DOE
and a leading research organization for the electric industry
identified gaps in the information available regarding likely EMP
impacts to modern grid technologies and electronic control systems.
They noted that such information remains important for developing
applicable protective guidelines and equipment design specifications.
In our March 2016 report, we recommended that DHS and DOE engage
with Federal partners and industry stakeholders to identify and
implement key EMP research and development priorities, including
opportunities for further testing and evaluation of potential EMP
protection and mitigation options. DHS and DOE concurred with our
recommendation and each identified actions to convene applicable
stakeholders to jointly determine mitigation options and conduct
further testing and evaluation. DHS stated S&T will work with DOE and
the Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council to develop a joint
Government and industry approach to identify options for mitigating the
consequences of an EMP event. DHS expects to implement this effort by
September 2016. In addition, DOE stated it is working with the Electric
Power Research Institute to develop an EMP Strategy that is scheduled
for completion by August 31, 2016, and the strategy is to be followed
by a more detailed action plan identifying research and development
priorities and specific opportunities to test and evaluate EMP
mitigation and protection measures. If implemented effectively, DHS and
DOE's actions should address the intent of our recommendation.
We will continue to monitor DHS and DOE actions taken to address
our March 2016 recommendations and have also recently initiated two
additional reviews. One is evaluating the electromagnetic event
preparedness of U.S. electricity providers and the other is a technical
assessment of protective equipment designed to mitigate the potential
impacts of a GMD on electrical infrastructure. We expect these projects
to be completed by mid-2017.
Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson Coleman, and Members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Currie.
The Chair recognizes Mr. Wales for his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRANDON WALES, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF CYBER AND
INFRASTRUCTURE ANALYSIS, NATIONAL PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS
DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Wales. Thank you, Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson
Coleman, and distinguished Members of the committee. It is my
pleasure to be here to discuss the threat posed by
electromagnetic pulse events, or EMP, to our Nation and our
critical infrastructure.
Over the past several decades, the risk to digital and
physical infrastructures has grown. Today's power grid and
information networks may be more vulnerable to EMP than those
from a few decades ago as the grid transitions from an analog
to a digital system.
My testimony today will focus on the Department of Homeland
Security's efforts to prepare for, respond to, and recover from
a potential EMP attack, as well as touch on the joint DHS-
Department of Energy effort to review the EMP science and
provide a peer-reviewed estimate of potential risks.
As you know, an EMP is the burst of electromagnetic
radiation created when a nuclear weapon is detonated or when a
non-nuclear EMP weapon is used. EMPs can be high-frequency,
similar to a flash of lightning, or low-frequency, similar to
an aurora-induced phenomenon.
The consequences of an EMP can range from permanent
physical damage to temporary system disruptions and can result
in fires, electric shocks to people and equipment, and critical
service outages. EMP in some of its forms can cause wide-spread
disruption and serious damage to electronic devices and
networks, including those upon which many critical
infrastructures rely.
All critical infrastructure sectors are at risk from EMP,
particularly those sectors that rely heavily on the electric
grid and communications and information technology, such as
industrial control systems. The complex interconnectivity among
critical infrastructure sectors means that EMP incidents will
likely create cascading failures across sectors.
We recognize that the Federal Government plays an important
role supporting the critical infrastructure community manage
risks from low-probability, high-consequence events, such as
EMPs and severe geomagnetic disturbances. DHS and its
interagency partners are using our unique resources, built over
the past decade, to address the scale and degree of uncertainty
associated with EMP risk.
DHS has been working on the topic of EMP for a number of
years, and we will continue working collaboratively both
internally and with external stakeholders in various arenas to
address the recommendations issued by the Government
Accountability Office on this issue.
The Office of Cyber and Infrastructure Analysis within
DHS's National Protection and Programs Directorate has
partnered with the Department of Energy's Office of Electricity
Delivery and Energy Reliability to assess the impacts of EMP
and geomagnetic disturbance events on electric power assets.
This study, facilitated through DHS's National
Infrastructure Simulation and Analysis Center and DOE's
National Laboratories, is intended to develop scientifically
rigorous, peer-reviewed methods for assessing electric power
asset impacts from EMP events. This study will include
participation from the intelligence community, the broader
interagency, the academic community, and the private sector
when possible. We expect to complete this study in mid-2017.
Our work also benefits from the activities of DHS's
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center,
or NCCIC. The NCCIC is an essential conduit within DHS to share
information between the interagency community and the private
sector on risks to the communication and control elements of
our infrastructure systems and has conducted past studies on
EMP risks to communications infrastructure.
In addition, the Office of Infrastructure Protection has a
long history of working with the private sector to enhance
electric grid security and resilience. This office conducts and
facilitates vulnerability and resilience assessments to help
critical infrastructure owners and operators and State, local,
Tribal, and territorial partners understand and address risks
to their critical infrastructure.
I would also like to recognize my colleagues' activities at
the Science and Technology Directorate and the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
The Science and Technology Directorate has a mission to
deliver effective and innovative insight, methods, and
solutions for the critical needs of the homeland security
enterprise. Past research efforts on electric grid resilience
have resulted in successes, such as the recovery transformer
project, which is available to be deployed by the private
sector today for risk reduction against a variety of hazards.
Finally, the Federal Emergency Management Agency leads
Federal efforts to respond to and recover from impacts of a
wide-spread disruption in the power grid regardless of cause.
Through the development of the Power Outage Incident Annex, a
collaboration of the Federal Government and the private sector,
FEMA is enhancing the existing response and recovery Federal
interagency operational plans.
The Department of Homeland Security has since its inception
pursued a deeper understanding of the EMP threat as well as its
potential impacts and effective mitigation strategies. These
efforts have been undertaken in cooperation with other Federal
agencies and the private sector, and we are committed to
continuing to expand our focus on this issue as warranted by
the risk environment.
The Department takes seriously the recent review and
recommendations of the Government Accountability Office on
Federal efforts to address EMP risk and welcomes further
cooperation with other Government agencies to ensure we are
appropriately responsive on this critical topic.
I want to thank the committee for the invitation to speak
here today and for your on-going support for our work in this
area. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wales follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brandon Wales
May 17, 2016
Thank you, Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Coleman, and
distinguished Members of the committee. It is my pleasure to be here to
discuss the threat posed by electromagnetic pulse events (EMP) to our
Nation and its critical infrastructure, including its cyber,
communications, and electric-grid assets.
Over the past several decades, the risk to digital and physical
infrastructures has grown. For example, today's power grid and
information networks may be more vulnerable to EMP than those of a few
decades ago, as the grid transitions from an analog system to a digital
system to improve efficiency. My testimony today will focus on the
Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) preparations to respond to and
assist recovery from a potential EMP attack, as well as touch on the
joint DHS/Department of Energy (DOE) effort to review the EMP science
and provide a peer-reviewed estimate of the potential risks.
The Federal Government plays an important role supporting the
critical infrastructure community to manage risks from low-probability,
high-consequence events, such as EMPs and severe geomagnetic
disturbances (GMDs). DHS and its interagency partners will be using our
unique resources built over the past decade to address the scale and
degree of uncertainty associated with risks such as the ones I am here
to discuss today.
The Department takes seriously the recent review and
recommendations of the Government Accountability Office (GAO) on
Federal efforts to address EMP risk, as well as the recommendations
issued by the 2008 EMP Commission, and welcomes further cooperation
with other Government agencies to ensure we are appropriately
responsive on this critical topic.
background on emp
An EMP is the burst of electromagnetic radiation created, for
instance, when a nuclear weapon is detonated or when a non-nuclear EMP
weapon is used. EMPs can be high-frequency, similar to a flash of
lightning, or low-frequency, similar to an aurora-induced phenomenon.
The consequences of an EMP can range from permanent physical damage to
temporary system disruptions, and can result in fires, electric shocks
to people and equipment, and critical service outages.
There are two general classes of EMP of concern: (1) Nuclear
sources of EMP, such as High-altitude EMP (HEMP), and (2) Non-Nuclear
sources of EMP (NNEP). HEMP results from a nuclear detonation typically
occurring 15 or more miles above the Earth's surface. The extent of
HEMP effects depends on several factors including the altitude of the
detonation, the weapon yield, and whether it was designed for EMP
effects. On the ground, effects may be diminished by the
electromagnetic shielding, or ``hardening,'' of assets. A high altitude
burst could blanket the entire continental United States and could
cause wide-spread impacts to multiple sectors, including to lifeline
sectors such as the energy and communications. HEMP threat vectors can
originate from a missile, such as a sea-launched ballistic missile; a
satellite asset; or a relatively low-cost balloon-borne vehicle.
Non-Nuclear EMP (NNEP) can be created by sources such as Radio
Frequency Weapons or Intentional Electromagnetic Interference devices,
which are designed to produce sufficient electromagnetic energy to burn
out or disrupt electronic components, systems, and networks. NNEP
devices can be either electrically-driven, where they create narrowband
or wideband microwaves, or explosively-driven, where an explosive is
used to compress a magnetic field to generate the pulse. The range of
an NNEP is fairly short (typically less than 1 kilometer) and faraday
casings with line filters and surge arresters can mitigate much of the
EMP effects.
potential impacts on critical infrastructure
In some of its forms, EMP can cause wide-spread disruption and
serious damage to electronic devices and networks, including those upon
which many critical infrastructures rely. There is uncertainty over the
magnitude and duration of an electric power outage that may result from
an EMP event due to ambiguity regarding the actual damage to electric
power assets from an event. Any electric power outage resulting from an
EMP event would ultimately depend upon a number of unknown factors and
effects to assets that are challenging to accurately model, making it
difficult to provide high-specificity information to electric system
planners and system operators. These variables include characteristics
such as the EMP device type, the location of the blast, the height of
the blast, the yield of the blast, and design and operating parameters
of the electric power system subject to the blast. Secondary effects of
EMP may harm people through induced fires, electric shocks, and
disruptions of transportation and critical support systems, such as
those at hospitals or sites like nuclear power plants and chemical
facilities.
All critical infrastructure sectors are at risk from EMP,
particularly those sectors that rely heavily on communications and
sensor (e.g., radar) technology, information technology, the electric
grid, or that use a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition system.
The complex interconnectivity among critical infrastructure sectors
means that EMP incidents that affect a single sector are likely affect
other sectors--potentially resulting in additional failures.
dhs efforts to address gao recommendations
DHS is working collaboratively, both internally and with external
stakeholders, in various arenas to address the recommendations issued
by GAO on this topic. DHS has been working on the topic of EMP for a
number of years, and we will continue working on it in the future. An
example of our previous work on the topic of EMP includes a 2010 study
on ``Electromagnetic Pulse (EMP) Impacts on Extra High Voltage Power
Transformers'' conducted by the National Infrastructure Simulation and
Analysis Center for DHS.
As part of DHS's continuing commitment to this issue, there are
resources across the Homeland Security enterprise engaged on this
topic, including within the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
the National Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD), and the
Science and Technology Directorate (S&T). The scope of activity, as
reviewed by GAO, falls into 3 areas of activity: (1) Risk assessment
and analysis, (2) communication and coordination of threat information,
and (3) research and development to mitigate EMP risks.
NPPD's involvement on EMP issues resides in a number of functional
components including the Office of Cyber and Infrastructure Analysis
(OCIA), the Office of Infrastructure Protection (IP), and the Office of
Cybersecurity and Communications (CS&C). OCIA has partnered directly
with the DOE's Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability to
assess the impacts of EMP and Geomagnetic disturbance events on
electric power assets. This study, facilitated through DHS's National
Infrastructure Simulation and Analysis Center and DOE's National
Laboratories, is intended to develop scientifically rigorous, peer-
reviewed methods for assessing electric power asset impacts to EMP
events. This study will include participation of the intelligence
community, the broader interagency, the academic community, and the
private sector, when possible.
The EMP study by OCIA will leverage newly-started private-sector
activities that are occurring through the Electric Power Research
Institute, as well as previous government investments in research which
have been sponsored by DHS and DOE. The estimated completion date of
this risk analysis-based study of the electric power sector is
approximately mid-2017.
IP and OCIA continue to work collaboratively with the Department of
Energy and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). As the GAO
report indicates, collaboration can and should be increased with an
emphasis on identification of critical infrastructure assets of the
electric power sector. Once identified, this list of assets can be used
to guide protection and preparedness activities at DHS and to help
prioritize response and recovery actions by DOE and DHS after a large-
scale event. DHS is also increasing our collaboration with DOE and FERC
in the near term, including additional collaboration between staff-
level subject-matter experts.
CS&C, which oversees the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC), has been assessing the potential risks to
the communications and control elements of the electric grid from EMP,
as well as radio frequency weapons, solar weather, and cyber threats
for several years. As part of these efforts, the NCCIC developed the
``EMP Protection Guidelines for Equipment, Facilities and Data
Centers'' report and provided related briefings to the Continuity of
Government community and to the Communications Sector, as well as other
programs and sectors, to inform the community and help mitigate EMP and
radio frequency weapons threats. The previously-mentioned joint study
by OCIA and DOE's Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy will seek
to learn and build upon the knowledge and expertise gained from the
NCCIC's previous studies on this topic.
FEMA continues to leverage the National Preparedness System to
build, sustain, and deliver the capabilities needed to prevent, protect
against, mitigate, respond to, and recover from the threats and hazards
that pose the greatest risk, including risks to the energy sector. The
tools and processes within the National Preparedness System include,
but are not limited to, plans, training, and exercises for managing a
variety of risks to the Nation's infrastructure, including EMP and
cyber vulnerabilities.
FEMA is also actively developing their Power Outage Incident Annex
to enhance the Response and Recovery Federal Interagency Operational
Plans. The Annex, developed in partnership with the Federal interagency
community and the private sector, will describe the process and
organizational constructs through which the Federal Government will
respond to and recover from the impacts of a wide-spread disruption in
the power grid from any cause.
Lastly, S&T develops near-term solutions to bridge capability gaps,
and S&T has invested in multiple research programs for increasing the
electric grid's resilience against solar weather hazards. Previous
research investments, such as the Recovery Transformer (RecX) project,
are available for private-sector risk reduction on EMP and are
available to be deployed by private-sector owners and operators today.
conclusion
DHS, for many years, has pursued a deeper understanding of the EMP
threat, as well as its potential impacts, effective mitigation
strategies, and a greater level of public awareness and readiness.
These efforts have been undertaken in cooperation with other Federal
agencies and private-sector owners and operators; and we are committed
to continuing to expand our focus on this issue, as warranted by the
risk environment.
I want to thank the committee for the invitation to speak here
today and for your on-going support for our work in this area. I
welcome your questions.

Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Wales.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. McClelland.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH MC CLELLAND, DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF ENERGY
INFRASTRUCTURE SECURITY, FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY

Mr. McClelland. Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson
Coleman, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the privilege to appear before you today to discuss
electromagnetic threats to the electric grid in the United
States.
My name is Joe McClelland, and I am the director of the
Office of Energy Infrastructure Security at the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission, or FERC. I am here today as a FERC staff
witness, and my remarks do not necessarily represent the views
of FERC or any individual commissioner.
Under section 215 of the Federal Power Act, FERC is
entrusted with the responsibility to approve and enforce
mandatory reliability standards for the Nation's bulk power
system. These standards are developed and proposed by the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation, or NERC.
Section 215 of the Federal Power Act provides a statutory
foundation to develop reliability standards for the bulk power
system. However, the nature of a National security threat by
entities intent on attacking the United States by exploiting
vulnerabilities in the electric grid using physical or cyber
means stands in stark contrast to the other major reliability
events that have caused regional blackouts and reliability
failures in the past. Wide-spread disruption of electric
service can quickly undermine the United States Government, its
military, and the economy, as well as endanger the health and
safety of its citizens.
Congress took steps to address such a situation late last
year. In the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act, or
FAST Act, Congress assigned notable new authority to the
Department of Energy, or DOE, and FERC, among other Federal
agencies.
Consistent with these requirements, FERC established our
office, the Office of Energy Infrastructure Security, in late
2012 to provide a more agile and focused approach to growing
cyber and physical security threats. Our office works
collaboratively with industry to share information, including
best practices, to help address threats from geomagnetic
disturbances, GMD, or electromagnetic pulses, EMP.
Just briefly, in 2001 Congress established a commission to
assess and report on the threat from EMP. In 2004 and again in
2008, the Commission issued reports on these threats.
One of the key findings in the reports was that a single
EMP attack could seriously degrade or shut down a large part of
the electric power grid. Depending upon the attack, significant
parts of the electric infrastructure could be, ``out of service
for periods measured in months to a year or more.''
In order to better understand and quantify the effect of
EMP and GMD on the power grid, FERC, DOE, and the Department of
Homeland Security sponsored a study conducted by the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory in 2010. The results of the study support
the general conclusion of prior studies that EMP and GMD events
pose substantial risk to equipment and operation of the
Nation's electric grid and, under extreme conditions, could
result in major, long-term electrical outages.
Unlike EMP attacks that are dependent upon the capability
and intent of an attacker, GMD disturbances are inevitable,
with only the timing and magnitude subject to variability. The
Oak Ridge study assessed a solar storm that occurred in May
1921 which has been termed a 1-in-100-year event and applied it
to today's electric grid. The study concluded that such a storm
could damage or destroy over 300 bulk power system
transformers, interrupting service to 130 million people, with
some outages lasting for a period of years.
To help address GMD and EMP threats, FERC has applied both
regulatory and collaborative actions. With respect to
regulatory actions, FERC has taken steps such as directing NERC
to propose two reliability standards on GMD requiring new
operational procedures and vulnerability assessments.
With respect to collaborative actions, FERC works closely
with Federal agencies, State agencies, and industry members in
many ways. In general, such collaboration has included efforts
to identify key energy facilities, conduct physical and cyber
threat briefings and reviews to industry, including sessions on
GMD and EMP, to assist with best practices for mitigation.
Examples of such collaborative action includes FERC's
participation on the SWORM--Space Weather Operations, Research,
and Mitigation--Task Force created in late 2014 by the National
Science and Technology Council.
In addition, as required by the FAST Act, DOE, in
consultation with FERC and others, is developing a plan to
establish a strategic transformer reserve. Specific to the
subject of today's hearing, the strategic transformer reserve
plan will identify ways to decrease vulnerabilities from
physical and cyber threats, including both EMP and GMD.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I
would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. McClelland follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joseph McClelland
May 17, 2016
Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson Coleman and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the privilege to appear before you today to
discuss electromagnetic threats to the electric grid in the United
States. My name is Joe McClelland and I am the director of the Federal
Energy Regulatory Commission's Office of Energy Infrastructure Security
(OEIS). I am here today as a Commission staff witness, and my remarks
do not necessarily represent the views of the Commission or any
individual Commissioner.
In the Energy Policy Act of 2005, Congress entrusted the Commission
with a major new responsibility to approve and enforce mandatory
reliability standards for the Nation's bulk power system. This
authority is in section 215 of the Federal Power Act. It is important
to note that FERC's jurisdiction and reliability authority under
section 215 is limited to the ``bulk power system,'' as defined in the
FPA, which excludes Alaska and Hawaii, as well as local distribution
systems. Under the section 215 authority, FERC cannot author or modify
reliability standards, but must depend upon an Electric Reliability
Organization (ERO) to perform this task. The Commission certified the
North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) as the ERO. The
ERO develops and proposes for the Commission's review reliability
standards or modifications, which the Commission can either approve or
remand. If the Commission approves a proposed reliability standard, it
becomes mandatory in the United States and is applicable to the users,
owners, and operators of the bulk power system. If the Commission
remands a proposed standard, it is sent back to the ERO for further
consideration. The Commission is required to give ``due weight'' to the
technical expertise of the ERO when reviewing any of NERC's proposed
standards.
Section 215 of the Federal Power Act provides a statutory
foundation for the ERO to develop reliability standards for the bulk
power system. However, the nature of a National security threat by
entities intent on attacking the United States by exploiting
vulnerabilities in its electric grid using physical or cyber means
stands in stark contrast to other major reliability events that have
caused regional blackouts and reliability failures in the past, such as
events caused by tree-trimming practices. Wide-spread disruption of
electric service can quickly undermine the U.S. Government, its
military, and the economy, as well as endanger the health and safety of
millions of citizens.
I note that Congress took steps to address such a situation late
last year, including in the Fixing America's Surface Transportation Act
(FAST Act) a section entitled, ``Critical Electric Infrastructure
Security.'' That section assigned notable new authority to the
Department of Energy (DOE) and the Commission, among other Federal
agencies. Under this new authority, DOE can declare a grid security
emergency and order actions to address it. As I will discuss further
below, DOE is also to consult with the Commission regarding development
of a Strategic Transformer Reserve Plan to reduce the threats from
physical, cyber, EMP, GMD, severe weather, and seismic events. The
Commission, in consultation with DOE, is to develop regulations
governing the designation, protection, and appropriate sharing of
Critical Electric Infrastructure Information. In addition, under the
Cybersecurity Act of 2015 also enacted late last year, Congress
directed the Federal Government to share and receive cybersecurity
threat and mitigation information, while restricting its regulatory
use, with non-Federal entities including State governments and
industry.
Consistent with these requirements, the Commission established OEIS
in late 2012 to provide a more agile and focused approach to growing
cyber and physical security threats. The mission of OEIS is to provide
expertise and assistance to the Commission, other Federal and State
agencies and jurisdictional entities in identifying, communicating, and
seeking comprehensive solutions to significant potential cyber and
physical security risks to the energy infrastructure under the
Commission's jurisdiction. This includes threats from geomagnetic
disturbances (GMDs) and electromagnetic pulses (EMPs).
Specific to the subject of this hearing, GMD and EMP events are
generated from either naturally-occurring or man-made causes. In the
case of GMDs, naturally occurring solar magnetic disturbances
periodically disrupt the earth's magnetic field which, in turn, can
induce currents on the electric grid that may simultaneously damage or
destroy key transformers over a large geographic area. Regarding man-
made events, EMPs can be generated by devices that range from small,
portable, easily concealed battery-powered units all the way through
missiles equipped with nuclear warheads. In the case of the former,
equipment is readily available that can generate localized high-energy
bursts designed to disrupt, damage, or destroy electronics such as
those found in control systems on the electric grid. The EMP generated
during the detonation of a nuclear device is far more encompassing and
generates 3 distinct effects, each impacting different types of
equipment; a short high-energy RF-type burst called E1 that destroys
electronics; a slightly longer burst that is similar to lightning
termed E2; and a final effect termed E3 that is similar in character
and effect to GMD targeting the same equipment including key
transformers. Any of these effects can cause voltage problems and
instability on the electric grid, which can lead to wide-area
blackouts.
In 2001, Congress established a commission to assess and report on
the threat from EMP. In 2004 and again in 2008, that commission issued
reports on these threats. One of the key findings in the reports was
that a single EMP attack could seriously degrade or shut down a large
part of the electric power grid. Depending upon the attack, significant
parts of the electric infrastructure could be ``out of service for
periods measured in months to a year or more.'' It is important to note
that effective mitigation against solar geomagnetic disturbances and
non-nuclear EMP weaponry can also provide an effective mitigation
against the impacts of a high-altitude nuclear detonation.
In order to better understand and quantify the effect of EMP and
GMD on the power grid, the Commission, DOE, and the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) sponsored a study conducted by the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory in 2010. The results of the study support the
general conclusion of prior studies that EMP and GMD events pose
substantial risk to equipment and operation of the Nation's electric
grid and under extreme conditions could result in major long-term
electrical outages. Unlike EMP attacks that are dependent upon the
capability and intent of an attacker, GMD disturbances are inevitable
with only the timing and magnitude subject to variability. The Oak
Ridge study assessed a solar storm that occurred in May 1921, which has
been termed a 1-in-100-year event, and applied it to today's electric
grid. The study concluded that such a storm could damage or destroy
over 300 bulk power system transformers interrupting service to 130
million people with some outages lasting for a period of years.
To date, a few U.S. entities have taken some initial steps to
address EMP on their systems, but much work remains. Internationally,
the United Kingdom, Norway, Sweden, Finland, Germany, South Korea,
Japan, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Israel, and Saudi Arabia
have GMD and/or EMP programs in place or are in the early stages of
addressing or examining the impacts of GMD or EMP. The costs of these
initiatives can vary widely depending on factors such as the threshold
of protection, the service requirements of the load, the type of
equipment that is to be protected, and whether the installation is new
or a retrofit.
With these issues and challenges in mind, the Commission has used a
two-fold approach to help address the GMD and EMP threats, applying
both regulatory and collaborative actions.
First, with respect to regulatory actions, the Commission has
directed NERC to propose 2 reliability standards on GMD. The Commission
approved the first of NERC's proposals, a mandatory reliability
standard that requires certain entities to implement operational
procedures to mitigate the effects of GMD events. The Commission also
has issued an order proposing to approve the second of NERC's
proposals, a reliability standard that would establish requirements for
certain entities to conduct initial and on-going assessments of the
vulnerability of their transmission systems against a benchmark
geomagnetic disturbance. The Commission has received comments on its
proposed order and held a related technical conference in March. The
Commission is currently reviewing this record to determine how to move
forward.
The Commission's regulatory authority with respect to rates also
may be relevant to addressing these issues. For example, the Commission
has issued 2 orders to provide clarity on how it will address services
provided by Grid Assurance, a company recently created by several
electric utilities and energy companies. Grid Assurance is intended to
enhance grid resilience and protect customers from prolonged outages by
providing electric utilities that subscribe to Grid Assurance with
timely access to an inventory of emergency spare transmission
equipment, including transformers, that otherwise can take months or
longer to acquire.
Second, with respect to collaborative actions, the Commission works
closely with Federal agencies, State agencies, and industry members in
many ways. In general, such collaboration has included efforts to
identify key energy facilities; conduct physical and cyber threat
briefings, including on GMD and EMP, to industry members; assist with
the identification of best practices for mitigation; and cooperate with
international partners to convey threat and mitigation information as
well as encourage adoption of best practices for mitigation.
Some of the Commission's collaborative actions are relevant to GMD
and EMP threats. For example, in November 2014, the National Science
and Technology Council (NSTC) created the Space Weather Operations,
Research, and Mitigation (SWORM) Task Force to develop high-level
strategic goals for enhancing National preparedness for a severe space
weather event. This Task Force is co-chaired by members from the Office
of Science and Technology Policy, DHS, and the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. The Commission has participated in the
SWORM Task Force's efforts from its inception.
In addition, as required by the FAST Act, DOE, in consultation with
the Commission and others, is developing a plan to establish a
Strategic Transformer Reserve. The Strategic Transformer Reserve Plan
is to identify the sufficient number, type, cost, and location of
equipment needed to temporarily replace critically-damaged large power
transformers and substations that are part of the critical electric
infrastructure or that serve defense and military installations.
Specific to the subject of today's hearing, the Strategic Transformer
Reserve Plan will decrease vulnerabilities related to physical and
cyber threats, including both EMP and GMD. The Strategic Transformer
Reserve Plan is not limited to transformers, but is also to include
other critical electric grid equipment as necessary to provide or
restore sufficient resiliency.
The Commission's efforts to date are consistent with the
recommendations of the Government Accountability Office's recently-
released report on electromagnetic risks to the electric grid. I
believe that building on previous collaboration among the Commission
and other Federal agencies can enhance our collective response in
addressing electromagnetic threats to the electric grid in the United
States.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today. I would be
happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. McClelland.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Freed for his statement.

STATEMENT OF JUDSON M. FREED, DIRECTOR, EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AND HOMELAND SECURITY, RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA, ON BEHALF OF
THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COUNTIES

Mr. Freed. Thank you, Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson
Coleman, and Members of the subcommittee, for this opportunity
to testify today on Federal efforts addressing electromagnetic
risks.
My name is Judson Freed, and I serve as director of
emergency management and homeland security in Ramsey County,
Minnesota. I also serve the justice and public safety committee
of the National Association of Counties, which represents all
of America's 3,069 counties, parishes, and boroughs.
As a large urban county located in the northern Midwest,
Ramsey County faces perennial threats ranging from tornadoes
and ice storms to train derailments and multi-location
terrorist attacks. In my role as the county's emergency
management director and homeland security director, I work to
protect our local communities and their residents and their
structures from the on-going threats posed by these and other
disasters.
Although all parts of government play a role in disasters,
counties across the Nation often serve as the first line of
defense before and after disaster strikes, and we are
responsible for helping our communities recover in the
aftermath. Any potential failing of our Nation's power grid and
the cascading impacts that would follow would heavily impact
local governments and require an immediate on-the-ground
response by county emergency managers and a range of other
local officials.
With that said, Mr. Chairman, I respectfully submit 3
principles for your consideration as you assess Federal efforts
to mitigate against electromagnetic risks.
First, the impact of Federal policy changes on local
government should be closely considered, particularly when it
comes to matters of emergency management. Local governments
respond to the Federal Government's actions not just in our
role as intergovernmental partners with Federal agencies but
also because our constituents demand that their local leaders
keep pace with the Federal Government's priorities and
initiatives.
Federal policy changes related to electromagnetic risks
would impact local emergency management efforts. Consider the
Critical Infrastructure Protection Act. The bill would require
in part that the DHS Secretary conduct outreach to educate
emergency response providers at all levels of government of the
threat of electromagnetic pulse events. Requirements like this
can accumulate quickly and have the potential to disrupt the
on-going process of local emergency management planning and
coordination.
Second, electromagnetic risks should be viewed in the
context of the whole wide variety of threats faced by our
Nation and its local communities. Due to changes in things like
weather patterns and population growth, especially in densely-
populated areas like Ramsey County, our Nation is facing an
arguably unprecedented number of threats and disasters.
According to NACo's analysis of data made available by FEMA, 92
percent of counties across the Nation have had at least 1
Presidential disaster declaration in the last 10 years.
Further, due to globalization and advances in technology
that have made us more interconnected than ever before,
communities across the country also face novel cybersecurity
threats from within and outside of the United States. We urge
you to consider electromagnetic threats in the context of the
full range of risks faced by our communities.
Last, emergency management resources, both fiscal and
administrative, are finite at all levels of government and
should be allocated based on holistic and pragmatic risk
assessment. Diverting limited resources from highly probable
threats will make our Nation less prepared for the risks and
disasters that have proven to be perennial visitors to all of
our communities.
In Ramsey County, we have worked hard to ensure that our
emergency management decisions and policies are based on
pragmatic and scientific risk assessment that takes into
consideration both the potential consequences and the
likelihood of various threats. This method of emergency
management risk assessment is one that was promoted in the 2014
Homeland Security QHSR and is widely accepted as a local best
practice in counties Nation-wide.
That said, we are by no means inattentive to the threats
posed to our power grids. In my county, for example, we monitor
space weather and provide weekly reports to our local public
safety partners and leadership. We monitor the status of our
region's power grid and include our utility providers in our
oversight and planning workgroups.
We assess transmission line protection in light of severe
weather and flooding, as well as geomagnetic incidents, and
large-scale power failures would present significant and
cascading challenges to our emergency response systems. We
consider these risks in our disaster response and coordination
efforts, and we base them on our broader risk assessment
strategies and work to mitigate these risks at every
opportunity.
In closing, I would like to thank you again for the
opportunity to provide the local perspective in this important
conversation on Federal efforts to address electromagnetic
risks, and I will welcome any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Freed follows:]
Prepared Statement of Judson M. Freed
May 17, 2016
Thank you Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson Coleman, and
Members of the Subcommittee on Oversight and Management Efficiency for
this opportunity to testify.
My name is Judson Freed and I have served as director of emergency
management and homeland security in Ramsey County, Minnesota since
2003. I am also vice chair of the Emergency Management Subcommittee of
the National Association of Counties' Justice and Public Safety Policy
Steering Committee.
about naco
NACo is the only national organization that represents county
governments in the United States, including Alaska's boroughs and
Louisiana's parishes. Founded in 1935, NACo assists America's 3,069
counties in pursuing excellence in public service to produce healthy,
vibrant, safe, and resilient communities.
about america's counties
Counties are highly diverse, not only in my State of Minnesota, but
across the Nation, and vary immensely in natural resources, social and
political systems, cultural, economic and structural circumstances, and
public health and environmental responsibilities. If you've seen 1
county, you've seen 1 county, and there are 3,068 more to go.
Counties also often serve as our Nation's first line of defense
before and after disasters strike. While State statutes and
organizational structures vary, local emergency management
responsibilities are most commonly vested in county governments. Many
counties, including Ramsey County, are required to maintain an
emergency management agency to coordinate all activities related to
emergency and disaster situations. These responsibilities go well
beyond the functions of public safety and emergency services and
involve a community-wide effort before, during, and after a disaster or
emergency incident occurs. Emergency managers are charged with
preparing their communities for disasters so that when these events
inevitably take place, their toll on our residents, homes, and public
and private structures is minimized. Following a disaster, local
emergency managers, on behalf of their elected officials, work to
mitigate damage and save lives. In the aftermath of disasters, we
coordinate and help fund clean-up, recovery, and rebuilding so that our
residents can return to their lives as quickly as possible.
about ramsey county, minnesota
Ramsey County is a large, fully urban county located near
Minnesota's border with Wisconsin, and with a population of more than
550,000, is the second-most populous county in Minnesota. It is also
the smallest county in Minnesota, and with its large population, among
the most densely populated counties in the Nation. St. Paul, the
capital of Minnesota, is our county seat.
As a large, urban county located in the northern Midwest, Ramsey
County faces perennial threats ranging from tornadoes and ice storms to
train derailments and multi-location terrorist attacks. In my role as
the county's director of emergency management and homeland security, I
work to protect our local communities and their residents and
structures from the on-going threats posed by these disasters.
federal efforts to address electromagnetic risks: the local perspective
Counties are not merely stakeholders in this conversation, but a
pivotal part of the Federal-State-local partnership of governments that
together share the responsibility of protecting our Nation and its
residents from disasters. Any potential failing of our Nation's power
grid--and the cascading impacts that would follow--would require an
immediate on-the-ground response by county emergency managers, law
enforcement, firefighters, EMS, 9-1-1 call centers, public health
officials, and public records and code inspectors. As such, counties
appreciate the potential threat posed by electromagnetic risks and
commend the subcommittee for convening this hearing to assess Federal
efforts to address these risks.
Mr. Chairman, I will focus my remarks today on 3 principles that we
believe the subcommittee should observe as you assess Federal efforts
to mitigate against electromagnetic risks:

First, the potential impact of Federal policy changes on
local governments should be closely considered, particularly
when it comes to emergency management. Counties are charged
with protecting local communities from threats both natural and
man-made, and Federal actions that change National priorities
can unintentionally compromise counties' ability to carry out
this responsibility and ultimately make our Nation less safe.

Second, electromagnetic risks should be viewed in the
context of the wide variety of threats faced by our Nation and
its local communities. We must prepare for an arguably
unprecedented variety of risks--from hurricanes and tornadoes
to terrorism and cybersecurity threats--and should not lose
sight of this fact as we assess electromagnetic threats.

Third, emergency management resources--both fiscal and
administrative--are finite at all levels of government and
should be allocated based on holistic and pragmatic risk
assessment. Diverting limited resources from highly-probable
threats will make our Nation less prepared for the risks and
disasters that have proven to be perennial visitors to our
communities.
By observing these principles--which are elaborated upon below--as
you assess Federal efforts to mitigate against electromagnetic risks,
the subcommittee can lessen the likelihood that policy changes made
leave our country more prepared for one particular threat while
decreasing our overall preparedness for the many different risks that
face our local communities at any given time.
The potential impact of Federal policy changes on local governments
should be closely considered, particularly when it comes to emergency
management..--As outlined in the opening section, counties play a
critical role in protecting our local communities from natural and man-
made threats. It has been said that ``disasters are local,'' and I can
attest that a well-organized local emergency management structure is
crucial to disaster preparation, mitigation, and recovery efforts.
But many factors affect a local emergency manager's ability to
perform his or her functions in a streamlined and efficient manner. De-
prioritization of emergency management efforts at the county level or
insufficient support for emergency management from the State government
are just 2 examples. Another example--most relevant to the conversation
at hand--involves rapidly-changing priorities and policies at the
Federal level. Counties respond to the Federal Government's actions,
not just in our role as intergovernmental partners working with our
Federal counterparts towards the shared goal of serving American
residents, but also because our constituents demand that their local
leaders keep pace with the Federal Government's priorities and
initiatives.
Policy changes related to electromagnetic risks would be no
different in this regard. Consider the Critical Infrastructure
Protection Act (H.R. 1073), which was passed by the House late last
year. The bill would require, in part, that the Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security ``conduct outreach to educate . . .
emergency response providers at all levels of government of the threat
of [electromagnetic pulse] events.'' Imposing Federal requirements like
this has the potential to disrupt the on-going process of local
emergency management planning and coordination and could undermine our
ability to preserve the safety of our communities. We urge Members to
consider the cumulative impact of such requirements as Congress works
to enact this legislation.
Electromagnetic risks should be viewed in the context of the wide
variety of threats faced by our Nation and its local communities.--Due
to changes in weather patterns and population growth--especially in
densely-populated areas like Ramsey County--our Nation is facing an
arguably unprecedented number of threats and disasters. We must not
lose sight of these various threats as we take on the work of assessing
the risks posed by electromagnetic pulses and space weather events.
According to NACo's analysis of data made available by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), 92 percent of counties across the
Nation have had at least one Presidential disaster declaration in the
past 10 years. Overall, these disaster declarations are happening at
unprecedented rates, and each disaster seems costlier than the last.
Due to globalization and advances in technology that have made us more
interconnected than ever before, communities across the country also
face novel cybersecurity threats from within and outside the United
States.
While we appreciate the importance of protecting our Nation against
a potentially devastating failure of our power grids resulting from an
electromagnetic event, we urge you to consider this threat in the
context of all of the risks and threats that we have been entrusted to
protect our communities against, especially at a time when the full
range of threats seems to be increasing year after year.
Emergency management resources--both fiscal and administrative--are
finite at all levels of government and should be allocated based on
holistic and pragmatic risk-assessment.--As disasters increase in both
frequency and cost, we must be pragmatic in resource allocation, so
that our limited emergency management resources go as far as possible
in preserving lives, homes, and public and private structures in our
local communities. Rather than creating new priorities or costly
mandates, we urge you to view electromagnetic risks as one element in
the portfolio of major risks we face.
In Ramsey County, we have worked hard to ensure that our emergency
management decisions and policies are based on pragmatic risk
assessment that takes into consideration both the likelihood and
potential consequences of various threats. This method of emergency
management is one that was promoted in the United States. Department of
Homeland Security's 2014 Quadrennial Homeland Security Review, and is
widely accepted as a local best practice in counties throughout the
country. Through this sort of risk assessment, we aim to make resource
allocation decisions that will best protect our communities from
threats and disasters. While low-priority events like electromagnetic
pulses may be deprioritized in this way--and while we appreciate that
these events are not unprecedented--we nonetheless believe that given
our finite resources, we can best protect our residents, homes, and
public and private structures through this manner of risk assessment.
That said, we are by no means inattentive to the threats posed to
our power grids. We monitor space weather reports and provide weekly
reports to our public safety partners and leadership; we monitor the
status of our region's power grid and include our utility providers in
our oversight and planning workgroups. We assess transmission line
protection in light of severe weather and flooding--as well as
geomagnetic incidents. Whether through space weather, terrorist threat,
or an ice storm or hurricane, large-scale power failures would present
significant and cascading challenges to our emergency response systems,
and we consider these risks in our disaster response and coordination
efforts, and based on our broader risk-assessment strategies, work to
mitigate these risks at every opportunity.
closing
Thank you again Chairman Perry, Ranking Member Watson Coleman, and
Members of the subcommittee for this opportunity to provide the local
perspective in this important conversation on Federal efforts to
address electromagnetic risks.

Mr. Perry. Thank you, Mr. Freed.
The Chair now recognizes himself for a few minutes of
questioning. I am going to start out with Mr. McClelland from
FERC.
Sir, given that FERC liaisons with industry frequently,
please provide the subcommittee with the industry perspective
as you see it on the threat posed by EMP. For example, does
industry feel they are well-prepared for an EMP event? Or do
you think they are?
Mr. McClelland. So that is a tough question to start.
At this point, industry has been requesting better
intelligence regarding the probability of an EMP strike. There
isn't much doubt as far as the science behind the strike, what
could happen to the power grid in the event that a strike
occurs.
The question from industry's perspective is, how do we rank
this risk? How do we prioritize this assignment from the
Federal Government? What is the probability that we will see a
nation-state attack, a high-altitude electromagnetic pulse from
a nuclear warhead?
To follow up, because of that, there's been very little
done by industry to prepare for this attack.
Mr. Perry. Okay. Thank you.
I am going to move on to Mr. Currie.
How has the lack of a lead DHS office or official
responsible for EMP impacted DHS's efforts? Has this led to
inefficiencies or duplication? Can you enumerate?
Mr. Currie. Sure.
We didn't actually find any instances of duplication across
the departments, but what we said in our report was that,
certainly, because of the lack of a coordination lead, there is
higher risk of potential overlap, fragmentation, and
duplication.
I don't think we really know, because there hasn't been a
cross-departmental coordination effort to look at all the
research that has been done, all the testing and development
that has been done as part of a holistic plan. So we really
don't know.
But the lack of a lead, I think, has just led to a lot of
confusion, especially in industry, as well, about who is
responsible for this and what they are supposed to be doing to
address it. Mr. McClelland hit that point. It is, who are we
supposed to go to, to understand these risks, and who are we
supposed to go to to understand the research behind how we
protect against these risks?
Mr. Perry. But you said that you don't know that it has led
to any inefficiency or duplication? I just want to make sure I
understand you.
Mr. Currie. Yeah, we did not find--we looked across all the
Departmental efforts--and, actually, I just want to say that,
when you go talk to the Department about these issues, they
don't have a list of EMP or electromagnetic actions. What we
did is we looked across all the actions they were taking to
protect critical infrastructure for the energy sector and we
said, well, how does this apply to EMP and the EMP Commission?
So we actually did that work.
We didn't find duplication of effort, but what we found is
little coordination between the departments of those efforts.
Mr. Perry. Okay.
You are still, obviously, recommending that there should be
a lead, one individual that is the go-to person that is
coordinating the effort where the buck stops, right?
Mr. Currie. Absolutely. Within DHS, it is critical, I
think, that there be a stop within DHS. We actually found in
DOE and FERC that it was pretty clear who was responsible for
this, just not within DHS.
Mr. Perry. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Wales, an EMP attack can be carried out by detonating a
nuclear device above the atmosphere or through the use of EMP
weapons. If you know, what nations and/or hostile nation-states
or actors currently have the capability to launch such an
attack? What steps is DHS taking to specifically protect
critical infrastructure from an EMP attack?
Mr. Wales. Sure. Thank you, sir.
So any country that has a nuclear capability would have the
capacity to generate an electromagnetic pulse from the
explosion of a nuclear weapon.
With that being said, the Department relies heavily on the
expertise of the broader U.S. intelligence community to provide
us information on the capabilities and intent of our potential
adversaries. In an open hearing, I don't think I am comfortable
sharing the kind of information that they have provided to us
in the past.
But I will say that we are guided by the consensus view of
the intelligence community as enumerated in the report released
in 2014 on the threat posed by a high-altitude EMP event
against the United States over the next 5 years.
Mr. Perry. Let me just ask you, the steps that DHS is
taking specifically to protect critical infrastructure, even if
they are just recommendations for best practices, have you seen
them? Do they seem adequate and appropriate to you?
Mr. Wales. The question of whether the grid can withstand a
large electromagnetic pulse today, I mean, clearly the answer
is no. We are not prepared for that type of significant attack.
I think that being said, industry does work to try to
improve its overall level of resilience. The Department has, I
think as I outlined in my testimony, provided information to
help them make better decisions. Obviously, as outlined by GAO,
there is more to be done, and we are committed to executing on
GAO's recommendations. We think that will further help industry
be prepared.
But, ultimately, given the current authority at the
Department and DOE and elsewhere, the ultimate burden for
preparing for that type of event on the systems that operate
our grid are going to be the utilities themselves. The work
that we do is to help them be as prepared as they can be by
providing them the kind of information that can help them make
better decisions.
Mr. Perry. Okay. Thank you.
My time has expired. The Chair now recognizes the
gentlelady, Mrs. Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Currie, you indicated that you think that Homeland
Security should be sort-of the coordinating agent, there should
be someone there that is the go-to person for this whole issue.
What component do you think should have that responsibility?
Mr. Currie. So we didn't actually designate in the report
who we thought it should be.
I will tell you that, in law and Presidential Directive, it
is pretty clear that NPPD, Mr. Wales' parent organization, is
responsible for critical infrastructure protection.
That was one of the key points in our report, is even
though they didn't have to implement the Commission's
recommendations--and, by the way, one of the Commission's
recommendations was to establish roles and responsibilities and
make that clear--they are already responsible for doing that
under the National Infrastructure Protection Plan. So it would
likely be in NPPD.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Freed, as emergency management director, you are aware
of a range of natural occurrences and threats impacting the
homeland, in particular in your county. Please state the
threats, the dangers, or the occurrences that are of specific
concern in your district. Share with us, please, how does the
EMP risk fit into this in the priority of areas?
Mr. Freed. Thank you for that question.
Under the methodology that DHS has worked to help us go
forward on our risk assessment, we take a look at the various
bad things that can happen in our county, their likelihood and
impact, our capabilities to cope with those, and then basically
look at the gaps between capability and worst case. We
concentrate on worst-case, most-plausible events, and then go
forward from there to kind-of develop the things that keep us
up at night.
We don't actually rank them, but there is sort-of the big
group that does. Among that big group, of course, in the upper
Midwest, you can imagine, tornados; you can imagine, winter
storms. But prolonged power failure, particularly during the
wintertime in the upper Midwest, is 1 of our 3 very big events.
There is also hazardous materials incidents and terrorist
attack are things that in urban areas such as ours we worry
about.
The impacts of a power failure, however, are the impacts of
a power failure whether it is caused by a high-altitude EMP, a
geomagnetic disturbance, an ice storm bringing down the power
lines. If there is a surge that destroys one of those EHV
transformers, we are going to rely on the transformer stockpile
or some other method.
So I certainly don't want to discount the absolute
importance of the EMP and GMD preparedness; I just want to ask
the committee to keep in mind that, you know, we need to
address these things holistically. Preparing to cope with the
threat to an EHV transformer, we can do that without increasing
rules, regulations, training requirements for local government
officials to make them all experts at E1, E2, and E3 effects of
HEMP. I mean, that is sort-of where we look at it, is more
holistically. That is, you know, our ask to the committee to
consider.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So do you have a relationship with the
Department of Homeland Security in sort-of discussing and
developing this, sort-of, risk-based management? Tell me to
what degree do you interact with the Department.
Mr. Freed. Much better in recent years than in past.
I teach--I am a risk geek----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. I am sorry, I didn't hear that.
Mr. Freed. I am a risk geek. I teach risk at the collegiate
level, undergraduate collegiate level. Very often, the
assessment of risk is extremely superficial and inaccurate. The
vulnerability-times-consequences measure--that is TVC--it is
not an effective way at looking at risk.
Through programs like the Urban Areas Security Initiative
and what is called the THIRA requirement, which is a Threat and
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment, we have started to
now, Nation-wide, adopt some of the risk-geekiness application
of measurement. So instead of, ``Well, that would be bad,'' we
now look at why it would be bad, and what are potential causes?
The problem comes that we can't prevent all of those
causes, but we can mitigate widely against those events.
Wherever possible, mitigating in a manner that protects us
against multiple events is sort-of the key to doing this in an
effective manner and an efficient manner as well.
So that is what we try and do, is we try and take a look at
those gaps and figure, if we do this training or buy this piece
of equipment or implement this policy, procedure, or plan, can
we cope with a lot of things or are we only protecting against
one possibility?
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Freed.
My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Loudermilk.
Mr. Loudermilk. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all the witnesses being here today. It is a
very important subject and one that, even on the Science,
Space, and Technology Committee, that we have addressed some of
these.
I do have some more technical questions.
Mr. Wales, when we talk about the potential of an EMP
attack, what specific damage would be done to power generation?
Can you address that? Or anyone? What I am looking at is what
damage would be done to generation versus the distribution
system?
Mr. Wales. In an EMP event, because EMP generates multiple
types of waves that will affect different systems in different
ways, we would expect disruption to both generation and
distribution systems--generation, transmission, and
distribution systems. Any system that has industrial control
systems could be affected by some parts of the EMP event. The
transmission lines could be affected by others.
The scale will obviously depend upon the unique type of
what is generating the EMP pulse, where it is, how it is
detonated--ground, air, et cetera. So there are a lot of
factors.
In part, this is why we have launched this new project with
the Department of Energy to better bound what types of EMP
events are going to potentially create the most amount of
damage to the power systems and which ones are likely to
generate less impacts.
Obviously, the thing that we are concerned about most would
be permanent damage to large equipment like the high-voltage
transformers that have much longer lead times for replacement
and are often built for specific purposes.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. That is kind-of what I was getting
at. I have heard several of you talk about these transformers,
and stockpiling these transformers. But in case of an EMP
attack on the United States, is predominantly the damage to the
power generation going to be done in the microprocessors, the
control systems? Or are we actually looking at the generators
itself being fried, for lack of a more technical term?
Mr. Wales. I think the issue would be more of a concern
with the transmission substation being----
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. So hydroelectric dams, coal power
facilities would still be able to generate power, it is just
they wouldn't be able to----
Mr. Wales. Possibly. Those would also be affected by the
loss of their control systems from microprocessor disruptions
from an EMP event.
But I think the--we have a lot more generation in the
country. We have a lot of excess generation that can be spooled
up when we need it, and a lot of it is not on-line at any given
moment. Therefore, the bigger concern is the transmission
disruptions, the substations that could be damaged through an
EMP.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
Then my concern is around the protection of those
replacement parts, per se. Is there a method of protecting--are
we protecting, let's say, the transformers that we talked
about? Stockpiling the transformers? What type of protection do
we have to ensure that even those would not be damaged?
Mr. Wales. So there is a small amount of extra transformers
that are maintained by industry, and they have a program to
share those in the midst of a disruption. That is obviously
meant for smaller-scale disruptions. They can get those in
place. At times, utilities will also maintain an extra spare on
site that may not be activated at any given moment that could
be brought back up on line.
But this is also why the Department invested in this
recovery transformer project through our Science and Technology
Directorate that actually piloted a modular transformer that
can be moved in and gotten up and running more quickly than
traditional transformers. That project successfully
demonstrated that that could be done with the Houston
CenterPoint utility back in 2014. That was a project that was
worked jointly with industry. So that demonstration project is
now available should industry want to purchase transformers
like those that can be brought up on-line very quickly and
more----
Mr. Loudermilk. Those could be protected if they are not
actively on the grid?
Mr. Wales. Correct. Generally, if a system is not in use,
it has a much higher degree of surviving an electromagnetic
pulse.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay.
You mentioned the 1920s geomagnetic disturbance. Would
something like that, if it were to happen today, have a world-
wide effect? Or would it be more limited to, what position the
Earth was in, those that were facing the sun at the moment it
happened?
Mr. Wales. There are going to be some effects that may be
global. So, as it scintillates satellites, it could affect
multiple parts of our constellations. Depending on the length
and intensity of a geomagnetic event, it could have wider-scale
impacts.
In general, I think the specifics of a geomagnetic event
are going to determine the effect it has both on the country
and any of our neighbors. In general, we assume that the higher
latitudes are going to be more directly affected than lower
latitudes, but it also will depend upon things like the geology
of those areas, how much they will carry geomagnetic effects.
So these are some of the factors that need to be evaluated
when trying to understand the impacts of a geomagnetic event on
a country.
Mr. Loudermilk. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, may I just add in closing that a
Congressional investigation on the attack of Pearl Harbor
determined that the Government felt that the Japanese attacking
Pearl Harbor was possible but not probable. The same with the
9/11 attacks, that the terrorists hijacking aircraft and flying
them into Government buildings and buildings in the United
States was possible but was not probable.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from California,
Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have a question for Director McClelland.
National electrical systems for countries across the globe
are structured in many different ways. Mitigation for
geomagnetic disturbances will have to be tailored to specific
countries' needs.
Are you aware of any plans to propose international
standards, given that there are so many different and
individualized systems that will need specialized mitigation?
Who would oversee such an effort? I am trying to understand
this issue. Is this an issue unique to the United States, or is
this an issue that we should be working with our partners
across the world?
Mr. McClelland. Thank you for the question.
Currently, there are many independent initiatives
internationally. So the United Kingdom, Norway, Quebec have all
initiated, not to mention other countries as named in the--
there is a Congressional research report for Congress in, I
will say, March 26, 2008, that specifically mentions mitigation
efforts in, for instance, Russia from both GMD and EMP.
So, independently, these nations are moving forward. They
are protecting the most critical--they are identifying and
prioritizing infrastructure, energy infrastructure, to protect
their population, and they are moving forward with mitigation
efforts.
To date, the United States has coordinated and has shared
information with other nations, but there is no international
standards development and nothing compulsory that is being
shared across the nations. But, as I said, the United States is
falling behind. Other nations are moving ahead for mitigation
on geomagnetic disturbances and, in some cases, electromagnetic
pulse.
Mrs. Torres. So, back to my question, who do you think
should oversee those efforts? Is that something that the United
States solely should continue to pursue? Or is that something
that should fall under U.N.-specific standards? Should there be
a specific commission related to this issue? How broad is it
and how much of a global impact, given our trade agreements and
all of that that could impact our communities across the world?
Mr. McClelland. I do think international collaboration will
be important. I think that the large storms--1859, 1921--they
occurred over a period of days, so the entire Earth was
affected by these storms, but no one had the interconnectedness
of the power grids that they have today and, arguably, the
vulnerability of the equipment.
Traditionally, it has not been FERC. FERC is not an agency
that works across those lines internationally. It would be the
Department of Energy and the Department of Homeland Security.
So I would defer to my colleague from the Department of
Homeland Security to better describe what could be done
internationally.
Mr. Wales. DHS works on a number of issues collaboratively
with international partners related to terrorism, cyber
threats. I don't think in any of those are we attempting to
organize the international community in terms of a leadership
role in taking certain action. But I think, as Joe indicated,
our goal is to build collaborative ties with those countries,
share information, and to make sure that, to the extent
possible, we are implementing good, consistent actions.
I would say it is a little bit different in the case of
Canada, where we have, obviously, a shared electric power grid.
There is far more collaboration there in attempting to
implement pretty joint activities associated with power grid
security and resilience.
Mrs. Torres. Okay. Thank you.
Also, the electric grid doesn't produce energy out of thin
air. We all know that the electric sector is highly dependent
on telecommunications, especially fuel supply and delivery
infrastructure. These key independencies must be identified,
understood, and prioritized.
How would you prioritize fuel supply and delivery security
as opposed to other infrastructure priorities? I don't know if
Mr. McClelland could answer that or if that would be----
Mr. Wales. I will help out Joe here.
Mr. McClelland. Thank you.
Mr. Wales. I don't know that you can segment out some of
those critical dependencies and interdependencies amongst
infrastructure such as power generation, natural gas/petroleum
movement, you know, communications, transportation. In many
cases, you need all of them working together to successfully
deliver the critical services that they provide to the American
people, our economy, and our way of life.
In many cases, when we are looking at the aftermath of a
major disruption or major disaster, a Hurricane Sandy, we are
trying to figure out how best to get most of those capabilities
up together so they can be mutually reinforcing and allow the
services to continue flowing.
But I think the ones that you named are those kind of core
set of lifeline services that we need and that we would
prioritize in the aftermath of any type of disruption or for
protection in preparedness activities.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am out of time.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentlelady.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank each being of you for being here. This is a very
important subject, something that we are obviously all
concerned about.
Mr. Wales, I will start with you. In response to the GAO's
findings, DHS has responded many times that it has not taken
the EMP threat seriously. Can you explain to me why it is a low
priority? It would seem to me that this should be a top
priority. Am I missing something here?
Mr. Wales. I would not characterize DHS's position that we
are treating this as a low priority. As I think I have outlined
in my statement, there is activity occurring across DHS that in
some cases is directly focused on addressing EMP-related
threats and their risks.
When you look at the activity that DHS co-chaired with the
Office of Science and Technology Policy at the White House that
developed a Space Weather Action Plan that applies across the
interagency, I think that demonstrates that the Department is
extremely focused on doing what it can to help improve the
security and resilience against that issue.
But I would also----
Mr. Carter. Well, now that you mention that, one of the
findings in the report is there was no central entity within
DHS that was concentrating on that. Have you identified a
central entity yet?
Mr. Wales. So, in response to the GAO recommendations, the
Department of Homeland Security identified its Office of
Policy--the Cyber Infrastructure Resilience Policy Office will
serve as the lead for coordinating DHS actions on EMP.
That being said, the complexity of the issue means that the
various components, the operational components, of the
Department need to bring to bear its specialized skills and
execution to address this issue. The work that FEMA does is not
going to be done by other parts of the Department. The work
that S&T does to sponsor research and develop prototypes is not
going to be done by other parts of the Department. The work
that we do in NPPD to work with industry, conduct studies, that
is not going to be done by other parts of the Department.
Policy's job is to make sure that all of our efforts are
aligned and moving in a common direction.
I will just say one other thing on the, kind-of, initial
question, and that is, as I think has been outlined by a number
of people today, we have to view EMP in terms of the broader
array of risks that we face as a country in our critical
infrastructure. When we devote resources to one topic, that
means that we are sacrificing focus and attention on other
topics.
Mr. Carter. We understand that. We certainly understand
that. But, again, it just seems that the Department is making
this a low priority when it would appear to us that it needs to
be a high priority and a top priority.
Let me ask Mr. McClelland.
Mr. McClelland, what changes would you suggest to be made
immediately? I mean, if we are going to be better prepared,
what do we need to do immediately, not only for perhaps a man-
made but even a natural disaster?
Mr. McClelland. The first order of business would be to
prioritize the assets. I know that DHS has done work in that
area. With 55,000 substations across the United States, I think
the argument legitimately back from industry would be, ``We
can't protect every one of these facilities from EMP. It is
simply too difficult and it is too expensive.''
However, if the assets were prioritized around
functionality--for instance, what do you need to provide
skeletal service to major urban areas? What facilities does DOD
absolutely have to have in service in order to remain mission-
ready? What might be critical infrastructure service, such as
off-site service to nuclear power plants? Identify those
criticalities. It won't be near 55,000 stations. It may just
end up being a few hundred stations.
Then from there, provide threat briefings and critical
intelligence to the owners and operators of those facilities,
because the Government can't do it without them. We don't own
the facilities, and we have no authority to compel them to take
action.
Mr. Carter. Understood. Understood.
Mr. McClelland. Provide intelligence, and then provide cost
recovery as well as best practices to----
Mr. Carter. Okay.
Mr. Freed, best practices. Are there any best practices out
there?
Mr. Freed. Best practices specific to protection against an
electromagnetic incident?
Mr. Carter. Protection and response to a problem.
Mr. Freed. The short answer is not really, not that has
been promulgated down to us at the local level, but--not
specifically, I guess, rather than not really. What there are
best practices are in exactly what Mr. McClelland was saying,
which is prioritizing--we refer to it as CIKR, Critical
Infrastructure and Key Resources--prioritizing what is
energized by which power substation; how are things
transmitted? Then our mitigation efforts are also--there are
best practices for that, the problem being that a lot of those
repairs or those mitigation efforts are extremely, extremely
expensive and time-consuming. For instance, if you bury a
transmission line and then something happens to it, the cost of
fixing it is significantly greater. So the private industries
kind-of have to weigh the chances of that transmission line
failing for some reason versus the cost of fixing it when it
does.
Mr. Carter. So there are things that counties and
municipalities can be doing to prepare for this?
Mr. Freed. There are things that we are currently planning
around. We do not own those transmission lines either. So I
live in an area that gets ice storms and severe summer storms
and floods on a regular basis. That has direct impact on our
power transmission systems. Working on ways to mitigate against
those in general and specifically protecting those power lines
is something we can and do.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Just one last point, Mr. Wales. I
hope the Department is taking this seriously and considers this
a top priority because I certainly think the impression you get
and the message you get from this panel today is that we are
taking it very seriously.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for your time today, gentlemen.
Following along this line of questioning, let's see if my
logic is right. The electrical grid and the power market is a
private market in the United States: Heavy regulation, private
shareholders, customers, suppliers, et cetera. Normally, in our
country, when there is a technical or security issue that
overlaps with the private sector--Y2K comes to mind
immediately. At least a couple, 2 or 3 of you all, are old
enough to remember that. I certainly do. One or 2 of you
probably aren't. We didn't wait around for the Government. We
were involved in fixing it for our own enterprise, and
moreover, there were plenty of consulting companies and others
that were involved in the fix in order to solve the problem
because everybody had a profit incentive, which is normally
what creates innovation and solution, as opposed to Government
involvement.
So, therefore, give me a summary here. I mean, the one
thing--and I missed a lot of what has gone on today because I
had constituents in my office, but nonetheless, if this is a
real deal--and there seems to be some debate about it--but if
there is a real deal, why isn't there a real market response?
Or is there a real market response, not just in terms of
suppliers of product but also consultants and technical folks
and all the people that would be working on this if it is the
real deal? What is going on with the private sector, to anyone
that would like to answer?
Mr. McClelland. I can start. There are really 2 aspects
here. There is geomagnetic disturbance, which is inevitable.
That is going to happen. It is just a matter of the timing of
when it occurs and the magnitude that will occur. An impact
from a geomagnetic disturbance has been debated. So the
Commission, along the agencies, Department of Energy and
Department of Homeland Security, put out a report by Oak Ridge
National Lab that said that, considering the current
configuration of the system, if we took a 1921 storm, the
impacts would be devastating. We will see over 300 transformers
that could be potentially damaged or destroyed. These have a
year-long lead time, in many cases custom-built for the site
that they are installed with no spares.
Mr. Clawson. By the way, if you have an incident, that 1-
year lead time is going to go to 3 or 4.
Mr. McClelland. Correct.
Mr. Clawson. Because you don't have enough capacity to make
that, I mean, obviously.
Mr. McClelland. You could even add to that that it is
probably going to be a global event. The United States does not
own or control the production facilities, so those transformers
may go to the international host where the factory is first,
and then if there is any left over, the United States gets on
the production list.
Industry, however, conducted its own study and said that
the grid would collapse before there would be problems to the
transformers. There would be wide-spread blackouts, but the
grid would collapse. It has been the subject of some back-and-
forth through an iterative process that the Commission
exercises. The bottom line conclusion, though, is even if the
grid collapsed--in 1989, Quebec collapsed. It was 90 seconds; 7
million people were out of power for 9 hours. Relatively little
damage, but the estimated cost for that 1 collapse was $1
billion, $1-2 billion. If we use the lower number and we put in
mitigation techniques to protect against it, we could protect
2,000 transformers for an incident that was relatively minor
impact. By the way, Quebec has now mitigated against
geomagnetic disturbances. So, even with inevitability, there is
still debate about what should be done and the costs that could
be incurred, which the Commission can reimburse those costs.
On the EMP side, it is even more debatable because industry
would need--they want--some sort of a risk analysis: How likely
is it that some of these countries, and Brandon explained it--
anyone that has nuclear capability would conceivably have an
ability to propagate an EMP attack--how likely is it we are
going to see this, and which facilities should we protect? The
approach the Commission has used is to prioritize--along with
DHS--is to prioritize those assets and, for a relatively small
number of assets, encourage best practices, not pass more
regulation but encourage best practices along with cost
recovery to protect against these threats.
Mr. Wales. I will only add that the science of hardening
things against EMP is well-known. The military has been doing
it since the dawn of the nuclear age when they wanted to harden
their own systems to be able to withstand EMP in the event of
war with Russia, the Soviet Union. So the science is there on
how to protect themselves. This is just an issue of whether it
is a sufficient priority for industry to make the investment,
and then what is the best way for them to fund that, since they
would have to go ask permission for every State utility
commission to recover the cost that it would take to put in
place those mitigation measures?
Mr. Clawson. I guess the only thing I would say is if I am
in the private sector and I have some savvy investors, I might
be thinking of an innovation that puts your science that you
are talking about on its head. What innovators do is they find
the next iteration of a more cost-effective solution so that we
don't sit around saying, ``This is too expensive,'' right? It
just seems to me that somebody is out there doing something. If
this is as big a deal as you say, there has got to be some X,
Y, or Z company that is doing something for profit incentive to
come up with a cheaper solution.
I am out of time, so you can take me back.
Mr. Perry. The Chair thanks the gentleman.
The Chair now recognizes our guest, Mr. Franks from
Arizona.
Mr. Franks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I especially want to express gratitude just for the
privilege of being your guest here today. The Chairman has,
throughout the debate here for a number of years, been a
champion in this area, and I am grateful. I suppose that it is
not a small thing that the Chairman, in other venues or forums,
is recognized as General Perry. When we discussed our military,
their response, there has never been an argument with the
military. We have spent billions of dollars hardening some of
our critical military assets, our critical defense assets. That
is telling in my mind, because the military does depend upon
the civilian grid in CONUS for about 99 percent of its
electricity needs, without which, even according to their own
perspective, they cannot effect their mission. So I think that
is a telling point, and I appreciate the whole panel here. A
lot of very good questions.
I am encouraged. I know that this is a subject that is
rather daunting. The Israelis now have begun to harden their
grid. They said that this is an attractive problem. You ask
them, ``What does that mean?'' and they say, ``Well, it is an
existential issue for us.'' I am not sure how that makes it
attractive. But they said, ``This is one we can fix,'' which is
kind-of an unusual situation for them.
I am almost more encouraged about the testimony that I have
heard from Mr. Currie and Mr. Wales and some of the acumen and
the very learned perspective that they have brought forth
because that hasn't been the case in the past. I say that with
all due respect. It gives me some hope.
I think there are 2 things that are critical that we do.
Other than making sure that we have properly done the research
that is necessary and things of that nature going forward, I
think CIPA in the Senate has a good chance of precipitating
some of that research, and I hope that political considerations
or gridlock does not prevent that, because if it gets a fair
vote, it goes forward. But I really am truly encouraged by the
testimony that I have heard today.
Of course, Mr. Chairman, I consider Joe McClelland a
National treasure. He has, ever since the EMP Commission first
reported to the Armed Services Committee years ago, been a lone
voice in many ways, and now his voice, of course, has been
confirmed in so many different ways, and I am grateful for
that.
If we can do 2 things, if we can come up with a National
standard at which we should harden our grid, that we can all
come to the conclusion based on sound science, and then use
hardware-based solutions, which is what the SHIELD Act attempts
to do, I think we can disincentivize either a particular enemy
or certainly protect against a natural impact. If an enemy
recognizes the potential danger here, it has always been, at
least historically speaking, their tendency to try to exploit
that.
Yes, I agree this is a low-probability, high-impact issue,
but if one just does a cursory glance at history, you realize
that those are the very kinds of things that we always find
regret in not finding insight to at least prepare for them,
because as we are now, I think we have an open invitation to
some of our worst enemies if they choose to exploit that.
So, with that, I am just going to ask one question and
again express the sincerest gratitude to you, Mr. Chairman, to
everyone here, and to the panel, again, for the encouraging
things that I am hearing.
So, Mr. McClelland, I will ask the question to you, sir,
and it has been asked in different ways. But in terms of what
should be done and what is being done--that is probably the one
element I would add to--right now, what do you think is being
done, and where are we? Are we making progress? Are we seeing
people expand their understanding of this issue?
Again, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. McClelland. Let's start with what is being done. The
Commission has established threshold standards, so foundational
practices for geomagnetic disturbances. They are based, though,
on operator actions. So that assumes 2 things: That the
operators have sufficient warning--and in the case of a solar
flare, it is assumed that they would have sufficient warning--
to take precautions to reconfigure the power grid to cause
minimal impact to the power grid itself. That depends on the
operator not making an error and, again, the forecast. But that
would not be sufficient for an electromagnetic pulse attack.
On the electromagnetic pulse side, more studies are being
conducted by the industry. They are doing some research. They
are now just starting to receive threat briefings, but very
little has been done to protect the power grid and the other
infrastructure against an electromagnetic pulse in the United
States.
Mr. Perry. Well, thank you, Mr. Franks.
I guess this is going to remain a work in progress.
Gentlemen, we appreciate your time here today. We can see that
there are some places for improvement within the context of
this. In some people's minds, I imagine this is an imminent
threat; in other people's minds, it is something less than
that. Also, in the context that it is hard-to-tell industry, I
think, to move forward when you don't have your own house in
order, right? So we have got to do the best we can, whether it
is FERC, whether it is the Department of Energy, whether it is
Homeland Security, to make sure our ducks are in a row before
we go to industry and say, ``This is what we would like to
see,'' and then help them get there one way or another. So we
have got to keep all that in context. Again, I think this is
just going to be a continuing issue we will have to revisit to
see that the benchmarks are being met and we keep moving
forward to make sure that the grid is adequately protected and
we are prepared for the eventuality of the, in some cases,
imminent; the naturally occurring; or the maybe not-so-
imminent, the other.
With that, the Chair thanks the witnesses for their
valuable testimony and the Members for their questions. Members
may have some additional questions for the witnesses, and we
will ask you to respond to these in writing. Pursuant to
committee Rule VII(e), the hearing record will remain open for
10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:17 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Scott Perry for Chris P. Currie
Question 1a. The EMP Commission made 7 recommendations related to
the electric grid which were mainly focused on DHS and DOE. GAO has
reported that of those 7 recommendations, DHS and DOE have taken ``some
action'' on 4 recommendations. In what ways have DHS and DOE further
addressed those 4 recommendations?
Question 1b. Do DHS and DOE intend to address the remaining 3?
Answer. It is important to note that the actions DHS and DOE have
taken to address electromagnetic risks are not part of a dedicated
effort to implement the EMP Commission recommendations. Through our
work, we identified actions taken by both agencies that aligned with
some of the recommendations. Specifically, of the 7 recommendations
made by the EMP Commission related to the electric grid, some of the
actions that DHS and DOE took aligned with 4 of them:
1. Conducting research to better understand the interdependencies
of critical infrastructures,
2. Addressing the vulnerability of control systems to an EMP
attack,
3. Identifying responsibilities for responding to an EMP attack,
and
4. Utilizing industry and other governmental institutions to assure
the most cost-effective outcomes--(5 of 15 subparts).
However, while some of DHS's and DOE's actions have aligned with 4
of the EMP Commission's recommendations, this does not mean that each
component of these 4 recommendations has been completed. Examples of
some of the actions DHS and DOE have taken include the following:

Developing National and regional restoration plans and
assuring the availability of critical communication channels.--
DHS and DOE are in the process of developing the Power Outage
Incident Annex (POIA) Plan. Although it's not finalized--
(expected completion is in 2016)--the POIA is intended to
provide incident-specific information regarding how the Federal
Government intends to respond to and recover from a loss of
power resulting from deliberate acts of terrorism or natural
disasters, including an EMP or geomagnetic disturbances (GMD)
event.

Implementing efforts outlined in the National Space Weather
Strategy and Action Plan.--DHS and DOE, among other Federal
agencies, are in the process of identifying efforts and taking
actions as outlined in the National Space Weather Strategy and
Action Plan from October 2015. The strategy identifies goals
and establishes the principles that will guide space weather
efforts in both the near and long term, while the Action Plan
identifies specific activities, outcomes, and time lines that
the Federal Government will pursue accordingly. Specifically,
the Action Plan calls for Federal agencies to establish
benchmarks for space weather events and to improve protection
and mitigation efforts, among other actions.

Conducting research on the susceptibility of transformers to
geomagnetic disturbances (GMD).--In November 2015, DOE reported
initiating a study by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory to
quantify the risks associated with GMD on electric power system
reliability. The study plans to identify power lines and their
associated transformers within the eastern section of the power
grid and to determine those that are most susceptible to the
effects of GMD. DOE officials expect the study to be completed
in July 2016.

Developing a National Transformer Strategy.--DOE developed a
draft National strategy in 2015 to reduce the risk to grid
reliability posed by the loss of critical large power
transformers. The draft National strategy focuses on 3 areas:
(1) Understanding and mitigating current and future risks to
transformers, (2) enhancing protection of transformers, and (3)
ensuring transformer replacement equipment is available. It
also calls upon Federal Government entities, to partner with
electricity operators, equipment manufacturers, and State and
local authorities to develop risk assessments and modeling
tools to guide their efforts and prioritize activities. As of
December 2015, DOE officials reported that the strategy is
undergoing review.
DHS and DOE intent to address the remaining 3 EMP Commission
recommendations remains unclear. There are some indications though that
issues included in the recommendations are being given consideration.
For example, both departments acknowledged the importance of providing
capabilities to recover rapidly from an EMP attack--which is
encompassed in 1 of the 3 remaining recommendations. In addition, DOE
officials also identified ``black start capabilities''--the ability to
restart power at a generation plant that has lost power without having
to use an external energy source--as an example of how to restart
energy production. This capability is also discussed in 1 of the
Commission's recommendations where some action has been taken but
several actions remain incomplete. DHS officials have agreed that an
analysis of black start capabilities is warranted.
Question 2a. A recent Idaho National Laboratory study found that
updated research and analysis on the effects of the early time pulse of
an EMP event is needed. In your estimation, how much of the other
existing EMP research is outdated?
Question 2b. Given that research projects can take a lot of time to
complete, what steps can the Federal Government take to fill any
existing knowledge gaps caused by outdated information?
Answer.

A key knowledge gap is in understanding how an EMP will
affect the U.S. electric grid. The INL report noted that most
information sources about the impact of EMP E1 on electric
power grids are decades-old and do not account for modern grid
technologies and electronic control systems. While we have been
told that the DOD and the intelligence community have updated
information on the EMP threat, additional opportunities may
exist to leverage EMP threat information through I&A or direct
collaboration with DOD, DOE, or other intelligence sources. For
example, Classified analytical products are available that
address specific components of threat, such as assessment of
EMP-related missile technologies, which could provide an
important input regarding adversary capabilities as part of
DHS's overall assessment of electromagnetic threats. Although
I&A officials have direct access to these materials, neither
I&A nor NPPD officials identified efforts to specifically
leverage this information as part of any Department-wide risk
assessment efforts. Acquiring more comprehensive information on
potential EMP threats may be helpful because, as one EMP expert
stated in recent testimony, there are misconceptions regarding
the nature and impact of potential EMP attacks, which may have
a negative effect on the ability of stakeholders to determine
reasonable steps needed to protect critical infrastructure and
mitigate potential impacts. Additionally, as we reported, while
the NPPD Office of Infrastructure Protection conducts various
assessments to identify vulnerabilities, interdependencies, and
potential cascading impacts across different sectors of the
Nation's critical infrastructure, these have generally not been
utilized to obtain specific information about vulnerabilities
or consequences related to EMP or GMD events. Given the lack of
comprehensive EMP-related information on the vulnerability of
and consequences to the U.S. electric grid, further R&D to
understand the effects, and techniques to protect against or
mitigate the effects of EMP attacks is needed. In our report,
we recommended that the Secretaries of Homeland Security and of
Energy engage with Federal partners and industry stakeholders
to identify and implement key EMP R&D priorities.

As we also stated in our report, a 2013 white paper
developed by the Electric Power Research Institute also noted a
lack of wide-spread and coordinated research and development
efforts to protect the commercial electric grid against EMP
attacks and mitigate their effects. The institute recommended
that stakeholders define key characteristics of an EMP event--
such as potential altitudes of detonation--for further study of
corresponding impacts, as the lack of more specific parameters
for determining potential EMP effects makes it difficult to
develop applicable protective guidelines and equipment design
specifications. However, according to Federal Energy Regulatory
Commission officials, additional work is being done outside of
the United States to further develop applicable standards and
implement equipment designed to mitigate the effects of or
protect against EMP risks. Given the on-going nature of this
work, U.S. officials may have an opportunity to investigate how
they might be able to coordinate with researchers outside the
United States already conducting this work to determine if
working jointly could speed the completion of this research for
the benefit of both parties.

Similarly, any proposed mitigation strategies resulting from
efforts to address GMD, including the National Space Weather
Action Plan, could also be reviewed to determine how effective
they might be against a potential EMP attack so that fully-
informed investment decisions can be made. For example, as one
EMP expert noted in recent Congressional testimony, if
designing protective equipment to withstand specified levels of
E3 effects from an EMP attack, there may be collateral benefits
for providing protection against GMD effects; however, the
reverse may not be true.

We also reported that Federal agencies should improve their
efforts to identify and prioritize key research and
development, including an evaluation of protective equipment
intended to help mitigate the impacts of an EMP event. As we
recommended in our report, Federal agencies and industry
stakeholders should work together to identify and implement key
EMP research and development priorities, including EMP
protection and mitigation options. Coordinating their efforts
can also help to better ensure that limited resources are more
effectively targeted toward the highest-priority research.
Questions From Chairman Scott Perry for Brandon Wales
Question 1. According to GAO's report, actions are underway to
establish a Cyber, Infrastructure, and Resiliency group within the
Office of Policy. How will this group differ from other offices, such
as NPPD's Office of Cybersecurity and Communications or Office of Cyber
and Infrastructure Analysis, which have already performed work in
regard to EMP threats?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Is DHS reviewing those EMP Commission recommendations
that have not been addressed? If so, what is being done to address
them?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. GAO recommended that DHS increase its collection and
analysis of threat, vulnerability, and consequence information related
to electromagnetic risks. GAO also provided a variety of methods
through which this can be accomplished, including closer collaboration
with DOD and leveraging existing assessment tools, such as the
Infrastructure Survey Tool. What has DHS done to increase its
collection and analysis of electromagnetic threat information?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Chairman Scott Perry for Joseph McClelland
Question. Has FERC assessed the potential costs of mitigating
critical electric assets to withstand a GMD or EMP? If so, what are
they and are there funding streams that could be shifted for some of
these costs?
Answer. FERC has not itself assessed the potential costs of
mitigating critical electric assets to withstand a GMD or EMP event. A
study conducted by the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in 2010, sponsored
by FERC and other Federal agencies and to which I referred in my
prepared testimony, includes some estimates of such costs.

[all]
