- ASSESSING TSA'S MANAGEMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCREENING PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ASSESSING TSA'S MANAGEMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCREENING
PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-44

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

25-551 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

John Katko, New York, Chairman
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia    William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Krista P. Harvey, Subcommittee Staff Director
Dennis Terry, Subcommittee Clerk
Vacancy, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Kathleen M. Rice, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Ms. Jennifer Grover, Director, Homeland Security and Justice,
U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Ms. Carolyn Dorgham, Director, Screening Partnership Program,
Office of Security Operations, Transportation Security
Administration, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    15

For the Record

The Honorable John Mica, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Florida:
Article........................................................    27

Appendix

Questions From Ranking Member Thompson for Carolyn Dorgham.......    33

ASSESSING TSA'S MANAGEMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCREENING
PARTNERSHIP PROGRAM

----------

Tuesday, November 17, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Transportation Security,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:08 p.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Katko
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Katko, Rogers, Walker, and Rice.
Also present: Representatives Mica and Jackson Lee.
Mr. Katko. The Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee
on Transportation Security will come to order.
I ask unanimous consent that the gentleman from Florida,
Mr. Mica, be allowed to sit on the dais and participate in this
hearing.
Without objection, so ordered.
The subcommittee is meeting today to examine the
Transportation Security Administration's management and
implementation of the Screening Partnership Program. I now
recognize myself for an opening statement.
I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing to
assess TSA's management and implementation of the Screening
Partnership Program, or SPP for short. I am pleased to have
once again Jennifer Grover, the director for homeland security
and justice for the Government Accountability Office; and
Carolyn Dorgham, the SPP director for TSA.
If that is not enough acronyms in one sentence, I don't
know what is.
They are our witnesses for today's hearing.
The hearing comes at a critical time for homeland security.
Just before I came out, there was another incident on a
jetliner where a woman tried to open up the back door of an
airliner on the way to Boston. So it continues.
As we all mourn the innocent victims of the horrific
terrorist attacks in Paris, Egypt, and Lebanon, we must
continue to pray for the victims' families and for all the
first responders who put their own lives on the line every day.
America and our allies must stand together to fight ISIS,
their hateful ideology, and the violence it incites. As
chairman of both the Foreign Fighter Task Force and this
subcommittee, I am all too aware of the lengths to which ISIS
will go to inflict terror. We must remain vigilant and
recognize that ISIS is intent on inflicting harm on anyone who
opposes their radical beliefs.
As the story behind the Russian Metrojet plane unfolds, it
is clear that the insider threat is real at airports. We must
take steps to mitigate it both overseas and here at home.
Earlier this month, the San Francisco Gate reported that
three screeners at San Francisco Airport were arrested for
taking money to allow drug smugglers to pass through security
checkpoints with large amounts of cocaine in their baggage.
In March, two other screeners at SFO were arrested and
arraigned for taking bribes to allow smugglers to pass through
checkpoints with methamphetamines. The SFO is one of 21
airports in the United States that participate in the Screening
Partnership Program, where screening operations are run by a
private contractor.
But these cases are not limited to SFO or to the privatized
screening workforce. In 2012, four TSA screeners colluded with
smugglers to allow drugs through checkpoints at LAX in exchange
for cash payments. When screeners are taking bribes and turning
a blind eye, terrorists can easily exploit this vulnerability
and create catastrophic consequences.
I point to something that happened earlier this year, where
a case--a drug smuggling case in Dallas-Fort Worth revealed the
fact that the employees that were bringing the drugs through
unmanned checkpoints, using their SIDA cards, offered not only
to take in drugs, but also offered to take in bombs. So the
threat is real from both a screening standpoint and from the
employee standpoint at airports.
It is a systematic problem that we must deal with head-on
or it will only be a matter of time before we hear a story
about a screener or aviation worker in the United States
intentionally allowing explosives or weapons to pass through
security checkpoints.
TSA must step up its oversight of both the Federal and
private-sector employees responsible for screening, and other
important jobs at our Nation's airports. The stakes are simply
too high not to do so.
The Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001
required TSA to conduct a pilot program to evaluate the
performance of private screening at airports. The pilot was
conducted from 2002 to 2004 at 5 airports, including Rochester,
New York, which is near my home town of Syracuse. The five
airports that participated in the pilot program transitioned to
SPP and since then the number of airports participating in SPP
has grown to 21.
Whether they are Federal workers or private contractors
conducting screening at checkpoints, we must ensure that TSA is
properly overseeing this workforce and guarding against
potential threats, including those emanating from the screening
workforce.
We all want the best and most effective security
safeguarding our Nation's airports. It is also incumbent upon
us to ensure that taxpayer money is being spent judiciously,
without sacrificing the scope or quality of security
operations.
However, without sufficient and reliable data from TSA,
Congress is left to make important policy decisions based on
assumptions rather than facts. This is not how we should be
doing business. A lack of adequate information exists to
measure the success of SPP versus non-SPP screening operations
almost 12 years after the implementation of the program. That
is simply unacceptable.
For over 6 years, GAO reports have highlighted a lack of
sufficient and reliable data to compare private versus Federal
screener performance and costs--for 6 years. Today, GAO will
testify on yet another report that found while TSA has made
improvements to their cost-estimating calculations, there are
still a number of shortcomings that need to be addressed.
It concerns me that TSA has failed to adequately address
this issue with a transparent and accurate cost assessment over
6 years after concerns were initially raised. Furthermore, the
recent termination of an SPP contract agreement in western
Montana, only 1 year after the contract was awarded, is
troubling. It raises questions about how TSA is evaluating
contractor applications prior to award and the management of
the workforce transition from non-SPP to SPP.
I look forward to hearing from the GAO on what can be done
to address some of these critical information gaps. I look
forward to hearing from TSA on how they plan to address this
issue in an effective and timely manner, and once and for all.
Again, thank you both for being here today.
[The statement of Chairman Katko follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Katko
November 17, 2015
I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing to assess TSA's
management and implementation of the Screening Partnership Program, or
SPP. I am pleased to have Jennifer Grover, the director for homeland
security and justice for the Government Accountability Office, and
Carolyn Dorgham, the SPP director for TSA, as our witnesses for this
hearing.
Today's hearing comes at a critical time for homeland security. As
we all mourn the innocent victims of the horrific terrorist attacks in
Paris, Egypt, and Lebanon, we must continue to pray for the victims'
families and for all of the first responders who put their own lives on
the line every day. America and our allies must stand together to fight
ISIS, their hateful ideology, and the violence it incites.
As Chairman of both the Foreign Fighter Task Force and this
subcommittee, I am all too aware of the lengths which ISIS will go to
inflict terror. We must remain vigilant, and recognize that ISIS is
intent on inflicting harm on anyone who opposes their radical beliefs.
As the story behind the Russian MetroJet plane unfolds, it is clear
the insider threat is real and we must take steps to mitigate it, both
overseas and here at home.
Earlier this month, the San Francisco Gate reported that three
screeners at San Francisco International Airport were arrested for
taking money to allow drug smugglers to pass through security
checkpoints with large amounts of cocaine in their baggage. In March,
two other screeners at SFO were arrested and arraigned for taking
bribes to allow smugglers to pass through checkpoints with
methamphetamines. SFO is 1 of 21 airports in the United States that
participate in the Screening Partnership program, where screening
operations are run by a private contractor.
But these cases are not limited to SFO or to the privatized
screening workforce. In 2012, 4 TSA screeners colluded with smugglers
to allow drugs through checkpoints at LAX in exchange for cash
payments. When screeners are taking bribes and turning a blind eye,
terrorists can exploit this vulnerability and create catastrophic
consequences.
This is a systemic problem that we must deal with head on or it
will only be a matter of time before we hear a story about a screener
or aviation worker in the United States intentionally allowing
explosives or weapons to pass through security checkpoints. TSA must
step up its oversight of both the Federal and private-sector employees
responsible for screening and other important jobs at our Nation's
airports. The stakes are too high not to.
The Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 (ATSA)
required TSA to conduct a pilot program to evaluate the performance of
private screening at airports. The pilot was conducted from 2002 to
2004 at 5 airports, including Rochester airport, which is near my home
town of Syracuse. The 5 airports that participated in the pilot program
transitioned to SPP, and since then the number of airports
participating in SPP has grown to 21.
Whether there are Federal workers or private contractors conducting
screening at security checkpoints, we must ensure that TSA is properly
overseeing this workforce and guarding against potential threats,
including those emanating from the screening workforce.
We all want the best and most effective security safeguarding our
Nation's airports. It is also incumbent upon us to ensure that taxpayer
money is being spent judiciously without sacrificing the scope or
quality of security operations. However, without sufficient and
reliable data from TSA, Congress is left to make important policy
decisions based on assumptions rather than facts. This is not how we
should be doing business.
A lack of adequate information exists to measure the success of SPP
versus non-SPP screening operations almost 12 years after the
implementation of the program. For over 6 years, GAO reports have
highlighted a lack of sufficient and reliable data to compare private
versus Federal screener performance and cost. Today, GAO will testify
on yet another report that found while TSA has made improvements to
their cost estimating calculations; there are still a number of
shortcomings that need to be addressed. It concerns me that TSA has
failed to adequately address this issue of a transparent and accurate
cost estimate over 6 years after concerns were initially raised.
Furthermore, the recent termination of a SPP contract agreement in
western Montana only 1 year after the contract was awarded is
troubling. It raises questions about how TSA is evaluating contractor
applications prior to award and the management of the workforce
transition from non-SPP to SPP.
I look forward to hearing from the GAO on what can be done to
address some of these critical information gaps, and I look forward to
hearing from TSA on how they plan to address this issue in an effective
and timely manner. Again, thank you both for being here today

Mr. Katko. The Chair now recognizes the Ranking Minority
Member of the subcommittee, the gentlewoman from New York, Miss
Rice, for any statement she may have.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for convening
this hearing.
I would also like to thank the witnesses for being here to
discuss how the Transportation Security Administration is
managing and executing the Screening Partnership Program, as
well as the Government Accountability Office's most recent
report regarding the program.
After the attacks on September 11, the Aviation and
Transportation Security Act established the Transportation
Security Administration as the Federal entity responsible for
transportation security and the Federal screener workforce.
This represented a pivot away from the pre-9/11 model, but it
also included an amendment that led to the establishment of
SPP, which gives airports the opportunity to opt out of Federal
screening, and instead contract private companies to conduct
security screening services under Federal oversight.
We often hear in Congress that screening without TSOs will
lead to a more pleasant and expedient travel experience, but
this is simply not the case. When an airport opts out of
Federal screening and begins to transition to private
screeners, they recruit and, as we will hear today, in many
cases depend on, the retention of TSOs who are given the right
of first refusal for these positions.
The airports enforce the same policies and procedures,
hoping to retain the same personnel, who are often forced to
choose between accepting the same job with less benefits,
relocating to continue working for TSA, or finding other jobs.
To coincide with this hearing, GAO released a report that
compares the costs incurred by TSA to perform screening, to the
costs associated with privatized screening.
First, I believe that through this report, we will come to
find that without certain changes, we cannot have a true
comparison between the screening entities. I look forward to
hearing Ms. Grover's testimony and thoughts on TSA's cost
estimate methodology.
Second, we have the example of four airports in Montana
that opted out of Federal screening, but ultimately terminated
the contracts because the vendor couldn't attract or retain
staff levels to perform screening duties.
So while these airports opted for private screening, in
many instances they still had to rely on TSA's National
deployment force to provide screening. That is obviously very
concerning.
I thank Ms. Dorgham for being here today, and I hope she
will speak to those concerns and discuss the oversight that
takes place at these airports that opt out of Federal
screening.
I am also eager to hear who pays for those TSA deployment
forces and if those costs are included in TSA's cost estimates
on the front end of the contracting process.
Finally, before closing, I would like to acknowledge the
horrific acts of terrorism that occurred in Paris on Friday.
Those attacks, along with the explosion of a Metrojet in Egypt
remind us that the threat of terrorism has not gone away. That
threat is very real. It is constant and it is always evolving.
TSOs play a critical role in confronting that threat. They
serve on the front line of our Nation's airports screening
millions of passengers daily, and I thank them for working to
keep the traveling public safe.
Mr. Chairman, thank you again for convening this hearing. I
look forward to a productive dialogue today, as well as the
follow-up hearing scheduled for December where we will be able
to consider additional perspectives.
I yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rice follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Kathleen Rice
November 17, 2015
After the attacks on September 11, the Aviation and Transportation
Security Act established the Transportation Security Administration as
the Federal entity responsible for transportation security and a
Federal screener workforce. This represented a pivot away from the pre-
9/11 model--but it also included an amendment that led to the
establishment of SPP, which gives airports the opportunity to ``opt-
out'' of Federal screening and instead contract private companies to
conduct security screening services under Federal oversight.
We often hear in Congress that screening without TSOs will lead to
a more pleasant and expedient travel experience. But this is simply not
the case. When an airport opts out of Federal screening and begins to
transition to private screeners, they recruit--and as we will hear
today--in many cases DEPEND on the retention of TSOs, who are given the
right of first refusal for these positions.
The airports enforce the same policies and procedures, hoping to
retain the same personnel, who are often forced to choose between
accepting the same job with less benefits, relocating to continue
working for TSA, or finding other jobs. To coincide with this hearing,
GAO released a report that compares the costs incurred by TSA to
perform screening to the costs associated with privatized screening.
First, I believe that through this report, we will come to find
that without certain changes, we cannot have a true comparison between
the screening entities. I look forward to hearing Ms. Grover's
testimony and thoughts on TSA's cost-estimate methodology.
Second, we have the example of four airports in Montana that opted
out of Federal screening, but ultimately terminated the contracts
because the vendor couldn't attract or retain staff levels to perform
screening duties. So, while these airports opted for private screening,
in many instances they still had to rely on TSA's National deployment
force to provide screening. That's very concerning.
I thank Ms. Dorgham for being here today, and I hope she will speak
to those concerns and discuss the oversight that takes place at these
airports that opt out of Federal screening. I'm also eager to hear who
pays for those TSA deployment forces, and if those costs are included
in TSA's cost estimates on the front end of the contracting process.
Finally, before closing, I would like to acknowledge the horrific
acts of terrorism that occurred in Paris on Friday. Those attacks,
along with the explosion of a Metrojet in Egypt, remind us that the
threat of terrorism has not gone away. That threat is very real, it is
constant, and it is always evolving.
Transportation Security Officers play a critical role in
confronting that threat. They serve on the front line of our Nation's
airports, screening millions of passengers daily, and I thank them for
working to keep the traveling public safe.
Thank you again for convening this hearing. I look forward to a
productive dialogue today, as well as the follow-up hearing scheduled
for December, where we will be able to consider additional
perspectives.

Mr. Katko. Other Members are reminded that statements may
be submitted for the record.
[The statements of Ranking Member Thompson and Hon. Sheila
Jackson Lee follow:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
November 17, 2015
It is my understanding that this subcommittee will be holding a
follow-up hearing to take testimony and question representatives of the
workforce on their perspectives on the Screening Partnership Program.
At the beginning of this hearing, the Government Accountability
Office released a report requested by Members of the Majority regarding
the Transportation Security Administration's use of cost estimates and
how these estimates for the Federal Government to perform screening
measure against costs incurred by private contractors to provide
screening in the Nation's airports through the Screening Partnership
Program.
I look forward to Ms. Grover's testimony today, particularly on
whether or not the statistics included in this estimation truly
represent an apples-to-apples comparison of the costs to Federal
screeners versus private screeners.
I believe that there are a number of factors that can significantly
alter these statistics.
SPP allows airports the option of returning to the pre-9/11 model
of using contract employees to screen passengers and baggage at our
Nation's airports.
Mr. Chairman, after the recent plane crash in Russia and the
horrific attacks in Paris, both of which ISIL has claimed
responsibility for, any facet of aviation security that mirrors a pre-
9/11 state should be strongly reconsidered.
After 9/11 it was clear to the vast majority of Members of Congress
and the Bush administration that transitioning to a Federal screener
workforce was the right thing to do for the security of our Nation.
Since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, there has not been a successful
terrorist attack on our aviation system on U.S. soil.
Despite that fact, there have been numerous calls from across the
aisle to return to a workforce that is increasingly composed of
contract screeners.
Some claim that transitioning to a contract workforce results in
more efficient and friendlier screeners, but there are no studies or
information that back up this assertion.
As I have said on numerous occasions, Transportation Security
Officers perform a thankless job.
These men and women, who go to work every day to ensure the safety
of the traveling public, along with TSA practices and policies designed
to do the same, are often ridiculed and singled out as the reason for
unpleasant screening experiences.
Members of the Majority will point to this as well as gaps in our
aviation security screening identified by the Inspector General and GAO
as the basis for needing to transition to a privatized screening
workforce.
However, what the public needs to know is that when an airport
chooses to use contract screeners, the private company recruits the
Federal workers. By law, privatized screeners follow the same screening
protocols and procedures as Federal Transportation Security Officers.
Moreover, the vendors who are awarded these screening contracts
depend on the retention of Transportation Security Officers to carry
out their contracts.
For instance, in Montana, a contract was awarded to a vendor who
assumed that it would be able to retain a significant portion of TSA's
workforce in those airports to carry out screening functions.
Citing various reasons, including the vast difference in benefits,
these Transportation Security Officers decided not to transition to a
contracted workforce, and instead decided to stay within the
Transportation Security Administration and secure jobs in other
airports.
This contractor was in the predicament of not being able to attract
the requisite number of employees required to conduct sufficient
screening within these airports, and had to supplement their screeners
with National Deployment Officers from the Transportation Security
Administration.
This incident raises many questions, including the oversight that
is in place to ensure that contractors are able to perform under the
terms of their contracts.
I thank Ms. Dorgham for being here today, and look forward to her
testimony on this subject.
Finally, I would like to point out that many of the changes made to
the law controlling for entry into the Screening Partnership Program in
the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 were ill-informed and
should be repealed.
Chief among those is the provision allowing for subsidiaries of
foreign-owned corporations to compete for and be awarded contracts for
screening services.
Earlier this Congress, I introduced the Aviation Screening
Contractor Reform and Accountability Act, which would reinstate the law
stipulating that a company could only get a contract for screening
services if it was owned and controlled by a U.S. citizen.
______

Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
November 17, 2015
Chairman Katko and Ranking Member Rice, I thank you both for the
opportunity for the subcommittee to hear from today's witnesses on the
topic of ``Assessing TSA's Management and Implementation of the
Screening Partnership Program.'' I thank the Chair for allowing me to
participate in today's hearing.
As a senior Member of the Homeland Security Committee and former
Chair of the Subcommittee on Transportation Security, I am a strong
proponent of Transportation Security and see that mission as on-going.
I thank today's witnesses:

Ms. Jennifer A. Grover, the director of homeland security
and justice, at the Government Accountability Office (GAO); and

Carolyn Dorgham, director, Screening Partnership Program,
Office of Security Operations, TSA.
Today's hearing delves into the TSA's Screening Partnership Program
(SPP), which is statutorily mandated to allow airports to ``opt-out''
of using the Federal passenger and baggage screening workforce and
instead utilize contract screeners.
Private-contract employees were on the job screening passenger
baggage on September 11, 2001, when 19 hijackers boarded 4 flights
crashing 3 of them into buildings and one into a field in Pennsylvania.
I will never forget that day. On September 11, 2015, the Nation marked
the 14th anniversary of the attacks that killed 2,977 men, women, and
children. I stood on the East Front steps of the Capitol on September
11, along with 150 Members of the House of Representatives and sang
``God Bless America.''
Eleven days after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks,
Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge was appointed as the first director of
the Office of Homeland Security in the White House.
Congressional action following September 11, led to the Aviation
and Transportation Security Act (ATSA), that was signed into law. That
law gave the Federal Government direct responsibility for airport
screening. The Transportation Security Administration is created to
oversee security in all modes of travel.
In November 2002, I was proud to join my colleagues in voting to
create a Department of Homeland Security. As a Member of the House
Committee on Homeland Security since its establishment, and Ranking
Member of the Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland
Security, today's hearing is of importance to me.
The work of the TSA is a front-line Department of Homeland Security
and it is not easy--it can in fact be very dangerous.
Like many of my colleagues, I recall the shooting incident at LAX
last year that killed Gerardo Hernandez, who became the first TSA
officer killed in the line of duty; and the machete attack at the Louis
Armstrong New Orleans International Airport earlier this year that
resulted in injuries to Senior Transportation Security Officer Carol
Richel.
Each day, TSA processes an average of 1.7 million passengers at
more than 450 airports across the Nation. In 2012, TSA screened
637,582,122 passengers. The Bush International and the William P. Hobby
Airports are essential hubs for domestic and international air travel
for Houston and the region:

Nearly 40 million passengers traveled through Bush
International Airport (IAH) and an additional 10 million
traveled through William P. Hobby (HOU);

More than 650 daily departures occur at IAH;

IAH is the 11th-busiest airport in the United States for
total passenger traffic;

IAH has 12 all-cargo airlines handling more than 419,205
metric tons of cargo in 2012.
I know that Congress has not done all that it could to make your
work easier--sequestration, a Government shut-down, and a delay in
fully funding the Department of Homeland Security was not in the
security interest of the Nation.
The DHS IG continues to stress TSA's poor responses to confront
problems concerning passenger and baggage screening, access controls to
secure areas, and employee misconduct. The OIG has produced 115 reports
on TSA with hundreds of recommendations, many of which remain
unresolved.
In addition, to these reports:

On May 6, 2015, the DHS OIG released a report claiming that
TSA does not properly manage the maintenance of its airport
screening equipment.

On June 1, 2015 news media reported on alleged preliminary
findings from an on-going undercover DHS Inspector General
review.

Essentially, Red Team auditors posing as passengers smuggled
mock explosives and banned weapons through checkpoints at
various U.S. airports. According to media reporting, TSA agents
failed 67 out of 70 tests or 96 percent of trials. It is
important to note that previous Red Teams investigations raised
similar concerns. This IG review is still on-going and the
report is to be released this fall.
The traveling public's confidence in the security of our Nation's
airports should not be shaken because of Federal Government planned and
managed tests of airport security.
The attacks in Paris last Friday and the continued uncertainty that
the Nation faces regarding what terrorist may do next is something that
as Members of this committee can understand. We cannot wait until the
terrorists figure out a way past security before we act--because this
would mean we have learned none of the lessons of September 11, 2001.
We must commit ourselves to do everything possible to prevent another
9/11 from ever occurring again.
I am committed to ending sequestration and making sure that my
colleagues in Congress comprehend the gravity of playing politics with
security.
My conclusion is that TSA should not be in the business of
privatization of screening duties in spite of airport requests. The
climate of terrorism today argues against privatization at all of TSA
screening responsibilities.

Mr. Katko. Our first witness is Ms. Jennifer Grover, who
currently serves as the director of the homeland security and
justice team at the Government Accountability Office. Her
portfolio includes GAO reviews of TSA and the U.S. Coast Guard
programs and operations. Ms. Grover joined the GAO in 1991. She
has testified before this committee many times and she has done
a highly competent job. We look forward to hearing your
testimony again today.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Grover to testify.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER GROVER, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY AND
JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Grover. Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Rice and other Members and staff. Thank you for the opportunity
to discuss TSA's Screening Partnership Program today. My
remarks are based on a GAO report being released today.
Since SPP's inception, Congressional committees, industry
stakeholders, and TSA have all sought information about how
screening costs compare at airports with private and Federal
screeners. To answer this question, TSA prepares estimates of
what it would cost the agency to provide screening services at
the SPP airports.
We found that TSA's cost-estimating process has improved
since our last review, in particular by providing a detailed
methodology. However, important limitations still affect the
reliability of TSA's estimates. For example, TSA's cost
estimates are not complete because they only include the costs
incurred by TSA to perform screening at an airport, and not
total Federal costs such as retirement benefits and insurance.
We found that these other Federal costs add another 9 percent
on average to total screening costs for the 13 airports in our
review.
OMB guidance describes what should be included in estimates
of Government costs. In this case, as in others, including all
Federal costs would eliminate bias by ensuring that the
estimated Government screening costs are accurately represented
and not systematically understated.
TSA also uses a modified version of these cost estimates as
part of their process for selecting SPP contractors.
Specifically, the estimates serve as a cap to ensure that no
SPP contracts are awarded for more than what it would cost TSA
to provide screening services. We found that contract awards
for 13 recent SPP airports ranged from 2 to 19 percent less
than TSA's estimated costs, with an average savings of 11
percent.
Now, keep in mind my previous point that TSA's estimated
costs are about 9 percent less than total estimated Federal
costs. Therefore, under this procurement process, the contract
award value will always be no more than TSA's estimate and even
lower than total estimated Federal costs.
Does this mean that SPP airports cost less to run than
airports with Federal screeners? We cannot answer that question
because TSA does not continue to monitor the value of an SPP
contract relative to TSA's estimated costs after the contract
has been awarded.
For example, although TSA monitors changes in the
contractor cost over time, TSA doesn't update how its own
estimated costs would change in response to new situations such
as providing additional staff if an airport opens a new
terminal.
Continually monitoring how actual contract values compare
to updated estimates of TSA's costs would provide program
officials and policymakers with more accurate information about
the relative costs of operating airports with private and
Federal screeners.
Finally, although Congressional committees have sought
information on the cost effectiveness of the SPP, we found that
TSA has not regularly reported cost comparisons to
policymakers.
Since 2013, TSA has prepared comprehensive annual reports
that include a comparison of actual private costs with
estimated Federal costs.
According to TSA, they have not shared these reports with
Congress because they are developed for internal use. We
concluded that while TSA has no legal requirement to report
this information, doing so such as on an annual basis would
enable Congressional committees to assess the effectiveness of
the SPP program and its effect on Federal costs.
We have made several recommendations based on these
findings: That TSA continue to improve its cost-estimating
methods; continually monitor how contract values compare to
TSA's estimated costs; and provide cost comparisons to Congress
on a regular basis. TSA concurred with all of our
recommendations and we will monitor TSA's progress toward their
implementation.
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, this concludes my
remarks. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Grover follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jennifer Grover
November 17, 2015
gao-16-115t
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss issues related
to the Transportation Security Administration's (TSA) Screening
Partnership Program (SPP). TSA, within the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), is responsible for screening the approximately 1.8
million passengers and their property traveling through our Nation's
airports every day to ensure, among other things, that persons do not
carry prohibited items into airport sterile areas or on flights.\1\ In
2004, TSA created the SPP, allowing commercial (i.e., TSA-regulated)
airports an opportunity to apply to TSA to have the screening of
passengers and property performed by TSA-approved qualified private-
screening contractors.\2\ Contractors perform passenger and baggage
screening services at a total of 21 airports across the country, with
the most recent airport beginning operations in June 2015.\3\ At each
of the SPP airports, TSA continues to be responsible for overseeing
screening operations, and the contractors must adhere to TSA's security
standards, procedures, and requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The sterile area is the portion of an airport defined in an
airport's security program that provides passengers access to boarding
aircraft and to which access is generally controlled by TSA through the
screening of persons and property. See 49 C.F.R. 1540.5.
\2\ See 49 U.S.C.  44920. There were approximately 450 commercial
airports as of September 2015. We refer to airports that are
participating in the SPP as SPP airports and the screeners in those
airports as private screeners. We refer to airports that do not
participate in the SPP as non-SPP airports and the screeners at those
airports as Federal screeners.
\3\ Of the 21 airports, 7 have transitioned to private screeners
since September 2014. One additional airport, Punta Gorda Airport, has
been accepted into the SPP but, as of September 2015, was awaiting
contract award.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since the SPP's inception, Congressional committees, industry
stakeholders, and TSA have sought to determine how screening costs
compare at airports with private and Federal (i.e., TSA-employed)
screeners, and TSA does produce cost estimates that attempt to predict
what it would cost the agency to provide passenger and baggage
screening services at airports that have opted out or plan to opt out
of Federal screening. Our previous work, including a January 2009
briefing and a March 2011 update, raised concerns with TSA's
methodology for developing its cost estimates.\4\ In 2013, TSA
developed a revised methodology for developing cost estimates for each
SPP airport that addressed some of the design limitations we previously
cited. TSA's estimates are used to provide a basis of comparison in
internal reports and as part of TSA's revised contracting strategy for
selecting contractors at SPP airports, which incorporates the estimates
in an effort to award contract values at or below what it would cost
TSA to screen passengers and property at an airport.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See GAO, Aviation Security: TSA's Cost and Performance Study of
Private-Sector Airport Screening, GAO-09-27R (Washington, DC: Jan. 9,
2009) and Aviation Security: TSA's Revised Cost Comparison Provides a
More Reasonable Basis for Comparing the Costs of Private-Sector and TSA
Screeners, GAO-11-375R (Washington, DC: Mar. 4, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As additional airports consider applying to the SPP and as TSA
continues to seek ways to improve its ability to compare the costs of
private and Federal screeners, you asked that we examine TSA's approach
to estimating costs, how these estimates are used in procuring
screening services, and how TSA continues to adapt its SPP procurement
policies and processes. My remarks today are based on our report,
released at this hearing, entitled Screening Partnership Program: TSA
Can Benefit from Improved Cost Estimates, which addresses: (1) The
extent to which TSA has developed and reported reliable cost estimates
for providing screening services for SPP airports, (2) how TSA uses
cost estimates in selecting SPP contractors and the extent to which TSA
monitors contractor costs relative to its cost estimates, and (3) how
the SPP has changed since the beginning of fiscal year 2014.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO, Screening Partnership Program: TSA Can Benefit from
Improved Cost Estimates, GAO-16-19 (Washington, DC: Nov. 16, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For our November 2015 report, we compared TSA's cost estimation
practices with leading best practices identified in GAO's Cost
Estimating and Assessment Guide and assessed TSA internal reporting
guidance using GAO's Standards for Internal Control in the Federal
Government.\6\ We analyzed contracts representing 20 of the 22 airports
in the SPP to identify where the cost estimates were used and whether
cost estimates were updated based on changes to the contract.\7\
Additionally, we visited 9 airports that had private screeners or were
preparing for private screeners and spoke to SPP stakeholders at each
airport, including airport directors, contractors, TSA Federal security
directors, and Federal screeners. We also met with each of the five
private screening contractors with SPP contracts at the time of our
review as well as TSA officials responsible for the program. More
detailed information on our scope and methodology can be found in our
November 2015 report. We conducted the work on which this statement is
based in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing
standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide: Best Practices
for Developing and Managing Capital Program Costs, GAO-09-3SP
(Washington, DC: Mar. 2, 2009). The methodology outlined in this guide
is a compilation of best practices that Federal cost-estimating
organizations and industry use to develop and maintain reliable cost
estimates throughout the life of a Government program. The best
practices were developed in conjunction with Government and industry
experts in the cost-estimating community. GAO, Standards for Internal
Control in the Federal Government, GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1 (Washington, DC:
November 1999).
\7\ We selected all of the contracts that were active at the time
of our review, except two. We did not review the contracts for: (1)
Kansas City International Airport because of an on-going dispute over
TSA's award of the SPP contract and contract renegotiations during the
time of our review (see, e.g., Firstline Transportation Security v.
United States, 119 Fed. Cl. 116 (2014)). and (2) Punta Gorda Airport
because, as mentioned earlier, the contract award was pending at the
time of our review.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tsa's cost estimates
In our November 2015 report, we found that, based on an analysis of
TSA's cost estimating practices and methodology developed in 2013
compared against best practices, TSA's cost estimates have some
strengths, but also have limitations in four general characteristics
that best practices call for in a high-quality and reliable cost
estimate.\8\ TSA's cost estimating practices reflect certain strengths,
including a revised cost estimating methodology that provides
sufficient details for TSA staff to develop and document cost
estimates. However, limitations in each of the four characteristics of
a high-quality cost estimate prevent TSA's estimates from being
reliable. For example, TSA's cost estimates are not fully comprehensive
because they include only the costs incurred by TSA to perform
screening at an airport and not the total costs incurred by the Federal
Government such as retirement benefits and insurance. As shown in
figure 1, we found that by including TSA's estimates of these other
Federal costs (i.e., costs not borne by TSA) for the 13 SPP airports
for which TSA provided official cost estimates, TSA's cost estimates
are, on average, 91 percent of the total Federal costs. In addition,
the percentage difference between the estimates of TSA's costs and all
Federal costs (other Federal costs added to TSA costs) ranges from 7 to
17 percent for each of the 13 SPP airports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The four characteristics of a high-quality cost estimate are:
Comprehensive, well-documented, accurate, and credible. See our
November 2015 report, GAO-16-19, for more details.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Further, TSA's estimates are not regularly updated to reflect
changes to the program that could affect costs and do not include an
analysis that addresses the uncertainty inherent in cost estimates. We
concluded that a methodology that is more closely aligned with best
practices for cost estimation can provide more reliable information. We
recommended that TSA ensure that the 2013 cost-estimating methodology
used to compare screening costs at SPP and non-SPP airports is revised
to more fully conform to leading cost-estimating best practices. TSA
concurred with the recommendation and stated that it will implement the
necessary changes. In addition, while multiple Congressional committees
have sought improved information on the cost-effectiveness of the SPP
to oversee the program, TSA has not reported cost comparisons between
Federal and private screening at SPP airports to policy makers.\9\
Since 2013, TSA has prepared comprehensive annual reports that include,
among other things, a comparison of actual private costs with estimated
Federal costs. According to TSA officials, they have not shared these
reports with Congress because they are developed for internal use. We
concluded that although TSA has no standing requirement to report this
information, doing so (such as on an annual basis) can better position
policy makers to assess and understand the effectiveness of the SPP
program and its effects on Federal costs. We recommended that TSA
provide cost comparisons that conform to leading cost-estimating best
practices to Congress on a regular basis. TSA concurred with the
recommendation and stated that it plans to use its existing SPP Semi-
Annual Report for Congress to provide this cost comparison beginning
with the June 2016 report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Since 2009, multiple Congressional committees have requested
evaluations of TSA's SPP cost comparisons or use of its estimates from
GAO, the DHS Inspector General, and independent studies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
selection of contractors and monitoring contractor costs
In our November 2015 report, we also reported that TSA limits its
selection of contractors to those who propose costs less than or equal
to TSA's estimated costs to perform the same services. However, once it
has awarded a contract, TSA does not continually monitor the value of
the contract relative to its estimated costs throughout the contract
period. TSA also does not update its estimated costs to account for
changes during the contract period that affect the estimates. TSA has
determined that it will not consider a contractor's proposal to perform
screening at an airport if the proposed cost exceeds its cost
efficiency number--TSA's estimated costs to perform screening services
at an airport--and will further evaluate only those proposals that are
less than or equal to TSA's estimated costs. As shown in figure 2,
contract award prices for 13 SPP airports ranged from 2 percent to 19
percent less than TSA's estimated costs for conducting screening, as
reflected in the cost efficiency number, with an average of 11 percent
savings at award compared with TSA's estimated costs.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

However, over the contract period, the value of the contract may
increase or decrease because of modifications that address changes to
the work. For example, if an airport opens a new terminal, the contract
might be modified to accommodate the need to hire additional staff.
Some of these changes may also affect TSA's estimated costs for
performing the services provided in the contract. Therefore, we
concluded that continually monitoring how contract values compare with
TSA's estimated costs, and ensuring the cost estimates are updated to
correspond to major changes in the program or contract, would provide
program officials and policy makers with more accurate information
about the relative costs of operating airports with Federal and private
screeners. We recommended that TSA continually monitor how contract
values compare with TSA's estimated costs and, in doing so, update its
cost estimates when changes to the program or the contract may result
in a major change to contract values to ensure the comparison is
current and accurate. TSA concurred with the recommendation and stated
that it will compare actual contract expenditures to TSA estimates on
an annual basis, with updates as necessary, starting with all-new
estimates after March 31, 2016.
changes in the spp program
In our November 2015 report, we found that since the beginning of
fiscal year 2014, TSA has made and continues to make changes to the
SPP. For example, TSA is in the process of changing its SPP contracting
approach from awarding individual contracts for SPP airports, to
awarding indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity (ID/IQ) contracts.\10\
Contractors awarded ID/IQ contracts will be allowed to compete for the
award of task orders to perform screening at specific airports. TSA is
also changing how wage rate determinations are made for employees of
SPP contractors that perform screening services and have extended the
time for a new contractor to complete the transition from Federal
screeners to private screeners from 90 to 120 days.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ This type of contracting approach, called ID/IQ contracts,
provides for an indefinite quantity of services, within stated limits,
for a fixed period and are usually awarded for a base year and
subsequent option years See 48 C.F.R.  16.50. Under an ID/IQ contract,
the Government places task orders for services or requirements
established in the contract.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions you or other Members of the subcommittee
may have at this time.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Grover, for your testimony. We
definitely appreciate your being here today.
Our second witness is Ms. Carolyn Dorgham, who currently
serves as director of the Screening Partnership Program at the
Transportation Security Administration's Office of Security
Administration.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Dorgham to testify.

STATEMENT OF CAROLYN DORGHAM, DIRECTOR, SCREENING PARTNERSHIP
PROGRAM, OFFICE OF SECURITY OPERATIONS, TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Dorgham. Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Rice, and Members of the subcommittee.
I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the
Transportation Security Administration's Screening Partnership
Program, or SPP. The SPP is a voluntary program under which
airports apply to transfer screening operations from Federal to
qualified private security screening companies. Upon an
airport's acceptance into the program, TSA selects a company to
conduct screening services under contract with the Federal
Government.
These companies must comply with all TSA security screening
procedures and TSA's Federal security directors oversee these
contracted operations to ensure compliance.
TSA maintains its responsibility for security regardless of
whether screening is conducted by private or Federal employees.
Twenty-one airports are currently participating in the SPP and
one additional airport has been accepted into the program and
is currently in the source selection phase.
Current SPP airports screen approximately 32 million
passengers per year, or 5 percent of the TSA annual passenger
volume. The FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012 provided
new requirements for the program, including standards for the
SPP application, a time line for agency action on applications,
and steps TSA must take if denying an application.
Since passage of the FAA Act, 7 airports have applied to
the SPP program. All 7 airports were approved within the
required 120 days, and 6 airports have private screeners in
place today. The FAA Act also requires TSA to ensure that
approving an airport operator's application would not
compromise the security or detrimentally affect the cost
efficiency or effectiveness of the screening of passengers or
property at the airport.
In order to maintain cost efficiency as required by law,
TSA includes the TSA cost estimate in all requests for
proposal, and requires that cost proposals not exceed the TSA
cost estimate. All offerers are evaluated on proposed costs as
well as their ability to perform screening according to TSA
standards.
GAO recently completed an audit focused on TSA's cost
estimates. TSA is pleased that GAO recognized the improvements
in our cost methodology. TSA concurs with all three of GAO's
recommendations and has already taken steps to address them.
Our office of finance and administration is working to
implement adjustments to our cost-estimating methodology based
on GAO's recommendations. My office will include the cost
comparison information in our semiannual Screening Partnership
Program report to Congress so that our oversight committees
have visibility on our estimates and program figures.
Finally, TSA will compare on an annual basis, the actual
contract expenditures for a given airport to TSA's estimate for
screening with Federal officers. If an airport's SPP
application meets all legal requirements and a qualified
contractor is identified during the procurement process, TSA's
goal for the SPP program is to award a contract within 1 year
of receiving the application. Compared to Federal contracting
practices, this is an aggressive goal. However, it reflects
TSA's commitment to ensuring that airports opting for contract
screeners can expediently transition from Federal to contract
screening operations.
Additionally, TSA recently began changing its SPP
contracting approach. Rather than awarding individual
contracts, we are now working to award an indefinite delivery,
indefinite quantity, or ID/IQ contract. Awarding the ID/IQ will
provide a pool of highly-qualified vendors that are capable of
running screening operations in a cost-efficient manner. Not
detrimental to security per statutory requirements.
Successful offerors will then be able to compete for
security screening services at specific airports through task
orders. This new approach is expected to reduce procurement
time lines for TSA while simultaneously streamlining the
proposal process for industry.
TSA provides information to vendors interested in
participating through numerous resources. TSA utilizes the
Federal business opportunities website to communicate with
vendors on SPP-related topics, such as annual industry day,
opportunities at TSA headquarters, and posting draft statements
for work and requests for proposals that solicit vendor
feedback.
Additionally, TSA provides opportunities for industry days
at airports which allow vendors to tour the airport, ask the
airport specific questions concerning, for example, equipment
requirements and airport layout. TSA also meets with vendors in
other forums such as summits and roundtable discussions.
My responsibility as the senior executive responsible for
the SPP is to focus on its security, effectiveness, and
efficiency. I work to achieve transparency and engagement with
industry so that our qualified private partners have access to
information that helps them achieve these same goals.
I appreciate this committee's interest in the success of
the program.
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, Members of the
committee, thank you again for the opportunity to appear before
you today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may
have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dorgham follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carolyn Dorgham
November 17, 2015
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee, I am pleased to appear before you today to discuss the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) Screening Partnership
Program (SPP).
TSA's mission is to protect the Nation's transportation systems to
ensure freedom of movement for people and commerce. We do this by
providing the most effective security in the most efficient way to
reduce the likelihood of attacks such as those that happened on the
morning of September 11, 2001, from occurring in the future. Our
operations provide an annual screening of nearly 660 million passengers
and nearly 2 billion carry-on and checked bags. Transportation Security
Officers (TSOs) prevented 180,000 prohibited items from being carried
on airplanes last year alone. While our mission remains challenging,
our workforce is dedicated to the task of keeping the American public
secure from terrorist attacks on transportation systems.
screening partnership program (spp) background
Congress established TSA through the Aviation and Transportation
Security Act (ATSA) (Pub. L. 107-71), which designated passenger
screening as a Federal responsibility. Included in ATSA was language
authorizing a pilot program for privatized passenger screening at five
airports of different sizes and risk categories. As part of the pilot,
TSA entered into contracts with qualified private companies to conduct
screening services with Federal oversight from TSA officials.
Characteristics of the pilot included guidelines for private companies
to maintain qualification standards set by TSA for Federal
Transportation Security Officers (TSOs) and standards to provide
personnel compensation and benefits at an equivalent level of those
provided to their Federal employee counterparts.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Modernization and Reform
Act of 2012 (Pub. L. 112-95) provided guidelines for the program,
including standards for an SPP application, a time line for agency
action on applications, and steps TSA must take if denying an
application. Under section 830, the statute also requires TSA to ensure
that approving an airport operator's application would not compromise
the security or detrimentally affect the cost-efficiency or the
effectiveness of the screening of passengers or property at the airport
(49 U.S.C. 44920(b)).
TSA maintains overall responsibility for transportation security
whether an airport operator has private or Federal employees conducting
passenger screening operations. Federal Security Directors oversee the
contracted security screening operations to ensure compliance with
Federal security standards.
current spp participation
The SPP is a voluntary program where airports apply to transfer
screening operations at commercial airports from Federal to qualified
private security screening companies. These companies run screening
operations under Federal oversight and must comply with all TSA
security screening procedures. Since the program began in 2004, 32
airports have applied, including the original five pilot airports
designated by ATSA. Twenty-one of those airports are currently
participating in the SPP program. Of the 11 airports that have applied
but are not currently participating in the program, one is in the
source selection phase, and the remaining 10 have either discontinued
commercial air service, were initially denied participation in the
program and did not reapply after a change to the statute, or withdrew
their applications prior to contract award.
Current participant SPP airports represent screening of
approximately 32 million passengers per year, or 5% of TSA's annual
passenger volume. Eight of the 21 are ``Category IV'' airports meaning
that they enplane between 2,500 and 10,000 passengers per year. The
contract value for these 21 airports stands at approximately $723
million over a 5-year period.
program accomplishments
If the application meets all legal requirements and a qualified
contractor is identified during the procurement process, TSA's goal for
the SPP program is to award a contract within 1 year of receiving a new
SPP application. Compared to general Federal Government contracting
practices, this is an aggressive goal; however, it reflects TSA's
commitment to ensure that airports opting for contract screeners can
expeditiously transition from Federal to contract screening operations.
Since passage of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, 7
airports have applied to the SPP program. All 7 airports were approved
within the 120-day requirement for application approval, and currently
have private screeners in place.
TSA also instituted improvements in its SPP application process to
facilitate meeting its aggressive 1-year goal to award a contract on a
new application. Process improvements include a reduction in SPP
application length from 5 pages to 2, as well as co-locating the
program and acquisitions teams that participate in the application
review process to enhance collaboration, and streamlining the
application.
Additionally, TSA recently began changing its SPP contracting
approach. Rather than awarding individual contracts, we are now working
to award an indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity (IDIQ) contract.
Awarding the IDIQ will provide a pool of highly-qualified vendors that
are capable of running screening operations in a cost-efficient manner
not detrimental to security, per statutory requirements. Successful
offerors will then be able to compete for security screening services
at specific airports or groups of airports through task orders. This
new contracting methodology is anticipated to reduce procurement
processing time for TSA while simultaneously reducing the burden of
preparation efforts on the vendor community.
industry engagement
TSA provides information to vendors interested in participating
through numerous resources. TSA utilizes the Federal Business
Opportunities website to communicate with vendors on SPP-related topics
such as annual Industry Day opportunities at TSA Headquarters, and
posting draft statements of work (SOW) and Request for Proposals (RFPs)
that solicit vendor feedback. Additionally, TSA provides opportunities
for industry days at airports, which allow vendors to tour the airport
and ask airport-specific questions concerning, for example, equipment
requirements and the airport layout. TSA also meets with vendors in
other forums, such as summits and roundtable discussions.
Successful offerors for the ID/IQ must also participate in a TSA-
hosted Industry Conference in which all offerors are provided valuable
information on screening requirements. In these conferences, vendors
also have an opportunity to give TSA feedback on the RFP process. TSA
uses this information to better refine its process, including adding
any additional information to the RFP which might be helpful to
vendors.
gao recommendations
GAO recently completed an audit entitled ``Screening Partnership
Program: TSA Can Benefit From Improved Cost Estimates'' (GAO-16-19),
continuing its oversight from previous reports in 2009 and 2011. TSA is
pleased that GAO recognized the improvements in our cost methodology,
including our comprehensiveness and documentation. TSA continually
refines our cost-estimating methodology for airports participating in
or applying to the SPP. We agree with GAO that reliable cost estimates
are critical, and addressing current limitations can help better
predict costs as well as allow us to make informed decisions about
program participants.
Specifically, GAO recommended that TSA further revise our cost-
estimating methodology to more fully conform to leading best practices;
providing cost comparisons to Congress on a regular basis; and
continually monitoring how contract values compare to our estimated
costs and updating them as necessary. TSA concurs with all of these
recommendations and has already taken steps to address them. Our Office
of Finance and Administration is working to implement adjustments to
our cost-estimating methodology based on GAO's recommendations. My
office will include the cost comparison information in our Semi-Annual
Screening Partnership Program Report to Congress so that our oversight
committees have visibility on our estimates and program figures.
Finally, TSA will compare, on an annual basis, the actual expenditures
for a given airport contract to TSA's estimate for screening with
Federal Transportation Security Officers.
conclusion
My responsibility as the senior executive responsible for the SPP
program is to focus on its security, effectiveness, and efficiency. I
work to achieve transparency and engagement with industry so that our
qualified private partners in the SPP program have access to
information that helps them to achieve these same goals. I appreciate
this committee's interest in helping the program to be more successful.
Chairman Katko, thank you again for the opportunity to appear here
today. I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Katko. Thank you Ms. Dorgham for your testimony. We
appreciate you taking the time to be here. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes for questions.
So, let's get right at it. In 2009 and 2011 GAO did
reports--am I correct on this matter? In both reports they
noticed and they noted strongly that TSA's cost estimates were
not properly taking into account, some other costs associated
with having the screeners.
So until you have an appropriate cost estimate for both
private screeners as well as the TSA screeners, you can't do a
really good comparison because there are really two components.
One is a cost estimate and one is a performance estimate. Those
two have to be considered--they are intertwined.
So, with that as a background, does TSA have internal
figures at their disposal that give a true cost estimate for
the screeners that work for TSA?
Ms. Dorgham. So, what I would like to clarify is that the
TSA cost estimate that is being published as part of the RFP
reflects TSA's actual costs for screening at that airport. It
does not include long-term retirement benefits because those
are not included in TSA's annual appropriation, so we would
have to absorb that difference in cost--the 9 percent
difference in cost that GAO outlined in their report by
reducing funds somewhere else, in another security program for
instance.
Which could be detrimental to security and it also would be
creating a cost inefficiency because now we would be spending
more on SPP screening at an airport than we would with TSA
screeners.
So, this is the reason why it is not in the TSA cost
estimate. From a cost comparison perspective, we don't see any
challenge with putting--including the long-term retirement
costs for cost comparison purposes.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now, I am not an accountant, but that is a
cost attributed--there is a cost attributed with each employee
that is a screener at TSA for retirement just like there is a
cost estimate for people in the SPP program for the private
entities--whether or not they have retirement and all that is
part of their cost estimate.
So, how can we do an accurate cost comparison if you are
not giving accurate figures? Now we are not telling you you
have to shift funds or do whatever, we are just saying from a
simple arithmetic standpoint--and I am not an accountant--but
I, it seems pretty straight to me that you just tell--we have
asked you since 2009 for the cost estimates associated per
employee at TSA and you tell me that that 9 percent is the
additional cost.
Correct? That is part of the cost for TSA screener?
Ms. Dorgham. The 9 percent is their long-term retirement
benefits----
Mr. Katko. It is a cost?
Ms. Dorgham. It is a cost----
Mr. Katko. Okay, okay. So we have--so that is a cost, we
have got that. Now, on top of that, is there other Federal
agencies or other Federal entities that cause additional cost
to be on top of what we have already talked about here?
So you have got the--published cost, plus the 9 percent for
retirement cost. Is there more that other agencies incur in
dealing with this program?
Ms. Dorgham. No, sir. The 9 percent is the other Federal
cost that other Federal agencies incur in long-term retirement
benefits. The benefits that TSA provides its employees--it is
Federal screeners when they are on Federal payroll, we pass on
to the vendors as part of the TSA cost estimate.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now, there is--they do--Ms. Grover you
mentioned that there is an average savings of 11 percent for
having the--for the private screeners, is that correct?
Ms. Grover. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. Does that include the 9 percent that we are
talking about or----
Ms. Grover. No, sir.
Mr. Katko. No, okay. So is that on--if you--is that
something you should add on to that 11 percent cost savings
figure?
Ms. Grover. Well, to be clear, our recommendation was that
TSA should be sure to include all Federal costs for the
purposes of the cost estimate comparison, as you were
mentioning in your statement earlier.
Because it is critically important to understand an
accurate apples-to-apples comparison of what it costs to
provide screening services under the two scenarios.
But, for the purposes of procurement, that is an entirely
different matter. TSA has a great deal of discretion under
Federal acquisition regulations and setting the cap at TSA cost
is certainly consistent with the FAR.
The other thing I would point out is that the fact that
there have been multiple bids at that level and that most
contracts have been carried out successfully, suggests that TSA
is able to successfully compete contracts at the level of the
TSA cap.
Mr. Katko. So, is the only thing that is missing from the
cost estimate this 9 percent retirement cost, or is there
something else that is missing?
Ms. Grover. It is retirement cost, it is liability
insurance, and a little bit of forgone corporate tax revenues.
But it adds up together to about 9 percent on average for the
13 airports that we looked at. So there could be some variation
if you look more broadly at other airports.
But yes, that is about it.
Mr. Katko. Okay, so. Okay. Alright. Well, I can keep going
on this but I don't want to get too far over, so.
Miss Rice, you are up next.
Miss Rice. So it seems to me that the two main areas of
concern when we are talking about screening and airport
security are safety, right?
The quality of the screening process, and the cost to the
American taxpayer to ensure that we have a quality screening
process.
Would you both agree?
Ms. Grover. Yes ma'am.
Ms. Dorgham. Yes.
Miss Rice. I think that regardless of what side of the
aisle you are on, there is no--you can't put a dollar amount on
quality screening and safety in the aviation industry here in
this country. Especially in light of what happened 2 weeks ago.
Would you all agree?
Ms. Dorgham. Yes.
Miss Rice. So is it accurate to say that those airports who
have decided to go into the SPP and opt out and use private
individuals, right, that they are relying on the TSO's who have
been trained through their employment with the TSA. Is that
true?
Ms. Dorgham. So, I can answer that question. TSA provides
the training. TSA bears program cost, we provide the equipment
and the standard operating procedures. The private-screener
workforce works for a qualified private company.
So they are not TSA employees, but they are trained in the
same manner.
Miss Rice. Right, so I guess my question is, the biggest
disparity between the different--you know, the TSA doing the
screening or airports opting to do it--opting out, right? Is a
benefit cost, right? Wages, benefits cost?
Ms. Dorgham. So approximately--based on our cost estimates,
76 to 85 percent of the overall TSA cost estimate is indirect
wages and benefits and the like. Only--the remaining percentage
is only for activities such as facility supplies and other
costs.
Miss Rice. So the majority is the difference in wages.
Ms. Dorgham. Correct.
Miss Rice. Okay. Would you both agree that there is a
morale issue at TSA right now?
Ms. Grover. The recent morale results for all of DHS are
low, and TSA is low within DHS. Yes.
Miss Rice. So paying people less who are in a position
where they are literally securing the safety of other human
beings might not be a good morale booster, is that----
Ms. Grover. If I could just clarify, the private
contractors are required to pay their screeners with
compensation and benefits that are not less than what the
Federal screeners receive.
Miss Rice. So then just before, you said that there was a
disparity in the benefits and the wages?
Ms. Dorgham. So sometimes, it may appear as if there is a
disparity because what we do or what we have historically done
under ATSA, we establish wage rates for every screening
category, and we pass that hourly wage rate, which is a
composite of direct wage and fringe benefits, to the contractor
or to the vendor.
Sometimes--as long as the vendor meets this composite
number, we are--we are good with that. We consider them
compliant. So one vendor may give their employees more direct
pay than fringe benefits or vice versa.
So it may appear as if their benefits or their wages are
being cut when, in reality, they are still receiving the same
hourly wages. It is just a different distribution between
direct pay and benefits.
There is a second scenario where we--it may have the
appearance as if the vendor is not passing on those benefits,
is if the vendor, even though they are paying the same costs
that the Federal Government incurs for a specific package, is
not able to secure the same benefits. But this is how it
appears as if they are not receiving the same wages.
Miss Rice. Okay. Now the contract to the vendor in Montana
was terminated apparently due to staffing issues. Is that
correct, where the TSOs declined to stay on with a private
vendor in Montana. Is that----
Ms. Dorgham. The vendor in Montana was terminated because
of their inability to conduct the screening of passengers and
baggage as outlined under the terms and conditions of their
contract, not necessarily just the staffing aspect.
Miss Rice. Okay.
Ms. Dorgham. The staffing issue just compounded the
problem.
Miss Rice. So is there any--has there been a study done to
see what the differences in terms of airport, actual airport
security between these two different operations?
Ms. Grover. In 2012, GAO issued a report where we did a
review of the performance at SPP airports and airports with
Federal screeners, and in general, we found that the
performance was about the same.
In some areas, the Federal screeners did better, on some
other different TSA tests, the SPP screeners did better. But it
wasn't any significant overwhelming difference in one direction
or another, so I would say for security effectiveness,
performance seems to be about the same.
Miss Rice. TSA obviously in both scenarios oversees----
Ms. Dorgham. Correct.
Miss Rice [continuing]. The implementation. I yield back.
Thank you.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Rogers
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree with Miss
Rice. We want to make sure that we have safe and secure
passenger screening.
So it is obvious from the testimony we have had that there
is no discernible difference in the quality of screening. We
have--the private contractors have to pay at least as much as
the Government contractors.
So Ms. Dorgham, why do you continue to drag your feet on
getting accurate cost estimates when this has been brought to
your attention in 2009 and again since then and not provide the
documentation that GAO says that you should provide?
Ms. Dorgham. So the good news is since 2012, with the
passage of the FAA Modernization and Reform Act, we have made
significant progress in improving our cost-estimating
methodology. We have concurred with GAO's recommendations and
we will on an annual basis start comparing the cost of Federal
screening to the cost of private screening and provide those
numbers in our semiannual report to oversight committees so
that lawmakers can get a better understanding of the cost.
Mr. Rogers. I don't understand--this is not rocket science.
They told you in 2009 what was deficient about your cost
estimate analysis and processes. Why couldn't you provide it
before 2010, much less here we are in 2015? I don't understand.
Ms. Grover just outlined the areas that were deficient. You
said you agreed with them. Why does it take this long? Why
hasn't it been done already? Do you not want the information to
be out there?
Ms. Dorgham. No, sir. We do have the information, we just
didn't have a process for the comparison----
Mr. Rogers. You didn't realize that benefits had to be
calculated into it?
Ms. Dorgham. Well, we will comply with the recommendations
and we--I believe there was a misunderstanding in that the
original requests were to include those benefits that TSA does
not get as part of the appropriation in our actual estimate
that we pass on and use as the ceiling contract. But there is
no issue at all with using those for comparison purposes.
Mr. Rogers. I think any reasonable person knows in order to
get an accurate cost comparison, you have to factor in those
costs.
Ms. Grover, in the 2009 study, did y'all make the
suggestion that those benefits had to be included in the cost
estimate analysis?
Ms. Grover. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Did y'all also recommend at that time that this
needed to be a continued review to be able to get a long-term
comparison?
Ms. Grover. No, sir. We didn't.
Mr. Rogers. So that is a new recommendation.
Ms. Grover. Yes, sir. That is new and it is particularly
important given the new information about the discrepancies
between the TSA estimated costs and the award values, because
it is through the on-going updates of TSA's estimated costs
that they will be able to determine whether there are
differences in costs over the long term.
Mr. Rogers. Good. Ms. Dorgham, you already testified you
intend to comply. You agree with these recommendations and you
intend to comply.
Ms. Dorgham. We agree, sir. Yes.
Mr. Rogers. So when will you be able to implement these new
methodologies so that we will have the more accurate
information?
Ms. Dorgham. We have already started making the changes to
the cost methodology that we currently--that was under review
by GAO. We will provide in our next semi-annual report, mid-
2016, the first cost comparison information to Congress.
There are multiple contracts that expire at different
times, so by providing 2 reports a year, you will be able to
see the cost comparisons on all contracts, regardless of when
they expire.
Mr. Rogers. Ms. Grover, is that the earliest that that
should be expected?
Ms. Grover. I think that sounds like a reasonable time
frame, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Ms. Dorgham, do you have a bias against SPP
programs?
Ms. Dorgham. I do not, sir.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Mica for
5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Mica. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member.
I think the Ranking Member, when she started, said there
are two things that we want to determine here: One is
performance. We have got to make certain the we have got the
best performing screening process and security process out
there. Then second, cost. That is what this is about.
Unfortunately, TSA has done everything they can to thwart
the private screening. Let's go back to performance. In 2012,
you just said that, basically, looking at the two performance--
and they were basically about equal, isn't that correct, in
performance?
Ms. Grover. Yes, sir, that is what we found.
Mr. Mica. We found that, too--now, let me say that at the
end of when I was involved in setting this up, and we finished
the--you testified about the finishing--after we had set up
five airports with private screening under Federal
supervision--it was San Francisco, Rochester, Tupelo, Kansas
City, and the smallest one was Jackson Hole, Wyoming--which,
actually, the airport does its own screening.
We tested them after having them in operation--that was at
the end of that period. The report I got back, which was a
Classified report at the time, said that private screening
under Federal supervision performed statistically significantly
better. Okay?
I assumed that from the beginning. I have sat in on
numerous Classified reports. We have seen some leaks about
performance. In 2007, we had 30,000 screeners, and the leak was
75 percent failure rate. That is anecdotal from the press.
Just recently, we saw, with 46,000 screeners, reported in
the press, a failure rate of 95 percent. Some of you may have
read that. So we have 46,000 screeners versus 30,000, and we
have actually gotten worse in performance, which has been
leaked.
Okay. Now have you--were you involved in the Sanford
request for privatization--Orlando Sanford airport, ma'am?
Ms. Dorgham. I was not, sir.
Mr. Mica. You were not. I would love to have as a witness
the former director who requested in 2010 for private
screening. TSA sent their goons down and intimidated this
airport director--and they have done that around the country--
to force--to keep them from applying. He told me the pressure
that was exerted.
That is why I went back in 2012 and we changed the rules
for this. From 2012, when we passed the law at the end of the
FAA bill, to 2014, how many private applications did you
approve?
Ms. Dorgham. Seven.
Mr. Mica. No. You approved none--2012 to just the beginning
of--the end of 2013.
Ms. Dorgham. So----
Mr. Mica. There were none. I had you in the office--it took
you 2 years to come up with this--you dragged your feet in the
evaluation process and coming up with the terms. I can tell
you, you had none.
I threw you--I threw TSA out of the office when they told
me that, and I will be glad to document that.
The whole point is, here, is we have limited resources, and
every study we have had--y'all--we just had--I have TSA
oversight on my Transportation Subcommittee assignment. We just
had a hearing at the full committee level, and the IG GAO came
in and said almost every area, TSA is failing. Every area.
Every layer. That is what they testified to us.
They built a huge bureaucracy--do you still have 4,000
people around Washington, DC, making, on average, $103,000
apiece?
Ms. Dorgham. I don't have that information.
Mr. Mica. Yes, I am telling you it is close to that, unless
you moved some people into other agencies to try to camouflage
the figure. They have close to 15,000 administrative personnel
in TSA. Did you know that?
What I am talking about is getting the resources directed
to where they should be: Private screening can be done. Didn't
you just testify that it can be done anywhere from 2 to 19
percent cheaper? Ms. Grover? What was the--just tell us the
figures for the record one more time.
Ms. Grover. Yes, 11 percent difference on average----
Mr. Mica [continuing] On average.
Ms. Grover [continuing]. At the time of award.
Mr. Mica. Yes.
Ms. Grover. So the question is still open about whether
that will actually play out over the 5 years.
Mr. Mica. It is not done at any cheaper wages or benefits.
That is all baloney, okay? Because we require that. We require
the standards. I have--we have looked at the airports and their
performance. You should see the report we did on San Francisco,
which is private, and Los Angeles.
In recruitment, in training, in management, and every
category, it costs more, and TSA did and an inept job at it. To
support the thousands you have got here in Washington and
across the country, and supporting this huge personnel
bureaucracy, is not directing the resources towards what we
need to do--is go after people who pose a risk.
So we are one of a few countries in the world--on the
Western Hemisphere--or in the Western world--not just
hemisphere, Western world--that employs an all-Federal
operation, where you do everything and none of it is done well.
So my point here today is, making SPP work--it can work. We
can use our resources and put them--right now, it should be
intelligence, intelligence, intelligence. Connecting the dots,
connecting the dots. TSA has failed almost every time in
connecting the dots, and homeland security reports have
verified that.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am ready for a second round when
you are.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Mica. Yes, I think--I know we
have votes coming up, but let's try and just honor a couple
minutes per questioning for this round--maybe 2 or 3 minutes--
and then we will go from there.
I have a couple follow-up questions. First of all, Ms.
Grover, when a--in your reports, do you find that there was a
problem with the bid--the way the private contractors' bids
were being treated for the starting rates for their people that
they were going to employ? It seemed to be some disparity
between that and what is going on with TSA and how they pay
their employees.
Ms. Grover. No, sir. No--necessarily--problem with that.
Just a note that TSA is moving towards a wage requirement
change, where, in the future, there would be a comparison
between the wage that would be calculated under the ATSA wage
rate, compared to the services contract wage rate, and then the
contractor would be required to pay whichever is higher.
Mr. Katko. In doing your evaluation, did you do anything--
did you encounter any issues with respect to the ability of
employees at TSA versus SPP employees to have flexibility and
make modifications and then whether you were doing their
business?
I mean, who was more--was there one that was better at
doing that than the other--at maybe making modifications to how
employees are handled, or modifications to security procedures?
If so, which one was seen to be more efficient?
Ms. Grover. You know, the approach to security procedure
should be exactly the same, because the SPP screeners are
required to follow the TSA's SOPs, use the same equipment, and
so on. The reason airports select SPP is because they often
believe that they have prospects for better customer service.
So we don't know very much about that. TSA has a test that
they use, called PACE, which looks at some aspects of customer
service, but I don't believe that there is a record of
complaints for SPP airports versus Federal airports that would
really illuminate that.
Mr. Katko. Now, if I understand the testimony correctly
from both of you, there is not a discernible difference,
really, in the performance of the SPP screeners versus the TSA
screeners. Is that basically correct?
Ms. Grover. That is correct.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now--and if that is the case, and we are
in this era of trying to save as much money as we can for the
Government, and trying to make Government agencies as efficient
as possible, do you--either one of you have an opinion based on
the cost estimates, which one is--would be more cost efficient
to use?
Ms. Dorgham--Ms. Grover, you can go first, please.
Ms. Grover. Well, in our report, we noted that, with an 11
percent difference at the time of contract award, that it
certainly raises questions about whether screening can be
operated at less expense with private screeners.
But that question has not been answered yet because it
would have to be monitored over the life of the contract.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Ms. Dorgham.
Ms. Dorgham. I agree with Ms. Grover's assessment. We would
have to wait for the life cycle of the contract to be over and
compare every year the--both the Federal and the private
screening cost to be able to come to a definite conclusion.
Because if we look at the sample under study, it was 13
airports out of the 21 that we currently have. So that is only
8.7 percent of the SPP airports, and it is 0.4 or 0.5 percent
of the overall TSA volume that we process.
So it is, statistically, a small sample. But it would help
if we allow the life cycle of the contract to conclude before
we make any other conclusions. So I am hesitant to say it is
more cost-efficient just because of the sample size.
Mr. Katko. So how long do you think it would take to get
for the life of the contract? How long are these contracts?
Ms. Dorgham. So, it is a 1-year base contract, and 4 option
years. Most of our contracts were awarded either last year or
the year before, so we would be looking at 4 years.
Mr. Katko. Is that accurate, Ms. Grover?
Ms. Grover. Well, with every year, you will have additional
information.
Mr. Katko. Correct. Correct. I am not sure we have to wait
5 years for that, but we do need a base sample, and we can't
get the base sample until we get the actual cost--correct cost
figures from TSA as to what the costs are for a TSA screener
versus an SPP screener.
Is that right?
Ms. Grover. Well, I would look at it a little differently.
I would look at it as two separate issues, because, on the one
hand, you want to have an understanding of the cost comparison,
but you already have what you need to begin looking at--
because, look, the contractors are bidding, actively bidding,
on these contracts with the cap at TSA's costs.
So that is a live concern already, and you already have
what you need to begin monitoring that right now.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Thank you. The Chair now recognizes Miss
Rice for questioning.
Miss Rice. But are you comparing apples to apples in that
scenario because it doesn't seem like you are?
Ms. Grover. So the contractors--so, right. It is a question
of what are the contractors willing to accept to do that work.
Then, you are right, if you wanted to understand what would be
the total cost to the Federal Government at those airports,
then you would need to have the total cost.
Yes, ma'am, that is correct.
Miss Rice. So we shouldn't sit here and act like these are
accurate apples-to-apples, oranges-to-oranges comparisons
because that really hinders us from getting to the heart of the
issue, in my opinion.
I would just like to talk about--comment on what Mr. Mica
was talking about in terms of, there needs to be a focus now on
intelligence. He said it three times--intelligence,
intelligence, intelligence.
I couldn't agree more. I think there was wide-spread
agreement across the aisle post-9/11 that we wanted the Federal
Government to be responsible for screening at our airports
given the tragedies of 9/11.
Unfortunately, for the TSA they were never empowered
appropriately, so they are not for instance seen as a law
enforcement agency and are not privy to a lot of the
intelligence that other law enforcement agencies within the
Federal Government are.
So I think that if you want to talk about privatization,
that is a great conversation to have. But I think that we
should look at the way that we have hamstrung the TSA from the
very beginning from its very inception, and really never
allowed it to do what we needed it to do, which is all the
explanation you need as to why the morale is so poor.
So I just need to have--stop politicizing this and say it
is either, you know, too much Government we have gotta
privatized this. The Federal Government, you know, if
everything has been happening over the last 2 weeks in the
world is any indication, we have to put more resources and a
higher premium on security of the homeland.
You know, talking about these numbers when you are not
talking apples-to-apples comparisons as a justification for
privatization is not really a conversation that, you know, is
appropriate. That is all. I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. Mr. Mica, you are recognized for a
few more moments of questioning, if you so choose.
Mr. Mica. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, if you could--this is 2013 July 1. The headline says
``Mica: TSA `Cooked the Books' To Inflate Screening Costs''--if
you could put this article in the record, I think it would be
appropriate at this juncture.
Mr. Katko. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted for the Record by Hon. Mica
Mica: TSA ``cooked the books'' to inflate screening costs
The Hill, http://thehill.com/blogs/floor-action/house/308775-mica-tsa-
cooked-the-books-to-inflate-screening-costs.
By Ramsey Cox, July 01, 2013, 07:02 p.m.
Mica's comments were a response to a report Monday from the
Department of Homeland Security's inspector general that Mica said
showed that the TSA's cost analysis for the Screening Partnership
Program (SPP) is ``flawed.''
Mica said the TSA incorrectly inflated the cost of private
screening operations, by more than $420,000 in one case.
``This is outrageous,'' Mica said. ``In this case, TSA's blatant
disregard for private-federal screening has unfairly resulted in a 7
percent increase in the cost of private screening operations compared
to federal screening.''
Mica said the security agency has also ``wasted'' taxpayer dollars
by over hiring. It has 66,000 employees, including 15,000
administrators and 51,000 screeners.
``This excessive TSA staffing at airports participating in the SPP
has resulted in duplicative costs that have still not been factored
into estimates,'' Mica said. ``It is unacceptable that taxpayer funds
are wasted on such unnecessary duplication of efforts.''
Mica, who serves on the House Transportation and Infrastructure
Committee, said he would continue to try and rein in the ``out-of-
control agency'' by attaining a true cost differential between the all-
federal and private-federal screening models.

Mr. Mica. Okay. Again this just goes on and on about
playing with these figures, but unfortunately, it requires a
huge number of personnel to operate TSA with an all Federal
force.
Thousands in Washington, tens of--10,000 out in the field.
What I would like to do is get TSA out of that business.
The private sector can screen and they do it well. They
perform even better, I am absolutely convinced on the covert
screening that I have seen and the reports I have had back. So
it costs less.
The other thing, too, is redirecting our resources. You
have got thousands of people here in Washington, right ma'am?
You have thousands of people here, we have got the reports.
You could--you can agree with me.
Ms. Dorgham. So I don't have the exact number, I
apologize----
Mr. Mica. How many are in your program? In the private
program?
Ms. Dorgham. Fourteen people including myself.
Mr. Mica. Fourteen people. That is a huge bureaucracy, but
you see how few it takes to operate that?
Even dragging your feet. Now, again, what I would like to
do is redirect those personnel and those dollars, connecting
the dots. TSA needs to be in the security business and
Government responsibility.
We are going to lose this effort if we continue to put the
money into a huge bureaucracy.
You still will screen under--Federal Government conduct the
audits, that the rules the regulations like you do.
Isn't that what you think you do now, you set everything,
right, for the private screeners?
Ms. Dorgham. So we--the goal of the----
Mr. Mica. You set the standards, right?
Ms. Dorgham. We do set the standards
Mr. Mica. The benefits and the pay and everything else as
set at one level. Isn't that right, Ms. Grover?
Ms. Grover. Yes, sir, TSA.
Mr. Mica. It is. No one is trying to do anything less, but
what you do is, you get rid of the bureaucracy. At Rochester
how--which is a private airport under Federal supervision--how
many personnel, TSA people do you have there?
I can tell you, at one time you had 18. Many of them making
between $80,000 and $100,000 to pack the books because you had
a private-screening operation.
I went to Canada and saw they had one Federal TSA
equivalent, an oversight position, which we should have at the
airport. But you pack the books, you pad the costs.
You have 80 at San Francisco. Some are needed on
international work and other work, which could also be assigned
to private screeners while you get in the security business.
Finding out who the hell poses a risk.
You don't even have your watch list and your other things
so that we can identify people totally coordinated.
Are you aware of that ma'am? I mean, you probably are, you
do run the SPP program.
Ms. Dorgham. So what I----
Mr. Mica. That is where the sources need to be or they will
get us. You need to be vetting your personnel. We have got
report after report, the ones that were just released, they are
not vetting their people. They hired people in my district that
my sheriff fired and they were hired as TSA people, and my
sheriff was appalled at what they were doing. Hiring people
that shouldn't be working at an airport.
Vetting airport workers. We are going to see what happened
in MetroJet, if that was an inside job. We have to--the people
who are working at our airports need to be closely vetted. That
is a Government responsibility.
But you need to get out of this Mickey Mouse business, let
someone else do the screening, set the standards, conduct the
audits, and then get in to the Government security business and
connect the dots.
I am sorry, you are probably doing the best you can with
the position you have. I don't mean to pick on you.
Thank you for your report and the update of their cooking
the books. This goes on and on and on, a year from now, 4 years
from now, but nobody wants to change it.
Thank you, I yield back Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Well, I think that there is a desire to change
it and that is why we are having his hearing today, and we are
going to be having a follow-up hearing in January with some
other people to come testify before the committee. Those being,
namely some from the private sector as well.
Is there anybody else? Any union representatives as well.
So we can hear from their side of the story, too.
But as I understand it now, we are really not too far apart
from getting what we need for points of comparison. That being
the--you know--the accurate cost estimates and we are going to
have those within 6 months when your next report is issued,
correct?
Ms. Dorgham. That is correct.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Then we are going to have at least within
a year at the latest, a pretty darn good idea of a 1-year cycle
on a contract of comparisons as well. So we are going to be
able to really use that time to really do our homework.
I asked Ms. Grover to do that, and Ms. Dorgham, as well.
You are not on opposite sides of the fence, perhaps you can
work together on this, and, you know, give an accurate think.
Because what we basically want to is have TSA be the best it
can be whatever iteration that is.
We can't do it unless we have the accurate comparisons we
need to do that. I--so I appreciate that, and I am not going to
tolerate any more delays in getting the accurate cost
estimates. So, yes.
Now, Ms. Jackson Lee came in.
We only get--they called votes, so we are going to have
about 5 minutes, but we can recognize you for 5 minutes of
testimony, if that is okay ma'am?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will give it a try--I am so sorry to
be--
Mr. Katko. Well, I know that you are a very hard worker, so
I have no problem with that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank the
Ranking Member as well. Let me say that I will try to be
pointed on the issue. I think this is an important issue, Mr.
Chairman.
But as you well know, we have experienced enormous tragedy
in Paris, France and part of the discussion, though, it was not
train-related is the idea of screening, whether it is dealing
with borders, dealing with transportation facilities.
So I am--just want to raise a question of concern, Mr.
Chairman, that may have been in another hearing, but I think it
is timely, and let me thank the witnesses for your presence
here.
I think it is timely with respect to the employees of
airports, which I understand, even now, I have chaired this
committee before that there is a different process. There was
not screening, there was badging. I would like to know, have we
moved to the system of having the employees to be able to go
through screening? Or are they able to enter an airport by way
of the apron tarmac ID being shown, and just immediately being
able to go on the tarmac and enter from the backside, which I
call the apron of the airport?
Ms. Dorgham. So I am not completely certain as to what we
are doing in that regard from an SPP contractual perspective,
all private screeners have to be vetted just like their Federal
counterparts. They go through watch list matching and criminal
background histories.
We also conduct recurrent screening for them. Additionally,
they are supposed to notify TSA immediately if there are any
summons to court, or if there are any arrests, or any
misconduct allegation and for the most part--the vendors have
been very good at keeping us informed in that regard. So, they
are vetted exactly like the Federal employees are vetted at the
airport.
Ms. Jackson Lee. But they are still vetted separately in a
different process or under a different operation than those at
the airports. That correct?
Ms. Dorgham. I----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Even though you say they are the same, but
they are still under a different process, meaning they screen
somewhere else. Use----
Ms. Dorgham. I am not familiar with the airport's vetting
process. From a TSA perspective, any contractor that is under
contract, any employee under contract with TSA receives the
same vetting as the Federal employees at that airport.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So, at that airport, they go through the
same exact screening?
Ms. Dorgham. Correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Okay. Am I able to get from, I think, Ms.
Grover, an answer to my question about the knowledge of what
you do with the individual worker that is coming through TSA
screening?
Are all workers screened regardless of where they might be
posted in the airport, or is there a limitation?
I am sensing that they are not all screened, so if I am
working on the backside--the apron of the airport, am I just
showing an ID and going through?
Now, I realize that you make the point that anyone working
at the airport is already vetted, and I raise this question on
two points. I raise this question clearly in the backdrop of
Paris. Again, I make it very clear that I know these were not
transit-related. These were large-venue-related, these were
people-related, this was a heinous tragedy.
But since we know that the mode of--transportation modes
are still the most attractive form of potential terrorism, as
my time runs out, do we have an understanding of what happens
on the backside of the airport?
Then let me just refer you to a situation in Atlanta, where
there was gun trafficking, and that is because workers were
able to come on with a badge and not go through TSA screening.
Can you comment on that, please?
Ms. Dorgham. So, ma'am, the----
Ms. Jackson Lee. No, I am asking--is this--I am asking the
wrong person--Ms. Grover, I am asking you.
Ms. Grover. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Ms. Grover. I do not believe that all airport workers are
screened at all checkpoints. I do know that TSA is making
changes this year to reduce the number of employee access
points, and to increase the frequency of random screening. But
with respect to your specific question about employees working
in the back parts of the airport----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right.
Ms. Grover. They would have limited access to certain areas
of the airport, and they wouldn't be able to access other areas
without getting specific permission or being escorted.
But beyond that, I would have to go back and do some
additional research for you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. No--okay, now, the Chairman has been kind,
let me finish on this and pursue this later, Mr. Chairman. What
I am saying that they can access the backside. I am not--I
shouldn't say I am not interested, but I am not directing my
questions to the point of whether or not they can be on the
backside and then get to a lunch counter somewhere.
I am interested in whether they are on the backside with
just showing their ID and coming on, because if they are just
showing their ID, they could have anything on their person that
could be a dangerous contributor to terrorism on the backside
of the airplane--I am sorry, the airport, which is where
airplanes are.
Mr. Katko. If I may add to that, we have had substantial
hearings on this very issue of employee access controls, and it
was the genesis of the Employee Access Control Act that passed
the House and is now sitting in the Senate, hopefully going to
pick up steam after what happened in Paris.
But the fact remains--it is an absolute fact that employees
get much less screening at airports than travelers do, and it
is an absolute fact that the vast majority of times,
employees--once they get inside with a badge--have access to
secure areas of airports without additional screening. That is
just a fact.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I will end on that note. Did you have any
response?
Ms. Dorgham. I would be happy to go back and get you that
information, but I do not have anything to add to the
conversation, because I am not really clear on what is being
done in that regard. Employee vetting is not under my purview,
but I would be happy to get back with an answer.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Ms. Grover, GAO.
Ms. Grover. No, ma'am. Nothing to add, thank you.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you,
and I would just make the point that the bill is making its way
through the Congress. I think we have a new sensitivity and
cause for urgency in light of what we are seeing and the
creativity of a new form of terrorism.
I say that it is scattered, it is unpredictable, which is
what terrorism is, but it causes us to push on every aspect of
security.
I thank you for allowing me to sit on this.
Mr. Katko. Well, I thank you for your hard work on Homeland
Security Committee. There is no doubt that you work hard and
you care. I couldn't possibly agree with you more. We are in a
different State.
As we are sitting here today, during this hearing, I just
got word of another--vehicle laden with bombs found outside a
soccer stadium in Germany 2 hours before the match.
So the terror continues, the terror is increasing, and it
is clear that we have to step up our game, and I agree with you
about the Employee Access Bill, not just because I wrote it,
but because it is--we have to plug that security gap. We have
to continue to be vigilant.
Homeland security is at the forefront of fighting the war
on terror, and whether we like it or not, we don't have the
luxury of time, and we need to move.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, I am glad to have a fellow traveler,
and this is a great committee, and I also want to say to the
witnesses, we look forward to working with the administration.
I know they are dedicated and committed to protecting the
American people.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, and I want to thank the witnesses. It
is not always pleasant having to testify and take the fire for
your agency, but, you know, that comes with the territory, and
you know that when you sign up. I have been on that end as a
prosecutor many a time, and I am on that end sometimes here.
But, it doesn't mean that we are in any way diminishing the
good work you do for your country, and we know you have the
best intentions at heart, so we thank you for your testimony.
I want to thank both witnesses for their testimony, and
Members of for their questions. The Members of the committee
may have some additional questions for the witnesses, and we
will ask you to respond to these in writing.
Persuant to committee rule VII(E), the hearing will be open
for 10 days. I will say, I hope that we can all get the
information we need in the next 6 months. We can put this issue
to rest, and to make an educated decision on which way to go,
if at all.
If there is anything else you would like to offer, please
do so in writing. We are going to have some additional
questions for you that we are going to submit to both of you.
Want to ask that you respond in a timely manner. Without
objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you both
very much.
[Whereupon, at 3:14 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Jennifer Grover
Question 1. Do we know whether TSA actually pays contractors less
than the amount that it would cost TSA to provide screening at an
airport?
Answer. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) does not
collect information that would allow it to determine if it is actually
paying contractors less than the amount that it would cost TSA to
provide screening services at an airport throughout the life of the
contract and its option years. As noted in our November 2015 report,
TSA limits its selection of contractors to those who propose costs less
than or equal to TSA's estimated costs to perform the same services.\1\
However, once it has awarded a contract, TSA does not continually
monitor the value of the contract relative to its estimated costs
throughout the contract period. TSA also does not update its estimated
costs to account for changes during the contract period that affect the
estimates. Over the contract period, the value of the contract may
increase or decrease due to modifications that address changes to the
work. For example, if an airport opens a new terminal, the contract
might be modified to accommodate the need to hire additional staff.
Some of these changes may also affect TSA's estimated costs for
performing the services provided in the contract. Continually
monitoring how contract values compare to TSA's estimated costs, and
ensuring the cost estimates are updated to correspond to major changes
in the program or contract, would provide TSA with more accurate
information about the relative costs of operating airports with Federal
and private screeners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ GAO, Screening Partnership Program: TSA Can Benefit from
Improved Cost Estimates, GAO-16-19 (Washington, DC: Nov. 16, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2. What are the strengths and limitations of TSA's method
for estimating its screening costs at an airport?
Answer. Based on an analysis of TSA's 2013 cost-estimating
practices and methodology compared to best practices, our November 2015
report concluded that TSA's cost estimates have some strengths, but
also have limitations in 4 general characteristics needed to reflect a
high-quality and reliable cost estimate.\2\ TSA's cost-estimating
practices reflect certain strengths, including a revised cost-
estimating methodology that provides sufficient details for TSA staff
to develop and document cost estimates. However, limitations in each of
the 4 characteristics of a high-quality cost estimate (comprehensive,
well-documented, accurate, and credible) prevent TSA's estimates from
being reliable. For example, TSA's cost estimates are not fully
comprehensive because they include only the costs incurred by TSA to
perform screening at an airport and not the total costs incurred by the
Federal Government such as retirement benefits and insurance. Further,
TSA's estimates are not regularly updated to reflect changes to the
program that could affect costs and do not include an analysis that
addresses the uncertainty inherent in cost estimates. A methodology
that is more closely aligned with best practices for cost estimation
can provide more reliable information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO-16-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 3. What's known about the relative performance of SPP and
Federal screeners?
Answer. In our December 2012 report, we analyzed screener
performance data for 4 measures and found that while there were
differences in performance between screeners at Screening Partnership
Program (SPP) and non-SPP airports, those differences could not be
exclusively attributed to the use of either Federal or private
screeners.\3\ We selected these measures primarily based on our review
of previous studies that compared screener performance of SPP and non-
SPP airports as well as on our interviews with aviation security
subject-matter experts, including TSA's Federal Security Directors, SPP
contractors, and airport and aviation industry stakeholders. We also
selected performance measures for which TSA has, for the most part,
consistently and systematically collected data from fiscal year 2009.
On the basis of our analyses, we found that, generally, certain SPP
airports performed slightly above the airport category and National
averages for some measures, while others performed slightly below. For
example, screeners at SPP airports performed above their respective
airport category averages for recertification pass rates in the
majority of instances, while the majority of SPP airports at which PACE
evaluations occurred in 2011 performed below their airport category
averages on their PACE evaluations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ GAO, Screening Partnership Program: TSA Should Issue More
Guidance to Airports and Monitor Private Versus Federal Screener
Performance, GAO-13-208 (Washington, DC: Dec. 6, 2012). The measures we
selected to compare screener performance at SPP and non-SPP airports
were TIP detection rates, recertification pass rates, Aviation Security
Assessment Program (ASAP) test results, and Presence, Advisement,
Communication, and Execution (PACE) evaluation results.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 4. Several years ago, GAO recommended that TSA provide
guidance to airport operators about applying to the SPP. Has TSA done
that?
Answer. TSA has provided guidance as well as examples of the type
of information TSA finds useful through its updated website. In
December 2012, we found that TSA had developed some resources to assist
applicants; however, it had not provided guidance on its application
and approval process to assist airports with applying to the
program.\4\ We then recommended that TSA develop guidance that clearly:
(1) States the criteria and process that TSA is using to assess whether
participation in the SPP would compromise security or detrimentally
affect the cost-efficiency or the effectiveness of the screening of
passengers or property at the airport; (2) states how TSA will obtain
and analyze cost information regarding screening cost-efficiency and
effectiveness and the implications of not responding to the related
application questions; and (3) provides specific examples of additional
information airports should consider providing to TSA to help assess an
airport's suitability for SPP. TSA updated its SPP website in December
2012 by providing: (1) General guidance to assist airports with
completing the SPP application and (2) a description of the criteria
and process the agency will use to assess airports' applications to
participate in the SPP. While the guidance states that TSA has no
specific expectations of the information an airport could provide that
may be pertinent to its application, it provides some examples of
information TSA has found useful and that airports could consider
providing to TSA to help assess their suitability for the program.
Further, the guidance, in combination with the description of the SPP
application evaluation process, outlines how TSA will analyze and use
cost information regarding screening cost efficiency and effectiveness.
Airports are also informed in the guidance that providing cost
information is optional and will not affect the application decision.
The actions the agency has taken in response to this recommendation
fully address the intent of the recommendation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ GAO-13-208.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 5. What are the strengths and limitations of TSA's method
for estimating its screening costs at an airport?
Answer. Please see the response to question 2.
Question 6a. Ms. Grover, during your investigation, did you have a
chance to evaluate the Montana West Airports?
Answer. As part of our November 2015 report, we reviewed TSA's cost
estimates and contracts from each of the 4 Western Montana airports.\5\
We also conducted on-site interviews with TSA officials, airport
executives, and contractor officials at 3 of the 4 airports.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ GAO-16-19.
\6\ We interviewed officials at Glacier Park International, Bozeman
Yellowstone International, and West Yellowstone airports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 6b. Is it true that the vendors who obtain these Screening
Partnership Program contracts actually rely on specific percentages of
TSOs remaining to work for the contractor?
Answer. When vendors are awarded SPP contracts, they are required
to first offer positions to qualified TSA-employed screeners--i.e.,
Transportation Screening Officers (TSO)--at the airport. According to
contractor officials we interviewed, there is an expectation that they
will retain some of the TSOs.
Question 6c. As you are likely aware, the contract to the vendor in
Montana, CSSI/Firstline, was terminated due to staffing issues. Are you
aware of any particular reasons that the TSOs declined to stay on with
the private vendor in Montana?
Answer. As noted in our 2015 report, according to TSA officials,
the contractor at the 4 Western Montana airports experienced a low
acceptance rate to its offer of employment to existing TSA
screeners.\7\ During the transition period, TSA offered its screeners
at these airports the ability to transfer to a non-SPP airport and a
$10,000 fixed relocation payment to facilitate the transfer. While TSA
and the contractor initially anticipated 90 percent of the TSA
screeners at the airports to accept employment offered by the
contractor at the transitioning airport, only 50 percent did so.
Contractor officials stated that they were unaware of the full extent
of transfer opportunities and relocation payments available to the
Federal screeners and attributed the lower acceptance of offers to
TSA's transfer option. As a result, the contractor had to hire
additional employees during the transition period which delayed the
completion of other necessary tasks. TSA provided personnel to assist
the contractor during the transition period to ensure screening
operations continued during the transition period. The contractor
providing screening services at the Western Montana airports told us
that it experienced a delay in obtaining the names and other human
resource information--such as background check information--from TSA on
the screeners that planned to accept its offer of employment. The
contractor stated that this delay affected the contractor's ability to
hire and train additional employees needed to provide screening
services at the airport.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ GAO-16-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 6d. Do we know whether TSA actually pays contractors less
than the amount that it would cost TSA to provide screening at an
airport?
Answer. Please see the response to question 1.
Question 7a. Ms. Grover, according to the GAO report, TSA's cost
estimates are, on average, 91 percent of the total Federal costs.
Although it is not 100 percent:
What is the composition of the percentage to the Federal Government
that is not associated with the sole costs to TSA?
Answer. As stated in our November 2015 report, for the 13 SPP
airports for which TSA provided official cost estimates, TSA's cost
estimates are, on average, 91 percent of the total Federal costs. Other
Federal costs are, on average, 9 percent of the total Federal costs.\8\
The composition of the estimated 9 percent at the 13 airports is:
Retirement Benefits, Pensions, and Insurance, 93 percent; General
Liability Insurance, 6.7 percent; Corporate Tax Adjustments, .3
percent.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ GAO-16-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 7b. Do you think the unmentioned 9 percent would alter the
cost estimates TSA uses for the procurement process?
Answer. If TSA were to include the estimates of non-TSA costs in
the cost-efficiency number it uses in the procurement process and
evaluate only those proposals that are less than or equal to the
Federal Government's total estimated costs (as opposed to only TSA's
costs), the amount that contractors could propose would increase up to
the amount of the non-TSA costs.
Question 8. Ms. Grover, as I understand it, the cost estimates that
TSA uses are simply a snapshot in time at the beginning of procurement,
when the life of these contracts is usually 5 years.
Because of this, are we truly able to do an apples-to-apples
comparison on costs, given that there are numerous factors that could
increase the amount of these contracts within that 5-year span?
Answer. Please see the response to question 1.
Questions From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Carolyn Dorgham
Question 1a. Ms. Dorgham, in your testimony you stated that TSA
concurs with all of the recommendations offered by GAO and has taken
steps to address them.
Could you please detail what steps TSA has taken specifically?
Question 1b. Please provide a time line for which the
recommendations will be completed.
Answer. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) provided a total
of 3 recommendations; the Transportation Security Administration (TSA)
is taking the following steps to address the recommendations:
Recommendation 1.--Ensure that the 2013 cost estimate methodology
used to compare screening costs at SPP and non-SPP airports is revised
to more fully conform to leading cost-estimating best practices.
TSA Actions.--Additional documentation on the source of some data
as well as its reliability and how it is normalized will be included in
the methodology and individual estimate documentation as necessary. A
sensitivity analysis and the risk and uncertainty analysis will now be
created for each estimate used for the TSA Cost Estimate (TCE) and cost
comparison. Lastly, GAO stated that imputed costs must be included for
cost comparisons in order for them to be fully comprehensive, and this
will be included in all cost comparisons. Estimated completion date is
March 2016.
Recommendation 2.--Provide cost comparisons that conform to leading
cost estimating best practices to Congress on a regular basis.
TSA Actions.--As GAO has recommended recalculating the TCE annually
for all SPP airports, TSA will provide the imputed cost comparisons to
the committee following completion in March 2016.
Recommendation 3.--Continually monitor how contract values compare
to TSA's estimated costs and, in doing so, update its cost estimates
when changes to the program or the contract may result in a major
change to contract values to ensure the comparison is current and
accurate.
TSA Actions.--TSA will now update the TCE on a recurring basis to
incorporate modifications to the contract or other changes to screening
procedures that may have affected the estimated or actual cost over the
course of the performance period. Estimated completion date is March
2016.
Question 2. Does TSA's cost comparison of SPP and Federal screeners
take into account use of the National Deployment Force?
Answer. Yes, for current Screening Partnership Program airports, an
assumption is made to the necessity of National Deployment Force (NDF)
deployments based on historical experience, seasonal passenger demands,
and location of airports. When calculating the costs for Federal
screening, the Transportation Security Administration's National
Deployment Office provides the actual costs for the NDF at that airport
in the last 3 years; these costs are averaged and are included in the
total cost of screening.
Question 3. In the past, TSA described plans for an electronic
system to collect and manage SPP data and SPP contractor activities.
What's the status of this system, and to what extent does TSA use it to
monitor SPP contracts?
Answer. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) uses an
on-line database to collect relevant Screening Partnership Program data
on a variety of areas including, but not limited to, coverage of
required screening positions, results of procedural and administrative
audits, daily incident reports, and other data demonstrating compliance
with operational metrics. The data is reviewed by the TSA Contracting
Officer's Representative and is discussed with TSA personnel at the
airport (i.e., Technical Monitor, Transportation Security Managers, and
Federal Security Director) and the contractors. This data is reviewed,
at a minimum, on a monthly basis to ensure compliance with contract
requirements.
Question 4. Ms. Dorgham, according to Ms. Grover's testimony, TSA
is changing how wage rate determinations are made for employees of SPP
contractors that perform screening service.
Could you please explain in detail this change?
Answer. As a matter of policy, the Transportation Security
Administration is now following the requirements of the Service
Contract Act and as such will be incorporating the Department of Labor
(DOL)-determined minimum wage requirements in all contracts for
screening services. To be compliant with the Service Contract Act,
contractors must pay employees no less than the DOL-established
prevailing wage rates, which are determined annually by the DOL.
Pursuant to the Aviation Transportation Security Act (ATSA), TSA also
requires SPP contractors to compensate their screeners at a rate no
less than the compensation of Federal screeners. TSA will be
responsible for any additional costs associated with the annual
increases in the DOL wage determinations that are greater than the
minimal compensation of screeners as required by ATSA. Given that the
DOL wage determinations were developed, in part, based on the ATSA
labor rates, TSA does not expect any additional labor costs to be
significant.
Question 5. Ms. Dorgham, during the GAO investigation it was found
that TSA's cost-estimating methodology is not fully comprehensive
because it does not include the costs to all Federal entities.
Specifically the cost estimates do not include retirement benefits and
insurance.
Can you explain why TSA does not include these factors in their
methodology, as well as how the lack of inclusion affects the
comparison made by the GAO?
Answer. As dictated by the Federal Aviation Administration
Modernization and Reform Act of 2012, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) is required to determine the cost efficiency of a
private screening contract proposal and only award such a contract if
it would not detrimentally effect cost efficiency. TSA includes all
costs directly attributed to screening operations, which include
indirect costs such as TSA fringe benefits, headquarters overhead,
airport administrative staff and supplies, hiring and recruitment
costs, information technology support and other cost items.
A cost factor excluded from this estimate is the imputed costs of
TSA's screening operations, which fall outside of TSA's annual
appropriations. For TSA's purposes these costs include 3 items: (1) The
unfunded portion of potential future retirement cost liabilities; (2)
corporate tax adjustment; and (3) consideration for general liability
insurance. When a contract is awarded, TSA realigns funds from
appropriate sources (such as the account that pays salaries and
benefits for Federal screeners) into the Screening Partnership Program.
If an estimate is built with costs not in TSA appropriations and a
contract is awarded at that cost ceiling, the agency would have to
reduce funding from another critical security program in order to fund
these other Government costs.
Question 6. Ms. Dorgham, in your testimony you stated that since
the Screening Partnership Program's inception, only 32 airports have
applied and currently 22 airports participate.
Given the category composition of these airports, do you think this
program is more beneficial to category 3 airports and below?
Answer. Per the Aviation and Transportation Security Act (ATSA),
airport authorities are given the authority to apply for the Screening
Partnership Program (SPP) and ``opt-out'' of Federally-provided
security screening services. Because participation in the SPP is a
voluntary decision by the airport authority, TSA remains neutral with
respect to the category of airports that opt-out as well as any
perceived benefits it may have.
Question 7. Ms. Dorgham, do you believe the size of the airports
used within the GAO study have an effect on the percentage of savings
found within the report?
Answer. The passenger throughput of Screening Partnership Program
(SPP) airports in the report represents a very small sample size
(approximately 0.4 percent) of the entire Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) passenger throughput in fiscal year 2015. Because
the sample of airports is so small, definitive conclusions on the
differences in cost between SPP and Federal airports cannot be
reasonably determined.
Question 8a. Ms. Dorgham, this year, we have seen instances in
which Secretary Johnson orders security directives to be taken out by
the Transportation Security Administration, such as those implemented
following the leaked passenger screening report.
Question 8b. When these directives are made, who implements them at
SPP airports?
Question 8c. Who incurs the costs of implementing these directives?
Answer. When directives are made, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) will issue a technical direction to the contractor
and modify the contract to include the directive. Each directive and
subsequent modification requires an analysis to determine if there is a
change in cost due to the increase/decrease in level of effort. In
cases where there is a change in cost, TSA will negotiate with each
contractor to determine the cost impact and make appropriate
modifications to increase or decrease the value of the contract. TSA
provides oversight at the airports to ensure the directives are being
implemented correctly and within the time frame as instructed by TSA.
Question 9a. Ms. Dorgham, recently four airports in Montana had
their contracts terminated due to decreasing staff levels, and as a
result TSA's National Deployment Force had to step in to provide
screening.
Can you walk us through the termination of this contract?
Answer. On August 11, 2015, the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) issued a ``Show Cause Letter'' to the contractor,
CSSI/First Line, due to 6 main issues observed since they assumed the
contract. These were: (1) Inadequate staffing levels at Bozeman
International Airport and Glacier Park International Airport; (2)
Failure to conduct mandatory maintenance on Government-Furnished
Equipment; (3) Standard Operating Procedures violations; (4) Not
meeting Acceptable Quality Levels; (5) Failure to maintain accurate
documentation; and (6) Failure to obtain a DD Form 254, which sets out
security requirements for contractor personnel.
TSA received CSSI/First Line's response to TSA's Show Cause Letter
on September 8, 2015. After careful review of the response, on
September 24, 2015, TSA determined it was non-responsive, and decided
to terminate the vendor's contract. On October 1, 2015, CSSI/FirstLine
was presented with the termination letter, and on October 2, 2015,
TSA's National Deployment Force (NDF) began screening operations at the
four Montana airports.
Question 9b. Who is responsible for paying for the National
Deployment Force?
Answer. TSA is reserving the right to hold the terminated
contractor liable for administrative costs associated with the
termination of the contract, including NDF and re-procurement costs.
Question 9c. If the contractor is responsible for the costs, are
considerations such as these included in TSA's cost estimate?
Answer. Yes, for current Screening Partnership Program airports, an
assumption is made to the necessity of NDF deployments based on
historical experience, seasonal passenger demands, and location of
airports. When calculating the costs for Federal screening, the
Transportation Security Administration's National Deployment Office
provides the actual costs for the NDF at that airport in the last 3
years; these costs are averaged and are included in the total cost to
screen.
Question 10. Ms. Dorgham, the recent GAO report has noted accuracy
as being one of TSA's limitations for the cost-estimate methodology;
specifically TSA does not update their estimates for things such more
staff for as a new terminal opening. TSA only provides point-in-time
cost estimates.
Please explain the reasoning for not updating the estimates.
Answer. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) Cost
Estimate (TCE), used to determine the cost efficiency of a contract
proposal at a point in time, will continue to represent TSA's 5-year
``bid'' for conducting screening operations, and be created when a
contract is re-competed or a new airport is applying to the Screening
Partnership Program (SPP). However, as a result of the GAO report, TSA
will now update the TCE on a recurring basis to incorporate
modifications to the contract or other changes to screening procedures
that may have affected the estimated or actual cost over the course of
the performance period. This will allow TSA to evaluate and track the
actual savings, if any, seen over the life of the contract.

[all]
