- INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVES ON THE PRESIDENT'S CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION-SHARING PRO- POSAL

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVES ON THE PRESIDENT'S
CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION-SHARING PRO-
POSAL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 4, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-7

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-578 PDF                   WASHINGTON : 2015

___________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi       Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Filemon Vela, Texas
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Curt Clawson, Florida                Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Katko, New York                 Norma J. Torres, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York              Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Loretta Sanchez, California
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi       Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Brett DeWitt, Subcommittee Staff Director
Dennis Terry, Subcommittee Clerk
Christopher Schepis, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Prepared Statement.............................................    14
The Honorable James R. Langevin, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Rhode Island:
Oral Statement.................................................    13

Witnesses

Mr. Matthew J. Eggers, Senior Director, National Security and
Emergency Preparedness, U.S. Chamber of Commerce:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Ms. Mary Ellen Callahan, Jenner & Block, Former Chief Privacy
Officer, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    26
Mr. Gregory T. Garcia, Executive Director, Financial Services
Sector Coordinating Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    30
Prepared Statement.............................................    32
Mr. Martin C. Libicki, The Rand Corporation:
Oral Statement.................................................    37
Prepared Statement.............................................    39

For the Record

The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Letter From the National Defense Industrial Association........     4
Letter From the American Bankers Association...................     5
Letter From the Retail Industry Leaders Association............     9
Statement of the Financial Services Information Sharing &
Analysis Center and the National Council of Information
Sharing and Analysis Centers.................................    10

INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVES ON THE PRESIDENT'S CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION-
SHARING PROPOSAL

----------

Wednesday, March 4, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Security Technologies,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:06 p.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Ratcliffe
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Clawson, and Langevin.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Security Technologies, will come to order.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
The subcommittee meets today to hear from key stakeholders,
including industry, privacy advocates in academia, on the
President's cybersecurity information-sharing proposal in
recent cyber initiatives.
Last week the full committee heard testimony from the
Department of Homeland Security's top cyber officials on the
growing cybersecurity threat and how this legislative proposal
could enhance protection of our digital networks and American's
most personal information.
Today we turn to the private sector and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses on what they think cyber threat-
sharing legislation should look like. For years, the private
sector has been on the front line battling devastating cyber
attacks from criminals, activists in nation-states such as
Iran, China, Russia, and North Korea. Any cyber threat-sharing
legislation produced by Congress should enhance existing
capabilities and relationships while establishing procedures to
safeguard personal privacy.
Protecting privacy and the integrity of information is what
compels us to act. The recent cyber breach of health insurance
giant Anthem exposed the personal information of up to 80
million Americans, approximately 1 in every 4 Americans,
demonstrating that the quantity and sophistication of these
attacks is only increasing.
Just last week the director of national intelligence, James
Clapper, underscored this fact, stating that cyber attacks
against us are increasing in frequency, scale, sophistication,
and severity of impact and that the methods of attack and the
systems targeted and the victims are also expanding in
diversity and intensity on a daily basis.
He emphasized that privacy and the integrity of information
are indeed at risk, stating that, ``In the future, we will
probably see cyber operations that change or manipulate
electronic information to compromise its integrity instead of
simply deleting or disrupting access to it.''
Director Clapper also revealed that, in 2014, America saw
for the first time destructive cyber attacks carried out on
U.S. soil by nation-state entities when he confirmed that Iran
was behind the cyber attack against the Las Vegas Sands
Corporation, which is owned by a vocal supporter of Israel.
These breaches are now becoming the norm with attacks on Sony
Pictures, Target, Home Depot, JPMorgan, and others as evidence
of that fact.
FBI director Jim Comey recently stated, ``There are two
kinds of big companies in the United States, those who have
been hacked by the Chinese and those who don't know they have
been hacked by the Chinese.''
Further, these attacks are not just affecting the largest
businesses in financial institutions, but small and medium ones
as well. Accordingly, we need to pass legislation that
facilitates the sharing of cyber threat indicators and contains
robust privacy protections to improve collaboration between
Federal civilian agencies, like the DHS, and the private
sector.
The Department of Homeland Security's National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center, or NCCIC,
has been at the forefront of working with the private sector to
facilitate cyber threat sharing between the Government and the
private sector. NCCIC is a civilian cyber operations center
with an embedded statutorily-required privacy office.
In fact, both industry and privacy advocates support NCCIC,
which was codified into law last year in bipartisan legislation
produced by this committee. NCCIC has been the lead civilian
portal for cyber threat sharing between the private sector and
the Government, and it is important that NCCIC and other
civilian portals be the focus of any cyber threat-sharing
legislation.
Today many companies still choose not to share cyber threat
indicators with one another or with NCCIC because they fear
legal liability. Information about an attack experienced by one
company can enable another to fortify its defenses. Yet, when
the sharing does not occur, it leaves all of us more vulnerable
because the same criminals can use the same tactics to target
other companies, exposing even more Americans to having their
private information compromised.
Past legislative attempts to improve cyber threat sharing
between the private sector and Government and private sector-
to-private sector have failed in large part because they could
not balance privacy protections with the need for industry to
share cyber threat indicators. This Congress I look forward to
working with Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and
Ranking Member Richmond to craft thoughtful cybersecurity
legislation that achieves this balance.
I look forward to hearing from each of the witnesses in
their respective fields about the opinions on how best this
committee should move forward on drafting legislation to
address these issues and what perspectives each of you have on
the President's recent legislative proposal and cyber
initiatives.
Every generation faces monumental moments where its
tenacity to overcome the challenges of our time are tested. Now
is our time, as we move deeper into the digital age, to ensure
that the cybersecurity challenges we face today are met with
the same resolve shown by previous generations of Americans.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying before this
committee, and I look forward to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
February 4, 2015
The subcommittee meets today to hear from key stakeholders
including industry, privacy advocates, and academia on the President's
cybersecurity information sharing proposal and recent cyber
initiatives. Last week, the full committee heard testimony from the
Department of Homeland Security's top cyber officials on the growing
cybersecurity threat and how this legislative proposal could enhance
protection of our digital networks and Americans' most personal
information. Today, we turn to the private sector and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses on what they think cyber threat-sharing
legislation should look like.
For years, the private sector has been on the front lines battling
devastating cyber attacks from criminals, hacktivists, and nation-
states such as Iran, China, Russia, and North Korea. Any cyber threat-
sharing legislation produced by Congress should enhance existing
capabilities and relationships while establishing procedures to
safeguard personal privacy.
Protecting privacy and the integrity of information is what compels
us to act. The recent cyber breach of health insurance giant Anthem
exposed the personal information of up to 80 million individuals--
approximately 1 in 4 Americans--demonstrating that the quantity and
sophistication of these attacks are only increasing. Just last week,
Director of National Intelligence, James Clapper underscored this fact,
stating that ``[cyber] attacks against us are increasing in frequency,
scale, sophistication and severity of impact'' and ``the methods of
attack, the systems targeted, and the victims are also expanding in
diversity and intensity on a daily basis.'' He emphasized that privacy
and the integrity of information are indeed at risk, stating, ``in the
future, we'll probably see cyber operations that change or manipulate
electronic information to compromise its integrity instead of simply
deleting or disrupting access to it.''
Director Clapper also revealed that in 2014, America ``saw, for the
first time, destructive cyber attacks carried out on U.S. soil by
nation-state entities,'' confirming that Iran was behind a cyber attack
against the Las Vegas Sands Corp., which is owned by a vocal supporter
of Israel.
These breaches are becoming the norm, with attacks on Sony
Pictures, Target, Home Depot, JP Morgan, and many others. FBI Director
James Comey stated, ``There are two kinds of big companies in the
United States. There are those who've been hacked by the Chinese and
those who don't know they've been hacked by the Chinese.'' Further,
these attacks are not just affecting the largest businesses and
financial institutions, but small and medium ones as well. As such, we
need to pass legislation that facilitates the sharing of cyber threat
indicators and contains robust privacy protections to improve
collaboration between Federal civilian agencies like DHS and the
private sector.
The Department of Homeland Security's National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center, or NCCIC, has been at the forefront
working with the private sector to facilitate cyber threat sharing
between the Government and the private sector. NCCIC is a civilian
cyber operations center with an embedded statutorily-required privacy
office. In fact, both industry and privacy advocates support NCCIC,
which was codified into law last year in bipartisan legislation
produced by this committee.
NCCIC has been the lead civilian portal for cyber threat sharing
between the private sector and the Government and it is important that
NCCIC and other civilian portals be the focus of any cyber threat-
sharing legislation.
Today, many companies still choose not to share cyber threat
indicators with one another or NCCIC because they fear legal liability.
Information about an attack experienced by one can enable another to
fortify its defenses. Yet when this sharing does not occur, it leaves
all of us more vulnerable because the same criminals can use the same
tactics to target other companies, exposing even more Americans to
having their private information compromised.
Past legislative attempts to improve cyber threat sharing between
the private sector and Government, and private sector-to-private
sector, have failed in large part because they could not balance
privacy protections with the need for industry to share cyber threat
indicators. This Congress, I look forward to working with Chairman
McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and Ranking Member Richmond to craft
thoughtful cybersecurity legislation that achieves this balance.
I look forward to hearing from each of the witnesses in their
respective fields about their opinions on how best this committee
should move forward on drafting legislation to address these issues and
what perspectives each of you have on the President's recent
legislative proposal and cyber initiatives.
Every generation faces monumental moments where their tenacity to
overcome the challenges of the time are tested. Now is our time, as we
move deeper into the digital age, to ensure that the cybersecurity
challenges we face today are met with the same resolve shown by
previous generations of Americans.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying before this committee
and I look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Next I will ask for unanimous consent to
insert into the record the letters received by the committee
from the following organizations: National Defense Industrial
Association, American Bankers Association, Retail Industry
Leaders Association, and the Financial Services Information
Sharing and Analysis Center. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Letter From the National Defense Industrial Association
March 3, 2015.
The Honorable Michael McCaul,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security, U.S. House of
Representatives.

Dear Chairman McCaul and Ranking Member Thompson: The National Defense
Industrial Association (NDIA) is a non-partisan, non-profit,
association with more than 1,600 corporate members and approximately
90,000 individual members. On March 4, 2015, your committee will hold a
hearing titled ``Industry Perspectives on the President's Cybersecurity
Information-Sharing Proposal.'' NDIA has received pertinent comments
from its membership concerning the President's proposal which I have
enclosed with this letter. Below is a synopsis of those comments to
inform your committee hearing.
The President's Cybersecurity Information-Sharing Proposal
sometimes uses vague language that makes the legislation subject to the
reader's interpretation. For example, section 103(c)(2) of the proposal
states that a private entity receiving cyber threat indicators shall
take ``reasonable efforts'' to protect the privacy of specific
individuals and to ``safeguard'' information on specific persons.
Section 103(c)(3) of the same proposal also uses the term
``reasonable.'' However, the proposal does not define what is
``reasonable,'' or what is adequate ``safeguarding.'' These undefined
terms leave the door open for an enforcing agency or court to step in
and provide definitions at their discretion, Instead, NDIA proposes
that any legislation define what is ``reasonable'' or where such a
definition can be obtained, such as in an industry or Government
standard. To that end, we recommend that the work done by the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) expand to include these
definitions.
The President's proposal also contemplates the creation of
Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) for the sharing
of information by private industry. The role of ISAOs is further
explained by Executive Order 13691, ``Promoting Private Sector
Cybersecurity Information Sharing.'' Nothing appears to preclude
existing Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) from becoming
ISAOs, although it is understood that ISAOs encompass a broader need-
specific range of activities. The legislative proposal should explain
the role of ISACs in the new scheme and positively allow or disallow
ISACs from becoming ISAOs. The legislative proposal should also explain
the role of other information sharing efforts, such as the Defense
Security Information Exchange (DSIE). The new legislation should not
bring past successful efforts to a premature end.
Missing from the creation of ISAOs is an explanation of how the
``stovepiping effect'' prevalent among the ISACs and in other cyber
sharing efforts can be eliminated. NIST is working hard to arrive at
generally accepted standards for a ``cybersecurity framework.'' Their
work should be emulated by having the legislation make clear that the
government's role is to learn from industry standards and to conform
itself to industry standards rather than the other way around. For
example, ``best practices'' should be specifically recognized as
evolving, and industry should have a mechanism to appeal previously
determined ``best practices.'' Also, important missing language in the
proposed legislation's concept of ``information sharing'' is that the
information sharing should be secure. Otherwise, the value of
information sharing is negated.
The proposed legislation's liability protections should include an
explicit extension of the Support Anti-Terrorism by Fostering Effective
Technologies (SAFETY) Act. Your Committee previously introduced a bill
that extended such liability protection, and a similar protection
should be included in this legislation. The legislation should include
anti-trust protection for entities that share information. A specific
concern within the defense industrial base is that existing regulations
already require breach notification and mandatory information sharing.
Therefore, the proposed legislation needs to provide, in instances
where the government requires the sharing or disclosure of information,
extended liability protection to companies that are affected.
Thank you for your attention to this letter. NDJA looks forward to
working with your Committee on this and other important matters
impacting industry. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have
any questions or need any further comments.
Sincerely,
Jimmy Thomas,
Director of Legislative Policy.
______

Letter From the American Bankers Association
March 3, 2015.
The Honorable John Ratcliffe,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Security Technologies, Committee on Homeland Security, United
States House of Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Security Technologies, Committee on Homeland
Security, United States House of Representatives, Washington,
DC 20515.

Dear Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member Richmond: On behalf of the
members of the American Bankers Association (ABA), I respectfully
request this letter be included as part of the record for your hearing
``Industry Perspectives on the President's Cybersecurity Information-
Sharing Proposal.''
Recent cyber-attacks underscore the need to help all businesses
improve their awareness of threats and enhance their response
capabilities. The steps taken by the Administration, through the
issuance of the February 13, 2015 executive order promoting private
sector Cybersecurity information sharing, will help the business
community and government agencies share critical threat information
more effectively.
While the recent executive order is an important step towards more
effective information sharing, it is widely recognized that Congress
must also act to pass legislation to fill important gaps that executive
action cannot fill. For instance, legislation is necessary to give
businesses legal certainty that they have safe harbor against frivolous
lawsuits when voluntarily sharing and receiving threat indicators and
countermeasures in real time and taking actions to mitigate cyber
attacks.
Legislation also needs to offer protections related to public
disclosure, regulatory, and antitrust matters in order to increase the
timely exchange of information among public and private entities. ABA
also believes that legislation needs to safeguard privacy and civil
liberties and establish appropriate roles for civilian and intelligence
agencies. The financial sector is dedicated to protecting customer
data, and has led the way for effective information sharing through the
development of the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis
Center (FS-ISAC). We are committed to working with others within the
overall business community to develop a similarly strong and effective
mechanism for sharing threat information.
We share the views of the Financial Services Sector Coordinating
Council (FSSCC) and the testimony that will be given by Mr. Greg
Garcia. However, we would like to highlight two important areas within
the executive order: The acceleration of the DHS security clearance
process and the establishment of Information Sharing and Analysis
Organizations (ISAOs).
Information sharing is of critical importance to the financial
services sector, other critical infrastructure sectors and the
government. Without it, none of the financial sector's security and
resiliency priorities would be achievable. With key federal support
from the Treasury Department as our Sector Specific Agency, law
enforcement and DHS, our network defenders are better able to prepare
for cyber threats when there is a consistent, reliable and sustainable
flow of actionable Cybersecurity information and analysis, at both a
classified and unclassified level.
As a nation, we are making some progress toward this goal, but it
has become increasingly necessary for appropriately-cleared
representatives of critical sectors such as financial services to have
access, and provide contributions, to classified information that
enables analysts and operators to take timely action to defend
essential systems. Accordingly, the executive order's enhancement of
DHS's role in accelerating the security clearance process for critical
sector owners and operators is a clear indication of the
Administration's support for this public-private partnership.
The ISAC's have played an important role for critical
infrastructure protection information sharing and incident response for
their sectors. The FS-ISAC, in particular, enjoys strong support from
sector members, Treasury and DHS. In this spirit, we also support the
creation of ISAOs as a mechanism for all sectors, regions and other
stakeholder groups to share Cybersecurity information and coordinate
analysis and response. While ISACs must retain their status as the
government's primary critical infrastructure partners, given their
mandate for broad sectorial representation, the development of ISAOs
should be facilitated for stakeholder groups that require a
collaborative cyber and physical threat information sharing capability
that builds on the strong foundation laid by the ISACs.
As the ISAO standards development process unfolds, certain
principles must be upheld for structuring both the ISAOs themselves and
the government's interaction with them:

Sharing of sensitive security information within and among
communities of trust is successful when operational standards
of practice establish clear and enforced information handling
rules;

Information sharing is not a competitive sport: while
competition in innovation can improve technical capabilities,
operational standards should incentivize federated information
sharing. Threat and vulnerability intelligence needs to be
fused across trust communities, not diffused or siloed;

Government internal processes for collecting, analyzing and
packaging critical infrastructure protection intelligence for
ISAC/ISAO consumption must be streamlined and transparent to
maximize timeliness, accuracy and relevance of actionable
shared information; and

To manage scarce resources, government information sharing
mechanisms such as the National Cyber and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC) and the Treasury Department's Cyber
Intelligence Group (CIG) should prioritize engagements with
ISACs and ISAOs according to transparently established
criteria.
It is also important that the process to develop the ISAO standards
is collaborative, open, and transparent. The process managed by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) during the
development of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework is an excellent example
of the appropriate leveraging of private sector input, knowledge and
experience to develop guidance that will primarily impact non-
governmental entities. We encourage DHS, as the implementing authority
of the president's EO, to emulate the engagement model that NIST used
to create and adopt their Cybersecurity Framework. The process worked.
Finally, for DHS to be successful implementing the EO and its many
cyber security risk management and partnership authorities, it must be
sufficiently resourced with the best analytical and technical
capabilities, with a cadre of highly qualified Cybersecurity leaders
and analytical teams to conduct its mission. There must be a concerted
effort to recruit, retain and maintain a world class workforce that is
able to assess cyber threats globally and help the private sector
reduce risk to this nation. With the application of the principles
discussed in this statement, we believe the creation of ISAOs and their
partnership agreements with DHS have the potential to complement the
ISAC foundation and measurably improve cyber risk reduction for
critical infrastructure and the national economy.
We look forward to working with Congress, the Administration and
DHS to leverage the FS-ISAC as a successful model in the development of
regional information sharing and analysis organizations. Above all, we
urge Congress to send a bill to the president that gives businesses the
liability and antitrust protections, and our citizens the privacy and
civil liberty protections that will enhance our already significant
efforts to protect the Cybersecurity of our nation.
Although it was not the focal point of the hearing, we understand
that an issue may be raised about whether or not requiring PINs on
transactions would be a more effective way to prevent harm to
consumers. There are some very positive features of PIN transactions,
but the fact is that the recent data breaches show the limitations of
PINs as a security feature. The recent breaches demonstrate the danger
of PINs with debit cards that are directly linked to a person's bank
account (e.g., through an ATM). It is possible that if a PIN is stolen
from a retailer's system, a criminal could access the customer's entire
account and commit fraud.
Security reporter Brian Krebs wrote that there are recent examples,
such as with the recent Home Depot breach, of thieves acquiring PINs,
changing them, and withdrawing cash from customers' accounts.\1\ The
data also shows that hackers increasingly target PINs. A report by the
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta published in 2012 found that PIN debit
fraud rates have increased more than threefold since 2004.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://krebsonsecurity.com/2014/09/in-wake-of-confirmed-breach-
at-home-depot-banks-see-spike-in-pin-debit-card-fraud/.
\2\ Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2012) http://bit.ly/16RAPGW.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The security threat we face now is a complex problem that cannot be
solved by any single technology, standard, mandate or regulation. In
fact, it cannot be solved by a single sector of society--businesses,
standards-setting bodies, policymakers, and law enforcement--must work
together to protect the financial and privacy interests of consumers.
The attached white paper ``Preventing Data Breaches: Smart Security in
a Changing Threat Landscape'' which was prepared by the ABA, goes into
this issue in greater detail. It makes it clear that winning the war
against criminal hackers will take a forward-looking approach and the
best technologies. No single security feature is fail-proof and
including a technology mandate in data breach legislation will only
provide a false sense of security and not real protection for
consumers.
Sincerely,
James C. Ballentine
Attachment.--Preventing Data Breaches: Smart Security in a Changing
Threat Landscape
dynamic cybersecurity for the future
Recent high-profile data breaches at retailers like Target and Home
Depot underscore the critical need for stronger and more innovative
security solutions that protect consumers.
Dynamic solutions, not rigid one-size-fits-all mandates. Mandates
stifle innovation in the private sector and hinder the ability to adapt
and react to evolving threats. While the federal government may believe
technology mandates are a way to ensure a level of security, the
private sector--and more importantly, consumers--will be saddled with
static technology that ultimately makes them vulnerable.
Investing in security. Banks and payment networks continue to
invest heavily in the development and implementation of promising new
technologies capable of protecting consumers everywhere purchases are
made.
A common enemy. Both banks and retailers have a role to play in
fighting criminal hackers who will never stop looking for new ways to
steal consumers' data.
chip technology: why it works
Debit and credit cards with EMV (Europay MasterCard Visa) or
``chip'' technology have a microprocessor that protects your personal
information through encryption--a process that scrambles personal and
financial data to make it virtually useless to criminals. Whether the
consumer signs for a purchase or enters a PIN, it is the chip
technology that enables a more secure payment. Chip technology cards
are:
More secure than magnetic stripe cards, because the chip generates
unique data for each transaction. If that information is stolen, it
won't be traceable back to the account.
Nearly impossible to replicate, thanks to the chip's ability to
create a new, random number for each transaction.
Coming to a checkout terminal near you. Banks are already issuing
chip cards, with 120 million cards expected to be in the hands of U.S.
consumers by the end of 2014, and 575 million cards issued by the end
of 2015. Javelin Strategy and Research estimates only 10 percent of
merchants currently have terminals that accept EMV chips. By October
2015, banks must issue cards with chip capability and retailers must
have terminals to accept them or they will be liable for fraudulent
purchases made on the card.
it's the chip that matters
For cards with EMV chip technology, it's the chip that makes the
card more secure.
A mandate, such as one requiring chip-enabled cards or PINs, does
not prevent on-line or mobile fraud. Americans spent $263 billion on-
line last year (most often without a PIN) and that dollar number is
expected to grow to $414 billion by 2018. Less than 30 percent of
merchants in the U.S.--both on-line and traditional storefronts--are
currently equipped to accept a PIN: And some merchants prefer not to.
As mobile technologies emerge, device passcodes and thumbprints are
being introduced to benefit the consumer. Security should be dynamic,
useful and address the realities of an increasingly digital economy,
not be mandated to a single method.
A mandate could not have prevented the massive data breaches at
Target, caused by hackers using malware to steal credentials through
the company's heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC)
contractor. It also would not have prevented breaches at Home Depot,
and Neiman Marcus, caused by malware installed in checkout terminals.
However, chip cards would have reduced the value of the compromised
data by inhibiting the creation of counterfeit cards.
Criminals will always seek the weakest link. No single security
feature is fail-proof. Creating a mandate around one static technology
gives hackers an open invitation to exploit loopholes in the payments
system.
No technology is fail-proof. Magnetic stripes have become more
vulnerable over the years as criminals have found ways to skim the data
stored in the stripe and replicate it to make fraudulent purchases.
PINs have their own flaws. A report by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta published in 2012 found that PIN debit fraud rates have
increased more than threefold since 2004. When a PIN is compromised, it
can open a backdoor for criminals to access and drain consumers' bank
accounts at an ATM.
beyond plastic: better security, wherever purchases are made
EMV chip technology will help protect customers at the register,
but it's not a silver bullet. Expecting a single technology to
successfully prevent all fraud is unrealistic, which is why banks and
payment networks are implementing new technologies that can adapt and
deploy in a changing threat landscape:
End-to-end encryption is helping make payments more secure, by
encoding consumers' information into unreadable formats as it makes its
way from checkout to card network to the bank and back.
Tokenization technology replaces sensitive consumer account
information at the cash register or on-line with a random ``token,''
rendering the information useless to criminals. This technology is an
important feature for some mobile wallets, such as Apple Pay, and can
be used on-line.
24/7 fraud protection is already a hallmark of banks, which employ
teams of experts using advanced computer systems to monitor
transactions and detect unusual activity indicating a customer's
account has been hacked.
the bottom line: fewer mandates, more collaboration
Mandates hurt consumers because they funnel valuable time and
resources into static technologies that will become obsolete as cyber
threats change.
A mandate could drive up the cost of doing business without
addressing the fundamental cause of most future data breaches--
inconsistent and outdated security practices within the retailers,
which was the source of recent high-profile breaches at Target, Home
Depot, and others.
The security threat facing the payment card industry is a complex
problem that cannot be solved by any single technology, standard,
mandate, or regulation. It cannot be solved by a single sector of
society--businesses, standards-setting bodies, policymakers, and law
enforcement--must work together to protect the financial and privacy
interests of consumers.
To borrow a concept from Moore's Law of Innovation, every new
technology is obsolete within 18 months. Data security technologies are
no exception. Winning the war against cybercrime will take a forward-
looking approach to preventing data breaches anywhere they occur--at
the register, with a mobile phone or on-line. Money and resources
should flow to the best technologies to fight these cyber attacks.
Focusing on just one technology gives a false sense of security at a
cost that everyone bears.
______

Letter From the Retail Industry Leaders Association
February 25, 2015.
The Honorable Michael McCaul,
Chairman, House Committee on Homeland Security, United States House of
Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.
The Honorable Bennie Thompson,
Ranking Member, House Committee on Homeland Security, United States
House of Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.

Dear Chairman McCaul and Ranking Member Thompson: On behalf of the
Retail Industry Leaders Association (RILA), I write to thank you for
holding today's hearing entitled, ``Examining the President's
Cybersecurity Information-Sharing Proposal.'' Retailers greatly
appreciate the Committee's leadership in seeking to find a sensible
path to address critical cybersecurity issues.
RILA is the trade association of the world's largest and most
innovative retail companies. RILA members include more than 200
retailers, product manufacturers, and service suppliers, which together
are responsible for more than $1.5 trillion in annual sales, millions
of American jobs and more than 100,000 stores, manufacturing facilities
and distribution centers domestically and abroad.
Retailers embrace innovative technology to provide American
consumers with unparalleled services and products on-line, through
mobile applications, and in our stores. While technology presents great
opportunity, nation states, criminal organizations, and other bad
actors also are using it to attack businesses, institutions, and
governments. As we have seen, no organization is immune from attacks
and no security system is invulnerable. Retailers understand that
defense against cyber attacks must be an on-going effort, evolving to
address the changing nature of the threat. RILA is committed to working
with Congress to give government and retailers the tools necessary to
thwart this unprecedented attack on the United States (U.S.) economy
and bring the fight to cyber criminals around the globe.
As leaders in the retail community, we are taking new and
significant steps to enhance cybersecurity throughout the industry. To
that end, RILA formed the Retail Cyber Intelligence Sharing Center (R-
CISC), one component of which is a Retail ISAC, in 2014 in partnership
with America's most recognized retailers. The Center has opened a
steady flow of information sharing between retailers, law enforcement
and other relevant stakeholders. These efforts already have helped
prevent data breaches, protected millions of American customers and
saved retailers millions of dollars. The R-CISC is open to all
retailers regardless of their membership in RILA.
For years, RILA members have been developing and deploying new
technologies to achieve pioneering levels of security and service. The
cyber-attacks that our industry faces change every day and our members
are building layered and resilient systems to meet these threats. Key
to this effort is the ability to design systems to meet actual threats
rather than potentially outdated cybersecurity standards that may be
enshrined in law. That is why development of any technical
cybersecurity standards, beyond a mandate for reasonable security, must
be voluntary and industry-led such as the standards embodied in the
National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework.
RILA members using the Framework have found it to be a helpful tool in
evaluating their cybersecurity posture and support the continued use of
voluntary, industry-led processes as a key method of addressing dynamic
technology challenges.
One area of cybersecurity that needs immediate attention is payment
card technology. RILA members have long supported the adoption of
stronger debit and credit card security protections. The woefully
outdated magnetic stripe technology used on cards today is the chief
vulnerability in the payments ecosystem. This 1960s-era technology
allows cyber criminals to create counterfeit cards and commit fraud
with ease. Retailers continue to press banks and card networks to
provide U.S. consumers with the same Chip and PIN technology that has
proven to dramatically reduce fraud when it has been deployed elsewhere
around the world. According to the Federal Reserve, PINs on debit cards
make them 700 percent more secure than transactions authorized by
signature.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Federal Reserve, ``2011 Interchange Fee Revenue, Covers Issuer
Costs, and Covered Issuer and Merchant Fraud Losses Related to Debit
Card Transactions,'' (March 5, 2013).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Increasing cyber threat information sharing is also vital to
defeating sophisticated and coordinated cyber actors. RILA strongly
supports cybersecurity information sharing legislation that provides
liability protections for participating organizations. That liability
protection should protect companies that share with appropriate federal
law enforcement partners like the Secret Service and the FBI to help
bring cybercriminals to justice. Legislation also should increase
funding for government-sponsored research into next generation security
controls and enhance law enforcement capabilities to investigate and
prosecute criminals internationally. The cyber-attacks faced by every
sector of our economy constitute a grave national security threat that
should be addressed from all angles.
RILA thanks the Committee for holding this important hearing
examining cyber information sharing legislation and cybersecurity more
broadly. We look forward to working with you on these vital issues.
Should you have any additional questions regarding this matter, please
feel free to contact Nicholas Ahrens, Vice President, Privacy and
Cybersecurity.
Sincerely,
Jennifer M. Safavian,
Executive Vice President, Government Affairs.
______

Statement of the Financial Services Information Sharing & Analysis
Center and the National Council of Information Sharing and Analysis
Centers
March 4, 2015
fs-isac background
Chairman Ratcliffe and Members of the subcommittee, my name is
Denise Anderson. I am vice president, FS-ISAC, government and cross
sector programs at the Financial Services Information Sharing &
Analysis Center (FS-ISAC) and chair of the National Council of ISACs
(NCI). I want to thank you for this opportunity to address the
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection and Security Technologies
Subcommittee about the industry perspective on ``Cybersecurity and
Information Sharing''. I am submitting this testimony for the record as
I am on travel and regret my inability to take part in this proceeding.
The FS-ISAC was formed in 1999 in response to the 1998 Presidential
Decision Directive 63 (PDD 63), which called for the public and private
sectors to work together to address cyber threats to the Nation's
critical infrastructures. After 9/11, in response to Homeland Security
Presidential Directive 7 (its 2013 successor, Presidential Policy
Directive 21) and the Homeland Security Act, the FS-ISAC expanded its
role to encompass physical threats to the sector.
The FS-ISAC is a 501(c)6 nonprofit organization and is funded
entirely by its member firms and sponsors. In 2004, there were only 68
members of the FS-ISAC, mostly larger financial services firms. Since
that time the membership has expanded to almost 5,500 organizations
including commercial banks and credit unions of all sizes, markets and
equities firms, brokerage firms, insurance companies, payments
processors, and 24 trade associations representing virtually all of the
U.S. financial services sector. The FS-ISAC is a global organization
and has members in 38 different countries.
NCI Background
The NCI is a voluntary organization of ISACs formed in 2003 in
recognition of the need for the ISACs to share information with each
other about common threats and issues. The mission of the NCI is to
advance the physical and cyber security of the critical infrastructure
of North America by establishing and maintaining a framework for
valuable interaction among and between the ISACs and with Government.
The membership of the NCI is the 18 individual ISACs that represent
their respective sectors or sub-sectors. The NCI also works closely
with the other critical infrastructure sectors (CI) that have
operational arms including chemical, (reforming its ISAC) automotive
(currently forming an ISAC) and critical manufacturing, among others.
The NCI has made it a goal to be inclusive of each critical
infrastructure sector and sub-sector's operational arm.
The ISACs collaborate with each other daily through the NCI daily
operations centers cyber call, the NCI secure portal and the NCI
listserver. The NCI also hosts a weekly operations centers physical
call and meets monthly to discuss issues and threats. The organization
is a true cross-sector partnership engaged in sharing cyber and
physical threats, mitigation strategies and working together and with
government partners during incidents requiring cross-sector response as
well as addressing issues affecting industry. In addition to the secure
portal, the NCI hosts an ISAC threat level dash board, conducts and
participates in cross-sector exercises, works with the National
Infrastructure Coordinating Center (NICC) and the National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) during
steady-state and incidents, holds emergency calls as needed and
develops joint white papers around threats. The ISACs have been
instrumental in embracing, developing and advancing the automatic
exchange of data within their memberships and across the ISACs, as well
as with government as possible.
isacs and government partnerships
ISACs, which are not-for-profit organizations, work closely with
various Government agencies including their respective Sector Specific
Agencies (SSAs) where they exist, intelligence agencies, law
enforcement, and State and local governments. In partnership with the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), several ISACs participate in the
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC)
watch floor. ISAC representatives, cleared at the Top Secret/Sensitive
Compartmented Information (TS/SCI) level, attend the daily briefs and
other NCCIC meetings to share information on threats, vulnerabilities,
incidents, and potential or known impacts to the critical
infrastructure sectors. Having ISACs on the floor has allowed for
effective collaboration on threats and incidents and there have been
many examples of successful information sharing. The ISACs also serve
as liaisons to the National Infrastructure Coordinating Center (NICC)
and play a vital role in incident response and collaboration under the
Critical Infrastructure Partner Annex to the Incident Management Plan.
In addition, ISAC representatives sit on the Cyber Unified
Coordination Group (Cyber UCG). This group was set up under authority
of the National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP) and has been
actively engaged in incident response.
Finally, it should be noted that the ISACs collaborate with their
sector coordinating councils as applicable and work with other critical
infrastructure partners during steady state and incidents.
the february 2015 executive order and isaos
The Executive Order, Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity
Information Sharing, signed February 15, 2013 by President Obama and
recently-announced information-sharing legislative proposal are
commendable in their intent to foster information sharing. Information
Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) were first defined in the
Homeland Security Act of 2002. ISACs were created under Presidential
Decision Directive 63 (PDD-63). Effectively ISACs were the original
ISAOs, are the subject-matter experts in information sharing and a
majority of ISACs have been in existence for over a decade or more.
Indeed there is a need for many groups that may not fall in with
the critical infrastructure sectors such as legal and media and
entertainment organizations, who are increasingly becoming targets for
cyber incidents and attacks, to share information. The private sector
is already organizing efforts in this area and as an example; the FS-
ISAC has been working with the legal industry for almost a year now to
form an ISAO. Many of the other ISACs, such as the Multi-State ISAC
(MS-ISAC) and Information Technology ISAC (IT-ISAC) have also been
engaging industries that do not have established information-sharing
forums such as the Retail sector, which is actively forming an ISAC.
However ISACs are much more than ISAOs. They serve a special role
in critical infrastructure protection and resilience and play a unique
role in the sector partnership model. While the White House has noted
that the EO seeks to ``not limit effective existing relationships that
exist between the Government and the private sector'' the recent EO and
prominent coverage of ISAOs has led to some confusion within industry
as to the impacts to ISACs. It is absolutely essential that the
successful efforts that the ISACs have established over the years
should not be disrupted. It is clear that the ISACs by their success
meet the distinct and unique needs of each of their sectors and the
owner and operator members of those sectors.
The solution to easing this confusion is very simple. The White
House, SSAs--including DHS--and other relevant agencies need to call
out, recognize, and support the unique role ISACs play in critical
infrastructure protection and resilience. For instance, ISACs have the
responsibility to maintain sector-wide threat awareness within their
respective sectors. It is critical that our Federal partners continue
to respect and support that role to avoid undermining one of the main
duties of ISACs to their members and sectors. It is vital that the
process is not diluted and remains streamlined to facilitate effective
situational awareness and response activities particularly when an
incident occurs.
One of the greatest strengths of ISACs is the productive
information sharing that occurs by having robust trusted networks of
members. Government should support private-sector efforts to form ISACs
in those very few critical infrastructure sectors where ISACs do not
currently exist, and where they do, regularly and consistently
encourage owner/operators to join their respective ISACs. This has been
very effective in the financial sector where the United States
Department of the Treasury, the regulators, and State agencies have
been strongly encouraging membership in the FS-ISAC as a best practice.
Currently, not all of the SSAs support their sector-designated ISACs in
the same manner.
Attached is an appendix, which lists out some 20 points as to why
ISACs are more than ISAOs.
creating standards for isaos
The Executive Order also calls for the drafting of a set of
voluntary standards. The NCI believes that having an established set of
capabilities is important and currently has a baseline set of criteria
that ISACs must meet in order to be members of the Council. But it is
essential that information-sharing organizations have the flexibility
and ability to meet the unique needs of its sector and members.
Although all ISACs have similar missions, no two ISACs are exactly
alike.
Any criteria that are developed must be done in concert with the
private sector and must be upheld by the private sector in order to be
effective. ISACs and ensuing ISAOs are private-sector organizations.
Any attempt by Government to oversee or mandate what these
organizations produce and how they collaborate would eliminate
information sharing and almost two decades of progress. In the face of
growing, targeted and sophisticated threats, rendering proven
information-sharing efforts ineffective would not only be a grave
consequence, it would run contrary to the spirit of the drafting of the
EO: To promote private-sector cybersecurity information sharing.
The NCI has a strong history of mentoring and supporting the
establishment of several new ISACs such as Aviation, Retail, and
Automotive and the re-formation of the Oil and Gas ISAC. ISACs fostered
by activities developed and sponsored by the NCI are robustly sharing
among their peer ISACs and partners, items such as best practice guides
and toolkits that ISACs can replicate and provide to their members for
free.
These activities reflect a powerful force in organizational
information sharing and collaboration that the EO fails to contemplate
and appears to attempt to recreate through the development of a
standards organization. Any focus on ISAOs and ISAO standards must be
implemented carefully as not only to encourage and foster information
sharing and analytical maturity among newly-established organizations,
but also clearly publish, highlight, and fully leverage and emulate
aspects of the status quo that are working and have been working for
quite some time.
effective information sharing
It is important to note that the goal of information sharing is not
to share information in and of itself but to create situational
awareness in order to inform risk-based decisions as well as allow
operational components within owner/operation organizations that have
direct actionable control over the content they are sharing, to perform
an action. The focus needs to be on enhancing the ability of
operational groups to work closely with each other.
The ISACs are successful organizations with almost two decades of
proven cases studies of information sharing and collaboration. They are
the subject-matter experts on information sharing. In order for
information sharing to be effective it must be:

Voluntary--not mandated or regulated

Industry Driven

Actionable, Timely and Relevant

Bi-directional and Collaborative

Government can help this effort by:

Recognizing ISACs and the special operational role that they
play in critical infrastructure protection and resilience;

Supporting private-sector efforts to form ISACs in the very
few critical infrastructure sectors where they do not currently
exist;

Encourage owners and operators of critical infrastructure to
join their respective sector ISACs;

Facilitate getting all of the ISACs on the NCCIC floor.
After 4 years this still has not been accomplished;

Recognize the NCI as the coordinating body for the ISACs.
This concludes my written statement for the record. Thank you again
for the opportunity to present this testimony and I look forward to
your questions.
Appendix: 20 Reasons Why ISACS are More Than ISAOS

ISACs are all-hazards and address both cyber and physical
threats and incidents

ISACs are the designated operational arms of their sectors

ISACs play a critical industry- and Government-recognized
role in critical infrastructure incident response

ISACs have reach into their sectors and in many cases are
relied upon as the threat and incident communications channel
for their respective sectors

ISACs provide annonymization and aggregation of data for
their sectors

ISACs provide a sector perspective on threats and incidents
and provide sector-specific analysis

ISACs set or manage threat levels for their respective
sectors

ISACs perform structured collaboration across the sectors

ISACs conduct joint analysis to develop joint products on
specific threats and incidents

ISACs serve an operational role in the National partnership
framework

Many ISACs have security operations centers that monitor
threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents and provide analysis
for sector threat potential and impact

ISACs are not-for-profit organizations that are not in the
business to sell information but to facilitate it

ISACs meet the unique needs of their respective members/
sectors

Most ISACs are global and are not just focused on the United
States. Many have global partnerships

ISACs have a vetting process for members to qualify to join

ISACs are organized and run by the owners and operators of
critical infrastructure

ISACs have a formal governance structure

ISACS facilitate bi-directional information sharing on
incidents, information, and intelligence within and among the
sectors.

ISACs are designated operational entities within sectors to
enhance efficiency and coordination of information sharing and
incident response.

Mr. Ratcliffe. The Chairman now recognizes the gentleman
from Rhode Island, Mr. Langevin, for an opening statement.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know that Ranking Member Richmond is on his way, and on
his behalf I will just welcome our witnesses.
In particular, I want to acknowledge Greg Garcia, whom I
worked with when I chaired this subcommittee many years ago and
when you had the Department of Homeland Security.
I thank all of you for your work. I know in one way or
another I have had the opportunity to interact with all of our
witnesses. Thank you for the work you are doing to better
protect our country. I look forward to hearing your perspective
here today.
Mr. Chairman, I especially want to commend you for holding
this hearing today. Thank you for giving the information-
sharing and data breach issues the attention that it needs and
deserves. Hearing from expert witnesses I know will move this
issue ahead further.
Obviously, there is no one answer to solving our
cybersecurity challenges. It is never a problem to be solved,
as I have said many times, but it is a problem to be managed,
and we have to do a much better job of getting to a place where
we are much better protected in cyber space than where we are.
We can close that air of vulnerability down to something much
more manageable.
It won't be just a Government answer, of course, and it is
not going to be just private sector. It is going to take that
collaboration of us working together to solve this and deal
with this incredible challenge.
So, with that, I will yield back.
I thank our witnesses in advance for being here and what
they are about to say.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman. I remind other
Members that additional statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Richmond follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Cedric L. Richmond
March 4, 2015
Our infrastructure is more digitally interconnected than ever. Our
country's reliance on cyber systems and networks covers everything from
power plants to pipelines, and hospitals to highways. Yet for all the
advantages interconnectivity offers, our Nation's critical
infrastructure is also increasingly vulnerable to attack from an array
of cyber threats.
We are to hear testimony today on how we can be better prepared for
these threats. The President has proposed an updated package of
legislative initiatives to frame the issues, and hopefully spur
Congress to action on cybersecurity. Last year this subcommittee was
the author of important authorizations that gave the Department sound
footing to carry out its mission as the central civilian portal for
information sharing between critical infrastructure sectors and the
Government.
It is widely recognized that more is needed, and the President's
initiatives do indeed go further. Senator Carper, Ranking Member on the
Senate Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee, has already
introduced almost a word-for-word version of the White House
information-sharing language as S. 456, The Cyber Threat Sharing Act of
2015.
Hacks on major businesses and financial institutions continue to
dominate headlines. Just a few weeks after Anthem insurance announced
that account information of as many as 80 million customers had been
stolen, we are all waiting for the next shoe to fall.
The President's proposal seeks to create a friendlier atmosphere
for companies to swap certain types of computer data with each other
and the Government, in order to identify potential cyber threats and
isolate security flaws. To persuade companies to buy into the proposed
system, the White House bill would provide assurances that the sharing
of indicators--which could include things like IP addresses, routing
information, and date and time stamps deemed important to identifying
potential cyber threats or security vulnerabilities--would be exempt
from legal or regulatory punishment. The President's proposals contain
some new ideas about the formation of information-sharing organizations
that would set sharing standards and privacy requirements.
Since the `90s, firms have shared information directly on an ad hoc
basis and through private-sector, nonprofit organizations, such as
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers, or ISACs that can analyze and
disseminate information. The White House proposal requires the
Secretary of Homeland Security to form a new type of organization, the
Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations, or ISAOs.
We need to know what kinds of barriers to information sharing exist
today, and how we on this subcommittee can help make this cyber tool
more effective. For our side, information sharing must be structured in
the public and private sectors to ensure that the risks to privacy
rights and civil liberties of individual citizens be recognized, and
how those rights and liberties can best be protected. Today, hopefully
we'll find answers to some of these questions.
We live in a post-Snowden world, and we are all much more aware of
the powerful abilities of our surveillance agencies. Information
sharing is not a zero-sum game. As policy makers we can step back and
take stock of how best to protect our citizen's privacy rights, while
finding effective and powerful tools to combat the cyber threats before
us.

Mr. Ratcliffe. We are pleased to have with us a
distinguished panel of witnesses today on this very important
topic. I would ask all of you to stand, if you would, and raise
your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you. You may be seated.
Our witnesses today--we have with us Mr. Matthew Eggers. He
is the senior director for national security and emergency
preparedness at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
Mr. Eggers, good to see you again.
Mr. Eggers. Good to see you.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Also with us is Ms. Mary Ellen Callahan. She
is a partner at Jenner & Block and is the former chief privacy
officer at the Department of Homeland Security.
Welcome, Ms. Callahan.
Also with us is Mr. Greg Garcia. He is the executive
director of the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council.
Mr. Garcia, we appreciate you coming to see us today.
Then, finally, last, but not least, Dr. Martin Libicki is
the senior management scientist at The RAND Corporation.
Dr. Libicki, thank you for being here as well.
The witnesses' full statements will appear in the record.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Eggers for 5 minutes to
testify.

STATEMENT OF MATTHEW J. EGGERS, SENIOR DIRECTOR, NATIONAL
SECURITY AND EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, U.S. CHAMBER OF COMMERCE

Mr. Eggers. Good afternoon, Chairman Ratcliffe and other
distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
My name is Matthew Eggers. I lead the U.S. Chamber
Cybersecurity Working Group, which has about 200 members, and
it is growing virtually daily. Before talking about the cyber
information-sharing proposals, I want to note that my written
statement highlights the successful roll-out of the NIST
framework.
The Chamber's proudly launched its own cyber campaign under
the banner of improving today, protecting tomorrow. In 2014, we
organized several roundtables across the country. The events
featured State and local chambers and principals from the White
House, DHS, NIST, as well as local FBI and Secret Service
officials. More roundtables are being planned this year.
The framework would be incomplete without enacting
legislation that removes legal and regulatory barriers to
quickly exchanging data about threats to U.S. companies. Let's
consider CISA and the White House proposal or the Carper bill,
S. 456.
First, the draft Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of
2015, or CISA. In January, 35 associations, including the
Chamber, urged the Senate to quickly pass the cyber info-
sharing bill modeled after the bipartisan CISA bill that
Senators Feinstein and Chambliss championed last year.
The first version of CISA stalled, unfortunately. A draft
CISA, 2.0, if you will, sponsored by Senators Burr and
Feinstein, is expected to be marked up soon. It reflects
practical compromises among many stakeholders. We need to focus
our collective legislative negotiations on CISA.
CISA would give businesses legal certainty that they have
safe harbor against frivolous lawsuits when voluntarily sharing
and receiving cyber threat indicators, or CTIs, and
countermeasures in real time with private and public entities
and when monitoring information systems to mitigate cyber
attacks.
CISA would also offer protections related to public
disclosure, (direct) regulatory, and anti-trust matters. Under
CISA, businesses must remove personal information from threat
indicators before sharing them.
Second, the White House cybersecurity legislative proposal,
or S. 456, the Cyber Threat Sharing Act of 2015. Senator Tom
Carper introduced S. 456 about 3 weeks ago. I focus, in part,
on this bill because it is very similar to the White House's
January 13 cyber information-sharing proposal and it has been
introduced.
In contrast to CISA, White House/Carper would grant
liability protections to companies only when sharing CTIs with
DHS's NCCIC and ISAOs, or Information Sharing and Analysis
Organizations, that have self-certified that they are following
certain information-sharing practices which have not yet been
established and won't be for some time.
DHS is to sponsor an outside organization to determine what
would constitute cyber info-sharing standards or best
practices, even though leading sectors tell us that they
already have them. The bottom line: The ISAOs-plus-standards-
setting effort warrants scrutiny before our organization
supports it.
Also, unlike CISA, businesses would not be protected under
White House/Carper when monitoring information systems and
sharing and receiving countermeasures. The White House/Carper
bill would not write anti-trust protections into the Federal
law.
The lack of safeguards and protections in all of these
areas would deter industry from participating in these
information-sharing programs for fear of litigation or
liability, whether at the Federal or the State levels.
CISA and White House/Carper do share some common features
especially in the area of privacy and civil liberties
protection. Both CISA and the White House/Carper proposal
narrowly define what cyber threat indicators may be shared
among private and Government entities.
CISA and White House/Carper require that businesses remove
personal information from CTIs before sharing them. Like CISA,
the White House/Carper bill would tightly limit how the Federal
Government could use threat indicators that agencies receive.
In sum, when comparing CISA with White House/Carper, CISA
offers a more dynamic way to share cyber threat data among many
businesses and Government entities, coupled with strong
liability and related protections.
CISA would go the furthest in helping businesses, including
critical infrastructure, defend information systems against
cyber attacks while protecting privacy.
CISA is meant to help counter serious malicious attacks
aimed at America that are being launched from threats like
organized crime and state-sponsored groups.
Getting an information-sharing bill signed into law this
year, one that would actually incentivize industry to
participate, not back away, is the Chamber's top cyber
legislative priority.
Again, thank you for inviting me to be here today. I would
be happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Eggers follows:]
Prepared Statement of Matthew J. Eggers
March 4, 2015
Good morning, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and
other distinguished Members of the committee. My name is Matthew
Eggers, and I am a senior director of the U.S. Chamber's National
Security and Emergency Preparedness Department. On behalf of the
Chamber, I welcome the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security Technologies
regarding industry's perspectives on the President's cybersecurity
information-sharing proposal.
The Chamber's National Security and Emergency Preparedness
Department was established in 2003 to develop and implement the
Chamber's homeland and National security policies. The department works
through the National Security Task Force, a policy committee composed
of roughly 200 Chamber members representing practically every sector of
the American economy. The task force's Cybersecurity Working Group,
which I lead, identifies current and emerging issues, crafts policies
and positions, and provides analysis and direct advocacy to Government
and business leaders. Industry's interest in cybersecurity is healthy
and expanding--individuals join the working group almost daily.
The need to address increasingly sophisticated threats against U.S.
and global businesses has gone from an IT issue to a top priority for
the C-suite and the boardroom. Chamber President and CEO Thomas J.
Donohue recently said, ``In an interconnected world, economic security
and national security are linked. To maintain a strong and resilient
economy, we must protect against the threat of cyberattacks.''
My statement highlights the successful rollout of the National
Institute of Standards and Technology's (NIST's) Framework for
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity (the framework)\1\ and
the positive collaboration that many businesses and Government entities
have developed over the past several months, including the Chamber's
cybersecurity campaign--Improving Today. Protecting
Tomorrow
TM
.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See www.nist.gov/cyberframework.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am also going to focus on policy issues--information-sharing
legislation being the top legislative priority--that lawmakers and the
administration need to diligently address. The information-sharing
discussion puts too little emphasis on improving Government-to-business
sharing. The Chamber wants to expand Government-to-business information
sharing, which is progressing but needs improvement.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The Chamber submitted in October 2014 similar comments to the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) related to
businesses' awareness and use of the framework. See http://
csrc.nist.gov/cyberframework/rfi_comments_10_2014.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The framework is a good start, but more work is needed to push back
against skilled attackers. Most small and mid-size businesses (SMBs)
tend to lack the money and personnel to beat back highly-advanced and
nefarious actors, such as organized criminal gangs and groups carrying
out state-sponsored attacks. No single strategy can prevent advanced
and persistent threats--popularly known as APTs in cybersecurity
jargon--from breaching an organization's cyber defenses.
Policymakers have not sufficiently acknowledged this expensive,
practical reality. American companies should not be expected to
shoulder the substantial costs of cyber attacks emanating from well-
resourced bad actors such as criminal syndicates or nation-states--
costs typically absorbed by national governments. Nation-states or
their proxies and other sophisticated actors are apparently hacking
businesses with impunity--and that has got to stop.
In addition to having policymakers acknowledge cost concerns, the
Chamber would welcome working with the administration and Congress on
establishing an intelligent and forceful deterrence strategy, utilizing
an array of U.S. policy tools, which the United States currently lacks.
U.S. policymakers need to focus on pushing back against illicit actors
and not on blaming the victims of cybersecurity incidents.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The Chamber submitted comments to the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) on cybersecurity solutions for small and mid-size
businesses (SMBs) in April 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
the framework is an excellent example of an effective public-private
partnership. critical infrastructure awareness of the framework is
strong, and sector activities are robust and maturing
The Chamber believes that the framework--which was released last
February--has been a success. The framework represents one of the best
examples of public-private partnerships in action. NIST and
stakeholders in the public and private sectors should have a great
sense of accomplishment. The Chamber, sector-based coordinating
councils and associations, companies, and other entities collaborated
closely with NIST in developing the framework since the first workshop
was held in April 2013.
Critical infrastructure sectors are keenly aware of and supportive
of the framework. The Chamber understands that critical infrastructures
at ``greatest risk'' have been identified and engaged by administration
officials under the terms of the cyber executive order (EO).\4\
Government officials ought to ensure that all resources, particularly
the latest cyber threat indicators (CTIs), are available to these
enterprises to counter increasing and advanced threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Executive Order (EO) 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure
Cybersecurity, is available at www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2013-02-19/pdf/
2013-03915.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, important elements of U.S. industry are aware of the
framework and are using it or similar risk management tools. Indeed,
the Chamber welcomed an assessment from Michael Daniel, White House
special assistant to the President and cybersecurity coordinator, who
remarked on September 23, 2014, at the Chamber's third cyber roundtable
in Everett, Washington, that industry's response to the framework has
been ``phenomenal.''
A second White House official, Ari Schwartz, senior director for
cybersecurity, noted on October 1, 2014, that business support for the
framework has ``exceeded expectations.'' Such recognition is
constructive and helps keep the private sector engaged in using the
framework and promoting it with business partners.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See ``At eight-month mark, industry praises framework and eyes
next steps,'' Inside Cybersecurity, October 6, 2014, http://
insidecybersecurity.com/Cyber-Daily-News/Daily-News/at-eight-month-
mark-industry-praises-framework-and-eyes-next-steps/menu-id-1075.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Much of industry's favorable reaction is owed in large measure to
NIST, which tackled the framework's development in ways that ought to
serve as a model for other agencies and departments. In May 2014, the
administration sent the business community a powerful message, saying
that the framework should remain collaborative, voluntary, and
innovative over the long term.\6\ Interestingly, public focus on the
framework has created visibility into industry's long-standing efforts
to address cyber risks and threats--constant, dedicated, and mostly
silent efforts that preceded the creation of the framework.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The Chamber agrees with Michael Daniel's May 22 blog, Assessing
Cybersecurity Regulations, at www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/05/22/
assessing-cybersecurity-regulations. The blog says that business and
Government ``must build equally agile and responsive capabilities not
bound by outdated and inflexible rules and procedures.'' The Chamber
and industry partners especially urge independent agencies and Congress
to adhere to the dynamic approach advocated by the administration and
embodied in the nonregulatory, public-private framework. See June 11,
2014, multiassociation letter, which is available at www.uschamber.com/
sites/default/files/documents/files/11June14GroupLetterT-
YReplytoDanielCyberBlog_Final_0.pdf.
\7\ The on-line publication Inside Cybersecurity provides an
excellent catalog of industry initiatives to implement data- and
network-security best practices. See http://insidecybersecurity.com/
Sectors/menu-id-1149.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Most notable, since the framework's release, industry has
demonstrated its commitment to using it. Many associations are creating
resources for their members and holding events across the country and
taking other initiatives to promote cybersecurity education and
awareness of the framework. Some examples are listed here. Associations
are planning and exploring additional activities as well.

The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers and the Association
of Global Automakers have initiated a process to establish an
automobile industry sector information-sharing and analysis
center (Auto-ISAC) to voluntarily collect and share information
about existing or potential threats to the cybersecurity of
motor vehicle electronics and in-vehicle networks.

The American Chemistry Council (ACC) is developing sector-
specific guidance based on the NIST cyber framework to further
enhance and implement the council's Responsible Care Security
Code. ACC's Chemical Information Technology Center (ChemITC) is
also piloting an ISAC for the chemical sector.

The American Gas Association (AGA) has hosted a series of
webinars on control system cybersecurity, is collaborating with
small utilities to develop robust cybersecurity programs, and
is working with companies to review and enhance their
cybersecurity posture using the Oil and Natural Gas Subsector
Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model (ONG-C2M2) from the
Department of Energy (DOE). Among other activities, AGA has
stood up the Downstream Natural Gas Information and Analysis
Center (DNG-ISAC), an ISAC designed to help support the
information-sharing interests of downstream natural gas
utilities.

The American Hotel & Lodging Association (AH&LA) has
conducted a series of widely-attended cyber and data security
webinars to assist small, medium, and large hotel and lodging
businesses with implementing key information security measures
and risk assessments.

The American Water Works Association (AWWA) has created
cybersecurity guidance and a use-case tool to aid water and
wastewater utilities' implementation of the framework. The
guidance is cross-referenced to the framework. This tool serves
as implementation guidance for the framework in the water and
wastewater systems sector.

Members of the Communications Sector Coordinating Council
(CSCC)--made up of broadcasting, cable, wireline, wireless, and
satellite segments--have participated in multiple NIST,
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and industry
association-sponsored programs, webinars, and panels. The
sector is completing a year-long effort within the Federal
Communication Commission's (FCC's) Communications Security
Reliability and Interoperability Council (CSRIC), which
involves more than 100 professionals who have worked to adapt
the NIST framework to the sector segments and provide guidance
to the industry.

The Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council has worked
with DOE to develop sector-specific guidance for using the
framework. The guidance leverages existing subsector-specific
approaches to cybersecurity, including DOE's Electricity
Subsector Cybersecurity Risk Management Process Guideline, the
Electricity Subsector Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model,
NIST's Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security, and the North
American Electric Reliability Corporation's (NERC's) Critical
Infrastructure Protection Cybersecurity Standards.

The mutual fund industry, represented by the Investment
Company Institute (ICI), has added to its committee roster a
Chief Information Security Officer Advisory Committee. The
committee's mission is to collaborate on cybersecurity issues
and information sharing in the financial services industry and
provide a cyber threat protection resource for ICI members.

The Information Technology Industry Council (ITI) visited
Korea and Japan in May 2014 and shared with these countries'
governments and business leaders the benefits of a public-
private partnership-based approach to developing globally
workable cybersecurity policies. ITI highlighted the framework
as an example of an effective policy developed in this manner,
reflecting global standards and industry-driven practices. ITI
principals also spoke at a U.S.-European Union (EU) workshop in
Brussels in November 2014, comparing U.S. and E.U. policy
approaches with cybersecurity and emphasizing the positive
attributes of the framework and its development.

The National Association of Manufacturers (NAM) has
spearheaded the D.A.T.A. (Driving the Agenda for Technology
Advancement) Policy Center, providing manufacturers with a
forum to understand the latest cybersecurity policy trends,
threats, and best practices. The D.A.T.A. Center focuses on
working with small and medium-size manufacturers to help them
secure their assets.

Through the American Petroleum Institute (API), the oil and
natural gas sector has worked with DOE to complete the Oil and
Natural Gas Subsector Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model
(ONG-C2M2). The oil and natural gas sector in 2014 established
an Oil and Natural Gas Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(ONG-ISAC) to provide shared intelligence on cyber incidents,
threats, vulnerabilities, and responses throughout the
industry.

The Retail Industry Leaders Association (RILA), in
partnership with the National Retail Federation (NRF), created
the Retail Cyber Intelligence Sharing Center (R-CISC),
featuring information sharing, research, and education and
training. This ISAC enables retailers to share threat data
among themselves and to receive threat information from
Government and law enforcement partners.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has launched its National
roundtable series, Improving Today. Protecting
Tomorrow
TM
, recommending that businesses of all
sizes and sectors adopt fundamental internet security
practices.
policymakers need to focus on passing information-sharing legislation
and deterring foreign attackers. the chamber's cybersecurity campaign
enters its second year
The NIST framework is designed to help start a cybersecurity
program or improve an existing one. The framework puts cybersecurity
into a common language for organizations to better understand their
cybersecurity posture, set goals for cybersecurity improvements,
monitor their progress, and foster communications with internal and
external stakeholders. Looking ahead to 2015, the Chamber's
cybersecurity campaign intends to focus on several areas, including the
following:
Improving information sharing is job No. 1. The framework would be
incomplete without enacting information-sharing legislation that
removes legal and regulatory barriers to quickly exchanging data about
threats to U.S. companies.

Draft Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act (CISA) of
2015.--On January 27, 35 associations, including the Chamber,
urged the Senate to quickly pass a cybersecurity information-
sharing bill.\8\ The Senate Intelligence Committee passed in
July 2014 S. 2588, the Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act
(CISA) of 2014, a smart and workable bill, which earned broad
bipartisan support.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ The coalition letter is available at www.uschamber.com/sites/
default/files/150127_multi-association_cyber_info-
sharing_legislation_senate.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The committee released in February a new draft bill--CISA 2015--for
stakeholder review. Recent cyber incidents underscore the need
for legislation to help businesses improve their awareness of
cyber threats and enhance their protection and response
capabilities.
The Chamber urges Congress to send a bill to the President that
gives businesses legal certainty that they have safe harbor
against frivolous lawsuits when voluntarily sharing and
receiving threat indicators and countermeasures in real time
with multiple private and public entities, as well as when
monitoring information systems to mitigate cyberattacks.
The legislation also needs to offer protections related to public
disclosure, regulatory, and anti-trust matters in order to
increase the timely exchange of technical CTIs and
countermeasures among public and private entities.
The Chamber further believes that legislation needs to safeguard
privacy and civil liberties and establish appropriate roles for
civilian and intelligence agencies. For example, businesses
must remove personal information from CTIs before sharing them.
Private entities must share ``electronic mail or media, an
interactive form on an internet website, or a real time,
automated process between information systems'' with DHS--a
civilian entity--if they are to be offered protection from
liability.
CISA, which is sponsored by Sens. Richard Burr and Dianne
Feinstein, reflects practical compromises among many
stakeholders on these issues. At the time of this writing, the
measure is expected to be marked up the week of March 9. The
Chamber looks forward to reviewing the bill following the mark-
up to determine its support for the base measure and any
amendments. Industry is likely to strongly support CISA.

White House cybersecurity legislative proposal (S. 456, the
Cyber Threat Sharing Act of 2015).--On February 11, S. 456, the
Cyber Threat Sharing Act of 2015, was introduced in the Senate
by Sen. Tom Carper. It makes sense to refer to S. 456 because
it is very similar to the White House's cybersecurity
information-sharing proposal, which was discussed at last
week's House Homeland Security Committee hearing, and released
by the administration on January 13.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ http://homeland.house.gov/hearing/hearing-administration-s-
cybersecurity-legislative-proposal-information-sharing;
www.whitehouse.gov/omb/legislative_letters (see January 13, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA offers strong protections and flexible avenues for sharing
with public and private entities. In contrast, S. 456 would
grant liability protections to companies only when sharing CTIs
with (1) DHS' National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC)--excluding law enforcement agencies,
among others--or with (2) information-sharing and analysis
organizations (ISAOs) that have self-certified that they are
following information-sharing best practices. (The implications
of the ISAOs and the new White House executive order \10\
related to promoting cybersecurity information sharing, which
directs DHS to sponsor an ISAO standards organization to
establish a common set of voluntary standards for creating and
operating ISAOs, have not been fully assessed by industry.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/02/13/executive-
order-promoting-private-sector-cybersecurity-information-shari.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These two protected avenues for sharing CTIs are far too narrow and
limiting and do not reflect the information-sharing
relationships that businesses have built up over time, for
instance, with DHS, the Departments of Energy and Treasury, and
law enforcement agencies.
Unlike CISA, businesses would not be protected under S. 456 when
monitoring information systems and sharing or receiving
countermeasures. The lack of safeguards in these areas is a
fundamental weakness of the White House proposal and S. 456.
Under S. 456, cyber threat data shared with the NCCIC would
seemingly be protected from public disclosure and may not be
used as evidence in a regulatory action against the entity that
shared CTIs, which is welcome. However, S. 456 neither codifies
antitrust protections in Federal law nor preempts State law.
The bill simply references via a sense-of-Congress provision a
policy statement that was issued in April 2014 by the
Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission.\11\
While this provision is constructive, anti-trust protections
need to be written into law to be meaningful to industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-federal-trade-
commission-issue-antitrust-policy-statement-sharing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Similar to CISA, S. 456 includes strong privacy protections. Both
bills narrowly define what CTIs may be shared among private
sector and Federal Government entities.\12\ CISA and S. 456
require that businesses remove personal information from CTIs
before sharing them. The Chamber urges businesses to share
cybersecurity threat data with industry partners and the
Government. Still, the mandate to scrub personal information
would almost certainly sideline smaller businesses, because the
provision assumes that businesses would have the technical
know-how or the resources to scrub data. To be sure, this
outcome is not the intent of the bills' writers, but it is
important to note that this is the likely response many
businesses would have to such provisions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ CISA 2015 and S. 456 define cyber threat indicators (CTIs) in
section 2 of their respective bills.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And, like CISA, S. 456 would also tightly limit how the Federal
Government could use CTIs that agencies receive. However,
unlike CISA, S. 456 would sunset after 5 years. A sunset
provision would almost certainly inhibit businesses' ability to
make long-term planning decisions related to risk management
and information-sharing investments.
It is necessary to highlight that the Chamber supports CISA.
Compared with S. 456, CISA offers a more dynamic approach to
sharing cybersecurity threat data among multiple business and
Government partners, coupled with stronger protections. CISA
would go the furthest in helping businesses, including critical
infrastructure, defend information systems against cyber
attacks. Businesses would likely share and receive CTIs and
countermeasures and monitor their networks on a broader scale
and more confidently because CISA grants stronger liability
protections and better policy tools.
Organizing roundtables with local chambers and growing market
solutions. The Chamber is planning more cyber roundtables in 2015. Last
year, the Chamber organized roundtable events with State and local
chambers in Chicago, Illinois (May 22); Austin, Texas (July 10);
Everett, Washington (September 23); and Phoenix, Arizona (October 8)
prior to the Chamber's Third Annual Cybersecurity Summit on October 28.
Leading member sponsors of the campaign were American Express,
Dell, and Splunk. Other sponsors were the American Gas Association,
Boeing, the Edison Electric Institute, Exelon, HID Global, Microsoft,
Oracle, and Pepco Holdings, Inc., and The Wall Street Journal.
Each roundtable featured cybersecurity principals from the White
House, DHS, NIST, and local FBI and Secret Service officials. The
Chamber and its partners urged businesses to adopt fundamental internet
security practices to reduce network and system weaknesses and make the
price of successful hacking increasingly steep. The Chamber also urged
businesses to improve their cyber risk management processes.
All businesses should understand common on-line threats that can
lead them to become victims of cyber crime. Using the framework and
similar risk management tools, such as the Chamber's Internet Security
Essentials for Business 2.0 guidebook,\13\ is ultimately about making
your business more secure and resilient. The Chamber encourages
businesses to report cyber incidents. Perfect on-line security is
unattainable, even for large businesses. Innovative solutions are
regularly being brought to market because cyber threats are always
changing. Businesses should report cyber incidents and on-line crime to
their FBI or Secret Service field offices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ The booklet is available free for downloading at
www.uschamber.com/issue-brief/internet-security-essentials-business-20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Increasing public awareness of the framework. The Chamber urges
policymakers to commit greater resources over the next several years to
growing awareness of the framework and risk-based solutions through a
National education campaign. A broad-based campaign involving Federal,
State, and local governments and multiple sectors of the U.S. economy
would spur greater awareness of cyber threats and aggregate demand for
market-driven cyber solutions.
The Chamber believes that Government--particularly independent
agencies--should devote their limited time and resources to assisting
resource-strapped enterprises, not trying to flex their existing
regulatory authority. After all, while businesses are working to
detect, prevent, and mitigate cyber attacks originating from
sophisticated criminal syndicates or foreign powers, they should not
have to worry about regulatory or legal sanctions.
Engaging law enforcement. The Chamber plans to continue its close
contact with the FBI and the Secret Service to build trusted public-
private relationships, which are essential to confirming a crime and
beginning criminal investigations. The Chamber encourages businesses to
partner with law enforcement before, during, and after a cyber
incident. FBI and Secret Service officials have participated in each of
the Chamber's roundtables.
Harmonizing cybersecurity regulations. Information-security
requirements should not be cumulative. The Chamber believes it is
valuable that agencies and departments are urged under the E.O. to
report to the Office of Management and Budget any critical
infrastructure subject to ``ineffective, conflicting, or excessively
burdensome cybersecurity requirements.'' The Chamber urges the
administration and Congress to prioritize eliminating burdensome
regulations on businesses. One solution could entail giving businesses
credit for information security regimes that exist in their respective
sectors.\14\ It is positive that Michael Daniel, the administration's
lead cyber official, has made harmonizing existing cyber regulations
with the framework a priority.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ The business community already complies with multiple
information security rules. Among the regulatory requirements impacting
businesses of all sizes are the Chemical Facilities Anti-Terrorism
Standards (CFATS), the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission--North
American Reliability Corporation Critical Information Protection (FERC-
NERC CIP) standards, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), and the Sarbanes-
Oxley (SOX) Act. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued
guidance in October 2011 outlining how and when companies should report
hacking incidents and cybersecurity risks. Corporations also comply
with many non-U.S. requirements, which add to the regulatory mix.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Raising adversaries' costs through deterrence. The Chamber is
reviewing actions that businesses and Government can take to deter
nefarious actors that threaten to empty bank accounts, steal trade
secrets, or damage vital infrastructures. While our organization has
not formally endorsed the report, the U.S. Department of State's
International Security Advisory Board (ISAB) issued in July draft
recommendations regarding cooperation and deterrence in cyberspace.
The ISAB's recommendations--including cooperating on crime as a
first step, exploring global consensus on the rules of the road,
enhancing governments' situational awareness through information
sharing, combating IP theft, expanding education and capacity building,
promoting attribution and prosecution, and leading by example--are
sensible and worthy of further review by cybersecurity
stakeholders.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ The ISAB report is available at www.state.gov/documents/
organization/229235.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Chamber believes that the United States needs to coherently
shift the costs associated with cyber attacks in ways that are legal,
swift, and proportionate relative to the risks and threats.
Policymakers need to help the law enforcement community, which is a key
asset to the business community but numerically overmatched compared
with illicit hackers.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ The Chamber argued for a clear cyber deterrence strategy in
its December 2013 letter to NIST on the framework. See http://
csrc.nist.gov/cyberframework/framework_comments/
20131213_ann_beauchesne_uschamber.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Making incentives work. In an April 2013 letter to NIST regarding
businesses' use of the framework and the role of incentives, the
Chamber provides its views on extending liability protections related
to information-sharing legislation, a safe harbor related to using the
framework, SAFETY Act applicability to the framework; eliminating
cybersecurity regulations, leveraging Federal procurement, and making
the research and development (R&D) tax credit permanent.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ The letter is available at www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/
29apr13_chamber_comments.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Chamber appreciates that the administration is assessing a mix
of incentives that could induce businesses to use the framework.\18\
However, in the Chamber's view, it is imperative that the
administration, independent agencies, and lawmakers extend to companies
the assurance that the cybersecurity framework and any actions taken in
relation to it remain collaborative, flexible, and innovative over the
long term. The Chamber believes that the presence of these qualities,
or the lack thereof, would be a key determinant to use of the framework
by U.S. critical infrastructure as well as businesses generally.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2013/08/06/incentives-support-
adoption-cybersecurity-framework.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
roadmap for the future of the cybersecurity framework
In February 2014, NIST released a Roadmap to accompany the
framework. The Roadmap outlines further areas for possible
``development, alignment, and collaboration.''\19\ The Chamber noted in
an October 2014 letter to NIST some key areas that it sees as needing
more attention. The Chamber would highlight for the committee the
importance of aligning international cybersecurity regimes with the
framework.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The Roadmap is available at www.nist.gov/cyberframework/
upload/roadmap-021214.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Many Chamber members operate globally and appreciate that NIST has
been actively meeting with foreign governments urging them to embrace
the framework. Like NIST, the Chamber believes that efforts to improve
the cybersecurity of the public and private sectors should reflect the
borderless and interconnected nature of our digital environment.
Standards, guidance, and best practices relevant to cybersecurity
are typically industry-driven and adopted on a voluntary basis; they
are most effective when developed and recognized globally. Such an
approach would avoid burdening multinational enterprises with the
requirements of multiple, and often conflicting, jurisdictions.\20\ The
administration should organize opportunities for stakeholders to
participate in multinational discussions. The Chamber encourages the
Federal Government to work with international partners and believes
that these discussions should be stakeholder-driven and occur on a
routine basis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ The Chamber sent a letter in September 2013 to Dr. Andreas
Schwab, member of the European Parliament's Internal Market and
Consumer Protection Committee, recommending amendments to the proposed
European Union (E.U.) cybersecurity directive. The Chamber argues that
cybersecurity and resilience are best achieved when organizations
follow voluntary global standards and industry-driven practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
passing an industry-supported information-sharing bill is the chamber's
top cyber legislative goal in 2015
Cyber attacks aimed at U.S. businesses and Government entities are
being launched from various sources, including sophisticated hackers,
organized crime, and state-sponsored groups. These attacks are
advancing in scope and complexity. Most policymakers and practitioners
appreciate that the intent of legislation is not to spur more
information sharing for its own sake. Rather, the goal is to help
companies achieve timely and actionable situational awareness to
improve the business community's and the Nation's detection,
mitigation, and response capabilities.
Additional positive side effects of enacting cyber information-
sharing legislation include strengthening the security of personal
information that is maintained on company networks and systems and
increasing costs on nefarious actors. The bill would also complement
the NIST framework, which many industry associations and companies are
embracing and promoting with their business partners. Congressional
action on cybersecurity information-sharing legislation cannot come
quickly enough.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Eggers.
It is my understanding that votes have been called. We
expect to return roughly 10 minutes after the last vote. So,
without objection, the subcommittee is in recess subject to the
call of the Chairman.
[Recess.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. Appreciate everyone's patience. We're
accommodating with the weather, and I think we're going to have
some Members return. But I want to continue with everyone's
testimony.
So I appreciate, Mr. Eggers, your testimony.
Next we would love to hear from Ms. Callahan.

TESTIMONY OF MARY ELLEN CALLAHAN, JENNER & BLOCK, FORMER CHIEF
PRIVACY OFFICER, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Callahan. Thank you, sir.
Good afternoon, Chairman Ratcliffe. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today.
My name is Mary Ellen Callahan, and I'm a partner at the
law firm of Jenner & Block, where I chair the privacy and
information governance practice. From 2009 to 2012, I served as
the Chief Privacy Officer of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security. I'm appearing before this committee in my personal
capacity.
Cybersecurity information sharing is vital to protect
private- and public-sector assets. In order to prepare for
disclosing cybersecurity threat indicators, however, to the
other entities in the cybersecurity ecosystem, the information
sharing with the Government must meet certain standards to
address industry interests and needs.
There are six factors that are crucial for establishing
robust effective private-sector information sharing with the
Government:
First, the Government must establish and implement
legitimate privacy safeguards.
Second, clearly-established controls must be placed on what
the Government does with that shared information.
Third, the controls must include civilian interface with
the private sector, not just as an intake center, but for all
communications and coordination related to cybersecurity
information sharing.
Fourth, a value proposition for the information sharing
must be established.
Fifth, liability limitations must be provided both civilly
and criminally.
Finally, the Congress should expressly provide the Privacy
and Civil Liberties Oversight Board with oversight authority
over cybersecurity, including information sharing.
It is unfortunate that the 2015 Executive Order did not
elaborate on the necessary privacy and civil liberties
protections, particularly with regard to private-sector
information sharing.
Nonetheless, the DHS Privacy Officer and Office for Civil
Rights and Civil Liberties can address those private-sector
concerns, including with the intersection of the Information
Sharing and Analysis Organizations, or ISAOs.
DHS has been quite transparent about its cybersecurity
capacities and privacy protections starting from the time when
Mr. Garcia was at Homeland Security. This work will assist DHS
in establishing deeper relations with the new and existing
ISAOs.
In addition, as this subcommittee knows, the DHS Chief
Privacy Officer has unique investigatory authorities.
Therefore, in the event that something went awry in the future,
the Chief Privacy Officer can investigate these activities.
That authority may be of interest to the private companies and
ISAOs as more private information starts to flow into the
Government.
There are three categories of information that companies
may provide when sharing cybersecurity threat indicators:
Information directly associated the cyber threat; information
related to the cyber threat; and information incidentally
retained when sharing the threat indicators themselves.
To limit the amount of incidentally retained and related
information being shared, companies should implement strict
data minimization standards. Frequently, however, it may not be
evident upon initial sharing which information is directly
associated with the threat and which information is either
incidentally retained or only related to the cyber threat.
Therefore, more information than necessary may be shared.
As a result, the Federal Government should implement a
secondary data minimization review and limit any sharing of
information only to the information directly associated with
the threat.
In certain discussions, there have been recommendations to
share all cybersecurity threat information, including the
related and incidentally-retained information, as soon as
possible with all Government entities. This is ill-advised.
If such sharing were to occur, each agency would need to
re-analyze the information to determine what is relevant and
what is not. If there is a requirement to immediately share,
then more information than necessary will be shared throughout
the Government.
Wide-spread sharing of related or incidentally-retained
information will chill information sharing generally. Companies
will not want their non-cyber-threat information shared widely,
even if there are use limitations. To be clear, use limitations
must be placed to provide guidance to the Government and
necessary comfort to the sharing companies.
The use of private-sector shared information must be
cabined to only include use for cybersecurity threat and
response. Relatedly, the Federal Government, including
intelligence agencies, should have limitations on what agencies
can retain and for how long with regard to the shared
information from companies.
Ensuring civilian control of the life cycle of
cybersecurity information from the private sector is critical
to comfort private companies before they share cybersecurity
threat indicators in volume.
Critical infrastructure sectors in companies have had
reservations about information being shared that may not only
be used for informing other vulnerable entities, but also would
have been used for investigations or National security without
concomitant benefit.
The liability limitation is also important. Companies and
ISAOs need to be comforted that the information they share will
be appropriately protected.
Finally, the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board
authority should be expanded to include oversight of
cybersecurity activities, including information sharing with
and from the private sector.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Callahan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mary Ellen Callahan
March 4, 2015
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, distinguished Members
of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today. My name is Mary Ellen Callahan. I am a partner at the law firm
of Jenner & Block, where I chair the Privacy and Information Governance
Practice and counsel private-sector clients on integrating privacy and
cybersecurity. From March 2009 to August 2012, I served as the chief
privacy officer at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS or
Department). I have worked as a privacy professional for 17 years and
have National and international experience in integrating privacy into
business and Government operations. I am appearing before this
subcommittee in my personal capacity and not on behalf of any other
entity.
Cybersecurity information sharing is vital to protect the private
and public-sector assets. In order to prepare for disclosing
cybersecurity threat indicators to other entities in the cybersecurity
ecosystem, however, the information sharing with the Government must
meet certain standards to address industry interests and needs.
In my testimony, I will address six factors that are crucial to
establishing robust, effective private-sector information sharing with
the Government. First and foremost, to encourage and facilitate
private-sector information sharing, the Government must develop and
implement legitimate privacy safeguards. Second, clearly-established
controls must be placed on what the Government does with the shared
information. Third, those controls must include identifying and
empowering a civilian interface with the private sector on information
sharing--not just as an intake center, but for all communications
related to cybersecurity information sharing. The fourth necessary step
is to establish the value proposition for information sharing;
information sharing must be at an acceptable cost and provide minimal
risk for the participants. Its companion point is to define clear and
objective limitations on liability for companies that participate in
information sharing--both civilly and criminally. And finally, Congress
should expressly provide the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight
Board with oversight authority over cybersecurity, including
information sharing.
privacy safeguards are essential to effective private sector
information sharing
As Apple CEO Tim Cook noted at the Cybersecurity Summit last month,
we have to protect our privacy rights or we will all face dire
consequences. At the same Summit, President Obama concurred, saying,
``When people go on-line, we shouldn't have to forfeit the basic
privacy we're entitled to as Americans.'' However, the Executive Order
on Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing does not
include a comprehensive privacy and civil liberties framework relating
to private-sector sharing, instead focusing only on the intra-
Government sharing, instructing agencies to work with their Senior
Agency Officials for Privacy (SAOPs) to ensure that appropriate
internal privacy protections are in place.
This decentralized and Government-only approach is flawed in two
ways. Following the 2013 Executive Order on Improving Cybersecurity,
each of the SAOPs for the major agencies prepared their assessments of
how they were complying with privacy and civil liberties protections in
department-to-department sharing. The detail and level of analysis by
the SAOPs differed greatly. Having a decentralized assessment of
privacy impacts, including how to intersect with the private sector,
will delay the implementation of adequate privacy protections, and will
not instill confidence from the private sector. Furthermore, this
decentralized approach does not need to take place under the 2015
Executive Order--because DHS has already has an existing infrastructure
in place, and it has been identified as the key department in this
private-sector information-sharing exercise.
It is unfortunate that the 2015 Executive Order did not elaborate
on the necessary privacy and civil liberties protections, particularly
with regard to private-sector information sharing. Nonetheless, the DHS
Privacy Office and Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties can lead
these inter-agency efforts to address private-sector concerns,
including with the intersection of Information Sharing and Analysis
Organizations (ISAOs).
Without a White House-based privacy policy official, the DHS Chief
Privacy Officer frequently serves as de facto privacy policy leadership
between and among the departments and agencies. As I testified before
this subcommittee in April 2013, DHS has taken multiple steps to
integrate cybersecurity and privacy as part of the Department's
cybersecurity mission. DHS has thoroughly integrated the Fair
Information Practice Principles (FIPPs) into its cybersecurity
programs. The FIPPS are the ``widely accepted framework of defining
principles to be used in the evaluation and consideration of systems,
processes, or programs that affect individual privacy.''\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The Fair Information Practice Principles as articulated in
National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace, April 2011,
available at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/rss_viewer/
NSTICstrategy_041511.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
DHS has been quite transparent about its cybersecurity
capabilities. As discussed below, transparency is an important tenet
under the FIPPs and an important cornerstone to encourage industry
participation. DHS has published several Privacy Impact Assessments
(PIAs) detailing pilot programs and information sharing among and
between Government entities as well as with private companies that have
signed Cooperative Research and Development Agreements (CRADAs). This
work will assist DHS in establishing deeper relationships with new and
existing ISAOs.
The Department already has skilled, dedicated privacy professionals
who can help navigate the privacy protections needed for effective
information sharing, with multiple cyber privacy professionals on
staff. These individuals focus on integrating the FIPPs of purpose
specification, data minimization, use limitation, data quality and
integrity and security systematically into all DHS cybersecurity
activities.
As part of its mission to implement the FIPPs and to integrate
privacy protections into DHS cybersecurity activities, DHS privacy
professionals review and provide comments and insight into
cybersecurity Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) (including protocols
for human analysis and retention of cyber alerts, signatures, and
indicators for minimization of information that could be personally
identifiable information), statements of work, contracts, and
international cyber information-sharing agreements. The DHS cyber
privacy professionals review all of the CRADAs signed with private
companies.
An important tenet of the FIPPs is the concept of accountability--
periodically reviewing and confirming that the privacy protections
initially embedded into any program remain relevant and that those
protections are implemented.
While I was DHS Chief Privacy Officer, I instituted ``Privacy
Compliance Reviews'' (PCRs) to confirm the accountability of several of
DHS's programs.\2\ We designed the PCR to improve a program's ability
to comply with assurances made in PIAs, System of Records Notices, and
formal information-sharing agreements. The Office conducts PCRs of on-
going DHS programs with program staff to ascertain how required privacy
protections are being implemented and to identify areas for
improvement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See DHS Privacy Office Annual Report, July 2011-June 2012 at
39-40 for a detailed discussion of Privacy Compliance Reviews.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the importance of the DHS mission in cybersecurity, the DHS
Privacy Office conducted a Privacy Compliance Review in late 2011,
publishing it in early 2012.\3\ The DHS Privacy Office found the DHS
cybersecurity entities generally complied with the privacy requirements
in the relevant Privacy Impact Assessments. Specifically, the DHS
cybersecurity entities fully complied with collecting information,
using information, internal and external sharing with Federal agencies
and accountability requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Privacy Compliance Review of the EINSTEIN Program, January 3,
2012, available at: http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/
privacy_privcomrev_nppd_ein.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, as this subcommittee knows, the DHS chief privacy
officer has unique investigatory authorities. Therefore, in the
unlikely event that something went awry in the future, the Chief
Privacy Officer can investigate those activities.\4\ This investigatory
authority may be of interest to the private companies and ISAOs as more
private information starts to flow into the Government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ 6 U.S.C.  142(b). See DHS Privacy Office Annual Report, July
2011-June 2012 at 40 for a discussion of the DHS chief privacy officer
investigatory authorities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The procedures, staffing, accountability and integration into the
relationships with private-sector entities through CRADAs demonstrate
the way in which privacy protections are integrated throughout the DHS
cybersecurity program. A framework is in place to address privacy and
civil liberties issues for private-sector information sharing, and DHS
is well-positioned to extend those privacy protections to private-
sector information sharing on a larger scale.
establish appropriate limitations on information sharing
Consistent with the FIPPs and private-sector company expectations,
there must be clearly-defined controls associated with the
cybersecurity threat indicators and the related information.
As the DHS portion of the 2013 Executive Order report noted, there
are at least three categories of information that companies may provide
when sharing cybersecurity threat indicators--information directly
associated with the cybersecurity threat, information related to the
cyber threat, and information incidentally retained when sharing the
threat indicators themselves.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Executive Order 13636 Privacy and Civil Liberties Assessment
Report 2014, available at: http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/2014-privacy-and-civil-liberties-assessment-report.pdf
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To limit the amount of incidentally retained and related
information being shared, companies should implement strict data
minimization standards. Frequently, however, it may not be evident upon
initial sharing--especially because time may be of the essence--which
information is directly associated with the cybersecurity threat and
which information is either incidentally retained or only related to
the cyber threat. Therefore, more information than necessary may be
shared. As a result, the Federal Government/DHS should implement a
secondary data minimization review and limit any sharing of information
only to the information directly associated with the cyber threat.
In certain discussions, there are recommendations to share all
cybersecurity threat information--including the related and
incidentally-retained information--as soon as possible with all
Government entities. This is ill-advised, for a few reasons. First,
this approach does not assist the other entities in identifying the
relevant information and requires each agency to re-analyze the
information to determine what is relevant and what is not. That is
inefficient. Instead, sharing immediately shifts the burden of
implementation and analysis to every entity and decentralizes the skill
set. If there is a requirement to immediately share, then more
information than necessary--and possibly inaccurate information--will
be shared throughout the Government. For these two reasons, the experts
at DHS should first parse the information and apply data minimization
principles to allow other agencies to respond quickly to the threat
itself, rather than weeding through potentially disparate layers of
information. The same principle of double data minimization applies to
information sharing between and among companies.
Wide-spread sharing of related or incidentally-retained information
will chill information sharing generally. Companies will not want their
non-cyber information shared widely, even if there are use limitations.
Providing anonymity for producers (especially private companies)--
allowing them an environment to share safely without fear of backlash
regarding their vulnerabilities--is vital to encourage cooperation.
Companies are legitimately concerned that their valuable trade secrets
or business-sensitive information may be available to the Government
and their competitors if the non-cyber threat indicators are not
minimized.
Even if cyber threat indicators are judiciously shared, use
limitations related to the shared information must be in place. In
addition to the liability limitations discussed below, the use of
private sector-shared information must be cabined to include only use
for cybersecurity threat and response. Relatedly, the Federal
Government (including intelligence agencies) should have limitations on
what agencies can retain and for how long with regard to the unique
information from companies, rather than the distilled threat
indicators.
civilian control of the cybersecurity information sharing is crucial to
encourage private information sharing
Ensuring civilian control of the life cycle of cybersecurity
information from the private sector is critical to comfort private
companies before they share cyber threat indicators in volume. Critical
infrastructure sectors and companies have reservations that information
being shared may not only be used to inform other vulnerable entities,
but also would be used for investigations or National security, without
any other concomitant benefit. The Executive Order is silent on the
issue of civilian control for the life cycle of the private-sector
relationship, but that control is crucial to the development of
repeatable, consistent information sharing.
Identifying DHS as the private-sector interface is vital to placate
these concerns. This committee began this process with the legislative
establishment of the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC) in 2014 through the National Cybersecurity
Protection Act. DHS must continue to be the primary interface with the
private sector, and must not just be seen as a pass-through to the
intelligence community.
As noted above, DHS has been transparent about its cybersecurity
activities, which is imperative to develop credentials and credibility
with the private sector. Now that NCCIC has been identified as the
leading agency, any information sharing must go through it. As
Assistant Secretary Andy Ozment reported to this committee in February,
NCCIC received 97,000 incident reports, released 12,000 actionable
cyber alerts or warnings and responded to 115 cyber incidents last
year. These statistics demonstrate that DHS is maturing. As a civilian
agency, it is well-positioned to liaise between private companies and
the Government.
information sharing must not threaten companies
Information sharing must be at an acceptable cost and, therefore,
provide minimal risk for the participants. If participants believe they
will be targeted by attackers by sharing information, such as
configurations, vulnerabilities, or even the fact that they have been
targeted, they will not be willing to share information.
DHS has received thorough advice--including from private-sector
representatives and advocates--as part of its Federal Advisory
Committee Act privacy committee, the Data Privacy and Integrity
Advisory Committee. The DPIAC issued a significant advisory paper for
DHS to consider when implementing information-sharing pilots and
programs with other entities, including the private sector.\6\ The
report addresses two important questions in privacy and cybersecurity:
``What specific privacy protections should DHS consider when sharing
information from a cybersecurity pilot project with other agencies?''
and ``What privacy considerations should DHS include in evaluating the
effectiveness of cybersecurity pilots?'' This type of advice helps DHS
design systems to avoid antagonizing companies and ISAOs and comfort
them they will not somehow be punished for participating.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Report from the Cyber Subcommittee to the Data Privacy and
Integrity Advisory Committee (DPIAC) on Privacy and Cybersecurity
Pilots, Submitted by the DPIAC Cybersecurity Subcommittee, November
2012, available at: http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/privacy/DPIAC/dpiac_cyberpilots_10_29_2012.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
limitations on liability must be clearly defined
The issue of liability limitations has been discussed at length
during the pendency of the cybersecurity legislation. It obviously is
an important issue for companies, and it needs to be resolved
appropriately in order to encourage information sharing. With that
said, having clearly-defined limitations may help companies even more
than having a ``notwithstanding any other law'' blanket exception.
The liability limitation must address at least two aspects
directly. First, the shared information cannot be shared with other
agencies and then used in a civil or criminal enforcement action
against the sharing company. That is crucial. Furthermore, the shared
information should not be used in civil or criminal enforcement actions
against a third party who is not the cyber attacker--namely, if shared
information contains damning information either about the sharing
company or a third-party company, the Government's awareness of that
information cannot lead to enforcement.
Furthermore, companies and ISAOs need to be comforted that the
information they share will be appropriately protected. The DHS
transparency on its systems will hopefully ameliorate that concern.
The anti-trust concerns raised in earlier Congresses have waned in
light of the Joint Department of Justice/Federal Trade Commission
Statement Antitrust Policy Statement on Sharing of Cybersecurity
Information.\7\ Nonetheless, more clarity, particularly vis-a-vis
inter-company sharing, will induce more information sharing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/guidelines/305027.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
privacy and civil liberties oversight board should be granted oversight
authority over cybersecurity information sharing
The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board (PCLOB) serves an
important oversight function on intelligence and National security
activities related to terrorism. The PCLOB's authority should be
expanded to include oversight on cybersecurity activities, including
information sharing with and from the private sector. This addition
will further bolster the FIPPs throughout the cyber information-sharing
life cycle, and will provide additional oversight capacity over the
collection, use, sharing, and retention of private-sector information.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before this subcommittee
this afternoon. I would be happy to take any questions you may have.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Callahan.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Garcia to testify.

TESTIMONY OF GREGORY T. GARCIA, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, FINANCIAL
SERVICES SECTOR COORDINATING COUNCIL

Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thanks for the
opportunity to address the subcommittee about the President's
information-sharing Executive Order.
The Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council, or
FSSCC, was establishes in 2002. It involves 65 of the largest
financial services providers and their industry associations.
Its mission is to coordinate sector-wide efforts to strengthen
the resiliency of the financial services sector against threats
to the Nation's critical infrastructure. So we're focused on
the critical infrastructure sector.
In practice, this means that we work with Government and
other partners to address information-sharing content and
procedures, incident response, cyber and operational risk
management best practices, and appropriate policy enhancements
to support the above objectives.
We've learned over the years that strong risk management
requires participating in communities of trust that share
information on cyber and physical threats, vulnerabilities, and
incidents. This is based on the simple concept of strength in
numbers, the neighborhood watch, shared situational awareness.
While the FSSCC focuses on longer-term trends and strategy,
our sector's operational arm is the Financial Services
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, or FS-ISAC. The FS-
ISAC participates in many information-sharing programs. One key
partner that you mentioned in your opening statement is the
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center,
or NCCIC.
The NCCIC is a hub for sharing information about cyber and
communications incidents across sectors, and the financial
sector has a seat on the NCCIC watch floor. The industry-sector
officials that serve on the NCCIC are cleared at the Top Secret
level. So they attend daily briefs and other NCCIC meetings
about threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents affecting the
financial sector.
Within the sector, FS-ISAC manages a formal structure for
collecting, analyzing, and sharing actionable intelligence and
best practices among members and the sector, as well as with
our industry, Government, and law enforcement partners. I'll be
happy to talk about all of that in detail during Q and A about
how we do that.
The sector continues to make progress on the speed and
reliability of its information-sharing efforts. Late last year,
for example, the financial sector announced a new automated
threat-sharing capability called Soltra Edge. This uses open
standards funded by DHS that facilitate automated machine-to-
machine information sharing.
It helps our industry increase the speed, scale, and
accuracy of information sharing, and it accelerates the time to
resolution. It can be used by any sectors and with any sectors
or information-sharing groups. So this is a way of
complimenting human-to-human sharing by using machine-to-
machine whenever possible.
So the point is the financial sector has a very robust
information-sharing environment among ourselves and with the
Government and we're always working to improve it.
So let me just spend the final moments of my statement
discussing the President's Executive Order on private-sector
information sharing.
In our view, the administration's Executive Action is a
positive step. We expect it has the potential to increase the
volume and quality of actionable and timely cybersecurity
information. We offer a few observations that can inform
implementation of the order.
First, as the sharing and use of Classified information can
improve our response capability, it's important that the
clearance process for critical sectors like ours is fast and
efficient. The Executive Order supports this goal by enhancing
DHS's involvement in the clearance process. This can help
accelerate the security clearance process for critical sector
owners and operators.
Also, in general, we support the creation of the ISAOs,
Information Sharing Analysis Organizations. This can be a way
for noncritical sector groups to share cybersecurity
information and coordinate analysis and response.
We understand that the impetus for the ISAO proposal was to
raise awareness for stakeholder groups looking to coalesce
around joint information-sharing objectives, and we believe
that the ISAO standards development process should build on the
strong foundation laid by the ISACs.
We caveat, however, that ISACs, as distinct from ISAOs,
must retain their special partnership status with the
Government, given their broad sector representation and a
strong cadre of operational support with security clearances.
Certain important principles need to be kept in mind for
the standards development process. Sharing is successful within
communities of trust when there are clear and enforced
information-handling rules.
Information sharing is not a competitive sport. Operational
standards should incentivize federated information-sharing.
Intelligence needs to be fused across trust communities, not
diffused or siloed.
Government processes for collecting, analyzing, and
packaging intelligence for private-sector consumption must be
streamlined and transparent. Indeed, the 2013 Executive Order
directs the Government to do just that.
In anticipating the potential for heavy demands from a
proliferation of ISAOs, the NCCIC should prioritize its
resources and engagements according to established criteria.
They'll need to consider Government capacity to effectively
serve critical sector constituents in steady-state and surge
mode. They need to consider the reach those stakeholders have
into their sectors and the effectiveness of their capabilities.
It's also important that the ISAO standards development
process be collaborative, open, and transparent. The process
managed during the development of the NIST cybersecurity
framework, for example, is an excellent example of this
principle.
Okay. Mr. Chairman, that concludes my oral remarks. I'll be
happy to answer questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Garcia follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gregory T. Garcia
March 4, 2015
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to address the
subcommittee about the President's information sharing Executive Order.
My name is Gregory T. Garcia. I am executive director of the
Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council (FSSCC), which was
established in 2002 and involves 65 of the largest financial services
providers and industry associations representing clearinghouses,
commercial banks, credit card networks and credit rating agencies,
exchanges/electronic communication networks, financial advisory
services, insurance companies, financial utilities, Government-
sponsored enterprises, investment banks, merchants, retail banks, and
electronic payment firms.
fsscc mission
The mission of the FSSCC is to strengthen the resiliency of the
financial services sector against attacks and other threats to the
Nation's critical infrastructure by proactively identifying threats and
promoting protection, driving preparedness, collaborating with the
Federal Government, and coordinating crisis response for the benefit of
the financial services sector, consumers and the Nation's economic
security. During the past decade, this strategic partnership has
continued to grow, in terms of both the size and commitment of its
membership and the breadth of issues it addresses. Members volunteer
their time and resources to FSSCC with a sense of responsibility to the
broader sector, financial consumers and the Nation.
In simplest terms, members of the FSSCC assess security and
resiliency trends and policy developments affecting our critical
financial infrastructure, and coordinate among ourselves and with our
partners to develop a consolidated point of view and coherent strategy
for dealing with those issues.
Accordingly, our sector's primary objectives are to:
1. Implement and maintain structured routines for sharing timely
and actionable information related to cyber and physical
threats and vulnerabilities among firms, across sectors of
industry, and between the private sector and Government.
2. Improve risk management capabilities and the security posture of
firms across the financial sector and the service providers
they rely on by encouraging the development and use of common
approaches and best practices.
3. Collaborate with homeland security, law enforcement and
intelligence communities, financial regulatory authorities,
other sectors of industry, and international partners to
respond to and recover from significant incidents.
4. Discuss policy and regulatory initiatives that advance
infrastructure resiliency and security priorities through
robust coordination between Government and industry.
To achieve these objectives we partner with the Department of
Treasury, DHS, law enforcement, and financial regulatory agencies
forming our Government Coordinating Council counterpart--called the
Financial and Banking Information Infrastructure Committee (FBIIC).
Rolling up into those broad objectives are numerous initiatives
undertaken collaboratively within this public-private partnership,
including committee-organized workstreams to, for example:

improve information-sharing content and procedures between
Government and the sector;

conduct joint exercises to test our resiliency and
information-sharing procedures under differing scenarios;

prioritize critical infrastructure protection research and
development funding needs;

engage with other critical sectors and international
partners to better understand and leverage our
interdependencies;

advocate broad adoption of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework,
including among small and mid-sized financial institutions
across the country;

develop best practices guidance for operational risk issues
involving third-party risk, supply chain, and cyber insurance
strategies.
We have learned over the years that a foundational element of any
strong risk management strategy for cyber and physical protection
involves participation in communities of trust that share information
related to threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents affecting those
communities. That foundation is based on the simple concepts of
strength in numbers, the neighborhood watch, and shared situational
awareness.
To achieve this goal, public and private-sector partners exchange
data and contextual information about specific incidents and longer-
term trends and developments. Sharing this information helps to prevent
incidents from occurring and to reduce the risk of a successful
incident at one firm later impacting another. These efforts
increasingly focus on including smaller firms and include international
partners.
Financial-sector stakeholders participate in information-sharing
programs operated by the Department of Homeland Security. For example,
the financial sector and Treasury Department maintain a presence within
the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC), which serves as a hub for sharing information related to
cybersecurity and communications incidents across sectors, among other
roles and responsibilities. The sector also works closely with the
National Infrastructure Coordinating Center (NICC), which is the
dedicated 24/7 coordination and information-sharing operations center
that maintains situational awareness of the Nation's critical
infrastructure for the Federal Government.
The financial sector benefits greatly from its close information-
sharing relationship with law enforcement partners, including the
Federal Bureau of Investigations and the United States Secret Service.
fs-isac information-sharing programs and operations
For the financial sector, the primary community of trust for
critical financial infrastructure protection is the Financial Services
Information Sharing and Analysis Center, or FS-ISAC, which is the
operational heartbeat of the FSSCC strategic body.
The FS-ISAC was formed in 1999 in response to the 1998 Presidential
Decision Directive 63 (PDD 63), which called for the public and private
sectors to work together to address cyber threats to the Nation's
critical infrastructures. After 9/11, and in response to Homeland
Security Presidential Directive 7 (and its 2013 successor, Presidential
Policy Directive 21) and the Homeland Security Act, the FS-ISAC
expanded its role to encompass physical threats to our sector.
The FS-ISAC is a 501(c)6 nonprofit organization and is funded
entirely by its member firms and sponsors. In 2004, there were only 68
members of the FS-ISAC, mostly larger financial services firms. Since
that time the membership has expanded to more than 5,000 organizations
including commercial banks and credit unions of all sizes, brokerage
firms, insurance companies, data security payments processors, and 24
trade associations representing virtually all of the U.S. financial
services sector.
Since its founding, the FS-ISAC's operations and culture of trusted
collaboration have evolved into what we believe is a successful model
for how other industry sectors can organize themselves around this
security imperative. The overall objective of the FS-ISAC is to protect
the financial services sector against cyber and physical threats and
risk. It acts as a trusted third party that provides anonymity to allow
members to share threat, vulnerability, and incident information in a
non-attributable and trusted manner. The FS-ISAC provides a formal
structure for valuable and actionable information to be shared amongst
members, the sector, and its industry and Government partners, which
ultimately benefits the Nation. FS-ISAC information-sharing activities
include:

delivery of timely, relevant, and actionable cyber and
physical email alerts from various sources distributed through
the FS-ISAC Security Operations Center (SOC);

an anonymous on-line submission capability to facilitate
member sharing of threat, vulnerability, and incident
information in a non-attributable and trusted manner;

operation of email listservs supporting attributable
information exchange by various special interest groups
including the Financial Services Sector Coordinating Council
(FSSCC), the FS-ISAC Threat Intelligence Committee, threat
intelligence sharing open to the membership, the Payment
Processors Information Sharing Council (PPISC), the Clearing
House and Exchange Forum (CHEF), the Business Resilience
Committee, and the Payments Risk Council;

anonymous surveys that allow members to request information
regarding security best practices at other organizations;

bi-weekly threat information sharing calls for members and
invited security/risk experts to discuss the latest threats,
vulnerabilities, and incidents affecting the sector;

emergency threat or incident notifications to all members
using the Critical Infrastructure Notification System (CINS);

emergency conference calls to share information with the
membership and solicit input and collaboration;

engagement with private security companies to identify
threat information of relevance to the membership and the
sector;

participation in various cyber exercises such as those
conducted by DHS (Cyber Storm I, II, and III) and support for
FSSCC exercises such as CyberFIRE and Quantum Dawn;

development of risk mitigation best practices, threat
viewpoints and toolkits, and preparation of cybersecurity
briefings and white papers;

administration of Subject Matter Expert (SME) committees
including the Threat Intelligence Committee and Business
Resilience Committee, which: Provide in-depth analyses of risks
to the sector, conduct technical, business, and operational
impact assessments; determine the sector's cyber and physical
threat level; and, recommend mitigation and remediation
strategies and tactics;

special projects to address specific risk issues such as the
Account Takeover Task Force;

document repositories for members to share information and
documentation with other members;

development and testing of crisis management procedures for
the sector in collaboration with the FSSCC and other industry
bodies;

semi-annual member meetings and conferences; and

on-line webinar presentations and regional outreach programs
to educate organizations, including small- to medium-sized
regional financial services firms, on threats, risks, and best
practices.
fs-isac partnerships
The FS-ISAC works closely with various Government agencies
including the U.S. Department of Treasury, Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), Federal Reserve, Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council (FFIEC) regulatory agencies, United States Secret
Service, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the intelligence
community, and State and local governments.
In partnership with DHS, FS-ISAC 2 years ago became the third ISAC
to participate in the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC) watch floor. FS-ISAC representatives,
cleared at the Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmented Information (TS/SCI)
level, attend the daily briefs and other NCCIC meetings to share data
information on threats, vulnerabilities, incidents, and potential or
known impacts to the financial services sector. Our presence on the
NCCIC floor has enhanced situational awareness and information sharing
between the financial services sector and the Government, and there are
numerous examples of success to illustrate this.
As part of this partnership, the FS-ISAC set up an email listserv
with U.S. CERT where actionable incident, threat, and vulnerability
information is shared in near-real time. This listserv allows FS-ISAC
members to share directly with U.S. CERT and further facilitates the
information sharing that is already occurring between FS-ISAC members
and with the NCCIC watch floor or with other Government organizations.
In addition, FS-ISAC representatives sit on the Cyber Unified
Coordination Group (Cyber UCG). This group was set up under authority
of the National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP) and has been
actively engaged in incident response. Cyber UCG's handling and
communications with various sectors following the distributed denial of
service (DDOS) attacks on the financial sector in late 2012 and early
2013 is one example of how this group is effective in facilitating
relevant and actionable information sharing.
Consistent with the directives of Presidential Policy Directive 21
and Executive Order 13636 of 2014, the Treasury established the Cyber
Intelligence Group (CIG) as part of the Office of Critical
Infrastructure Protection and Compliance Policy. The CIG was
established in response to a need identified by the financial sector
for the Government to have a focal point for sharing cyber threat-
related information with the sector. The CIG identifies and analyzes
all-source intelligence on cyber threats to the financial sector;
shares timely, actionable information that alerts the sector to threats
and enables firms' prevention and mitigation efforts; and solicits
feedback and information requirements from the sector.
Finally, it should be noted that the FS-ISAC and FSSCC have worked
closely with its Government partners to obtain security clearances for
key financial services sector personnel. These clearances have been
used to brief the sector on new information security threats and have
provided useful information for the sector to implement effective risk
controls to combat these threats.
In addition, several membership subgroups meet regularly with their
own circles of trust to share information, including: The Insurance
Risk Council (IRC); the Community Institution Council (CIC) with
hundreds of members from community banks and credit unions; and the
Community Institution Toolkit Working Group with a mission to develop a
framework and series of best practices to protect community
institutions. This includes a mentoring program to assist community
institutions just getting started with an IT security staff.
The FS-ISAC also works very closely with the other critical
infrastructure sectors on an ISAC-to-ISAC basis as well as through the
National Council of ISACs. Information about threats, incidents, and
best practices is shared daily among the ISACs via ISAC analyst calls,
and a cross-sector information-sharing platform. The ISACs also come
together during a crisis to coordinate information and mitigations as
applicable.
automated threat information sharing
The sector continues to make significant progress toward increasing
the speed and reliability of its information-sharing efforts through
expanded use of DHS-funded open specifications, including Structured
Threat Information eXchange (STIX
TM
) and Trusted Automated
eXchange of Indicator Information (TAXII
TM
).
Late last year, the financial sector announced a new automated
threat capability it created called ``Soltra Edge'', which is the
result of a joint venture of the FS-ISAC and the Depository Trust and
Clearing Corporation. This capability addresses a fundamental challenge
in our information-sharing environment: Typically the time associated
with chasing down any specific threat indicator is substantial. The
challenge has been to help our industry increase the speed, scale, and
accuracy of information sharing and accelerate time to resolution.
The Soltra Edge capability developed by the sector removes a huge
burden of work for both large and small financial organizations,
including those that rely on third parties for monitoring and incident
response. It is designed for use by many parts of the critical
infrastructure ecosystem, including the financial services sector, the
health care sector, the energy sectors, transportation sectors, other
ISACs, National and regional CERTs (Computer Emergency Response Teams)
and vendors and services providers that serve these sectors.
Key goals of Soltra-Edge are to:

Deliver an industry-created utility to automate threat
intelligence sharing;

Reduce response time from days/weeks/months to seconds/
minutes;

Deliver 10 times reduction in effort and cost to respond;

Operate on the tenets of at-cost model and open standards
(STIX, TAXII);

Leverage DTCC scalability; FS-ISAC community & best
practices;

Provide a platform that can be extended to all sizes of
financial services firms, other ISACs and industries;

Enable integration with vendor solutions (firewalls,
intrusion detection, anti-virus, threat intelligence, etc.).
With these advancements, one organization's incident becomes
everyone's defense at machine speed. We expect this automated solution
to be a ``go-to'' resource to speed incident response across thousands
of organizations in many countries within the next few years.
exercises
The sector regularly tests its resilience through exercises to
identify gaps and exercise processes related to information sharing.
Efforts such as the annual ``Cyber Attack against Payment Processes
(CAPP)'', ``Quantum Dawn'' and public/private exercises provide
essential insight into our ability individually and collaboratively to
respond to various attack scenarios.
In carrying out this information-sharing partnership, the financial
sector and Government partners are committed to ensuring that
individual privacy and civil liberties protections are incorporated
into all activities, to include technical analysis, information sharing
on threats, and incident response efforts.
the president's executive order on promoting private-sector
cybersecurity information sharing
As discussed above, the Financial Services Sector Coordinating
Council (FSSCC) considers strong collaboration and information sharing
within the sector and with Government to be a critical element of
cybersecurity risk management.
Thus, in alignment with the FS-ISAC's statement for the record by
Denise Anderson, vice president of the FS-ISAC and chair of the
National Council of ISACs, we applaud this administration's efforts to
improve our cybersecurity information-sharing environment so that we
can better anticipate, protect against, and respond to cyber threats.
The administration's Executive Action is a positive step toward
increasing the volume and quality of actionable and timely
cybersecurity information.
With key Federal support from the Treasury Department as our
Sector-Specific Agency, law enforcement and the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS), our network defenders are better able to prepare for
cyber threats when there is a consistent, reliable, and sustainable
flow of actionable cybersecurity information and analysis, at both a
Classified and Unclassified level.
We are making some progress toward this goal, but it has become
increasingly necessary for appropriately-cleared representatives of
critical sectors such as financial services to have access, and provide
contributions, to Classified information that enables analysts and
operators to take timely action to defend essential systems.
Accordingly, the Executive Order's enhancement of DHS's role in
accelerating the security clearance process for critical sector owners
and operators is a clear indication of the administration's support for
this public-private partnership.
In considering enhancements to this model, agility and innovation
are essential for the operational resilience of critical sector
functions. In this spirit, we support the creation of Information
Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) as a mechanism for all
sectors, regions, and other stakeholder groups to share cybersecurity
information and coordinate analysis and response.
While ISACs must retain their status as the Government's primary
critical infrastructure partners given their mandate for broad sectoral
representation, the development of ISAOs should be facilitated for
stakeholder groups that require a collaborative cyber and physical
threat information-sharing capability that builds on the strong
foundation laid by the ISACs.
As the ISAO standards development process unfolds, the FSSCC
believes certain principles must be upheld for structuring both the
ISAOs themselves and the Government's interaction with them:

Sharing of sensitive security information within and among
communities of trust is successful when operational standards
of practice establish clear and enforced information handling
rules.

Information sharing is not a competitive sport: While
competition in innovation can improve technical capabilities,
operational standards should incentivize federated information
sharing. Threat and vulnerability intelligence needs to be
fused across trust communities, not diffused or siloed.

Government internal processes for collecting, analyzing, and
packaging CIP intelligence for ISAC/ISAO consumption must be
streamlined and transparent to maximize timeliness, accuracy,
and relevance of actionable shared information. Indeed, Section
4 of EO 13636 directs the Government to improve its
dissemination of cyber threat intelligence to the private
sector, enabling entities to protect their networks. Full
implementation of this directive is necessary to achieve the
objectives of the President's information sharing Executive
Order.

To manage scarce resources, Government information-sharing
mechanisms such as the National Cyber and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC) and the Treasury Department's Cyber
Intelligence Group (CIG) should prioritize engagements with
ISACs and ISAOs according to transparently-established impact
criteria, such as Government capacity to effectively serve CIP
constituents in steady-state and surge mode, the reach those
CIP stakeholders have into their sectors, and the effectiveness
of their capabilities.
It is also important that the process to develop the ISAO standards
is collaborative, open, and transparent. The process managed by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) during the
development of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework is an excellent example
of the appropriate leveraging of private-sector input, knowledge, and
experience to develop guidance that will primarily impact non-
Governmental entities. We encourage DHS, as the implementing authority
of the President's EO, to emulate the engagement model that NIST used
to create and adopt their Cybersecurity Framework. The process worked.
Finally, for DHS to be successful implementing this EO and its many
cybersecurity risk management and partnership authorities, it must be
sufficiently resourced with the best analytical and technical
capabilities, with a cadre of highly-qualified cybersecurity leaders
and analytical teams to conduct its mission. There must be a concerted
effort to recruit, retain, and maintain a world-class workforce that is
able to assess cyber threats globally and help the private sector
reduce risk to this Nation.
The FSSCC believes that, with the application of the principles
discussed in this statement, the creation of ISAOs and their
partnership agreements with DHS have the potential to complement the
ISAC foundation and measurably improve cyber risk reduction for
critical infrastructure and the National economy.
On the subject of legislation, Mr. Chairman, passing cyber threat
information-sharing legislation that encourages more information
sharing between the private sector and Government and within the
private sector, with fewer concerns about liability, will have a
positive operational impact on the security of the Nation's networks.
This sector-wide position is articulated in detail in recent letters
from leading financial services trade associations.
Mr. Chairman and Members of the committee, this concludes my
testimony.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Chairman now recognizes Dr. Libicki.

STATEMENT OF MARTIN C. LIBICKI, THE RAND CORPORATION

Mr. Libicki. Good afternoon, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking
Member Richmond, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
My name is Martin Libicki from The RAND Corporation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today about the
President's cybersecurity information-sharing proposal. As a
general proposition, information sharing among defenders makes
for a better defense.
Nevertheless, two concerns merit note. First, the current
proposals do not address and may even exacerbate a
cybersecurity divide. Second, an enormous amount of political
energy is being dedicated to a point solution to a broad
problem.
A cybersecurity divide exists between organizations,
roughly speaking, large enough to afford their own chief
information security officer and those that cannot.
ISAOs, for their part, are oriented towards organizations
that can afford the membership fees. Unless other mechanisms to
share information with the smaller organizations are bolstered,
the latter are going to be left out of whatever information-
sharing exists.
As for the narrower focus, several weeks ago President
Obama said, ``There's only one way to defend America from cyber
threats, and that's Government and industry working together,
sharing appropriate information.'' An associated Executive
Order calls for ``fostering the development and adoption of
automated mechanisms for the sharing of information.''
However, cybersecurity is so complex a challenge that not
only is information sharing not the ``only one way,'' but the
model proposed for information sharing is not even the only one
way to share information.
To explain why, let's note three models of information
sharing.
In the first model, vulnerabilities in software are found
by white hat hackers and the forensic specialists brought into
the attention of the vendors. The vendors, when they receive
this information, attack the vulnerabilities and generally fix
them. This is a model that would lead to better software and
can be encouraged by the Federal Government with a modest
addition of funding and without having to pass any new laws.
In a second model, the collection and analysis of cyber
attacks can shed light on what organizations could have done
differently to have prevented or at least mitigated the effects
of such attacks. Such sharing permits evidence-based
assessments of alternative cybersecurity tools, techniques, and
practices. This model can be encouraged by empowering
organizations, such as NIST, and funding various R&D entities,
such as the ARPAs and NSF, to build and disseminate a
systematic body of knowledge on cybersecurity.
The first model results in better software. The second
model results in better cybersecurity management. Organizations
of all size can benefit from each.
The third model of information sharing, organizations are
asked to report details of the attacks they have suffered, such
as malware samples, attacker modus operandi, IP addresses,
attack vectors, induced anomalies, social engineering methods
and so on. These are used to profile specific threat actors so
that the signatures of their activity can be fed to intrusion
detection and prevention systems of organizations that happen
to have them.
The usefulness of this third model, however, requires that
four assumptions be true.
The first assumption is that most serious attacks come from
specific black hat hacker groups who repeat their attacks often
enough so that evidence from early attacks can be used to
detect later ones.
The second assumption is that such groups maintain a
consistent modus operandi that is constantly reused.
The third assumption is that such signatures can be shared
in a timely manner, something that is complicated by the length
of time--several months to a year--between when a typical
advanced attack starts and when it is discovered.
The fourth assumption is that such signatures will not
evolve over time, even if information sharing were to become so
wide-spread that the failure to evolve on the part of hackers
would doom their ability to compromise networks.
An analogy may be made to the anti-virus industry. The
majors run very large information-gathering networks fed by
inputs from sensors placed throughout the internet, but the
anti-virus model has lost viability in the face of ever-
shifting signatures and the tendency of attackers to test their
malware against anti-virus suites before releasing them.
Granted, the threat-based information-sharing model, if
substantiated, would not be totally useless. Not every black
hat hacker group will be conscientiously altering its modus
operandi, and forcing such groups to cluster their attacks or
shift their attack vectors does mean more work for them.
Nevertheless, threat-based information sharing is no
panacea, and, yet, efforts to achieve it have absorbed a
disproportional share of the legislative and media bandwidth on
the topic of cybersecurity policy, crowding out the
consideration of alternative approaches. Hence, the basis for
our concern.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this important
topic, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Libicki follows:]
Prepared Statement of Martin C. Libicki \1\ \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The opinions and conclusions expressed in this testimony are
the author's alone and should not be interpreted as representing those
of RAND or any of the sponsors of its research. This product is part of
the RAND Corporation testimony series. RAND testimonies record
testimony presented by RAND associates to Federal, State, or local
legislative committees; Government-appointed commissions and panels;
and private review and oversight bodies. The RAND Corporation is a
nonprofit research organization providing objective analysis and
effective solutions that address the challenges facing the public and
private sectors around the world. RAND's publications do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
\2\ TThis testimony is available for free download at http://
www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/CT425.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 4, 2015
Good morning, Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about the President's cybersecurity
information-sharing proposal.
The President's initiatives to improve cybersecurity through
information sharing are laudable. Information sharing can and should be
an important element in efforts to ensure that defenders learn from
each other faster than attackers learn from each other. The fact that
attackers do learn from each other is something that we know from
research that RAND conducted for a report released last year on cyber
crime markets (Markets for Cybercrime Tools and Stolen Data: Hackers'
Bazaar).
People have been calling for greater information sharing for almost
20 years, dating back to the formation of Information Sharing and
Analysis Centers (ISACs) in the late 1990s and continuing through the
recent reformulation of ISACs into Information Sharing and Analysis
Organizations (ISAOs). Although more information is being shared, the
President's initiatives are prompted by the perception that information
sharing is not advancing fast enough. Those asked to share gain little
directly from sharing and believe they face financial, reputational,
and legal risks in doing so. As a result, legislation has been
repeatedly introduced to facilitate the increased exchange of
information--notably, I would argue, threat information. Without going
into a detailed assessment of the privacy implications of such
legislation, apart from noting that concerns have been raised, its
purposes are nevertheless sound and its passage can help improve
cybersecurity.
Two concerns, however, merit note. One is that the current
proposals do not address, and may even exacerbate, the differences
between the cybersecurity enjoyed by small- and medium-sized
enterprises on the one hand and that enjoyed by large enterprises on
the other: A cybersecurity divide. The second concern is that the
current legislative proposals represent an enormous amount of political
energy dedicated to what is actually a narrowly-focused point solution
to the problem of cybersecurity when a much broader approach is
required. Consider each concern in turn.
The cybersecurity divide exists roughly at the boundary between
those organizations that are large enough to afford their own chief
information security officer (CISO) and those that cannot. As a very
rough estimate, though this varies by sector, organizations with more
than 1,000 employees can afford to hire a CISO, and those that are
smaller cannot. Organizations that cannot afford to employ a CISO can
usually offer only generalized cybersecurity training for their
employees (if they do so at all); must rely on commodity hardware and
software, often deployed with default settings; make do with commercial
network offerings such as routers; and use off-the-shelf firewall
tools. Organizations that can afford to employ a CISO can offer and
customize specialized training, can afford to optimize their hardware
and software for cybersecurity, can purchase sophisticated
cybersecurity tools, can hire information security analysts, and
contract with third parties for additional cybersecurity services.
Fortunately, cloud offerings can be and are tailored for organizations
of all sizes, but this only represents a partial approach to
cybersecurity and may introduce a few additional security problems of
their own.
ISAOs, laudable as they may be, are oriented toward organizations
that can afford their membership fees; at $10,000 a year, most small-
and medium-sized organizations are priced out of that market. Consider
the likelihood that these ISAO's become the primary--or worse,
exclusive--conduit for information sharing between the Government and
private organizations. If so--and in the absence of other mechanisms to
share information with the broader public--the smaller organizations
are going to be left out. Whatever advantage they reap from
information-sharing rests on the hope that the existence of ISAOs as
conduits for shared information does not detract from paths more suited
to smaller enterprises.
The risks of exacerbating the cybersecurity divide are related to
the problem of an overly narrow focus for information sharing
associated with pending legislation.
Several weeks ago, during the Cybersecurity Summit, President Obama
said, ``There's only one way to defend America from cyber threats, and
that's Government and industry working together [and] sharing
appropriate information.'' However, cybersecurity is not that
elementary; there is no one unique way. Furthermore, the associated
Executive Order calls for ``fostering the development and adoption of
automated mechanisms for the sharing of information.'' That being so,
not only is information sharing not the ``only one way'' to improve
cybersecurity, but the model proposed for information sharing is also
not the ``only one way'' to share information.
To explain why requires stepping back to take a broader look at
information sharing. Among the many types of information sharing, three
merit note.
First is the process by which software vulnerabilities are brought
to the attention of those who make and maintain software. A large
percentage of all networks--particularly the more diligently-defended
ones--are penetrated because their software contains vulnerabilities
that have not been fixed, notably because the vendors have not
discovered them. These are ``zero-day vulnerabilities''; they permit
``zero-day exploits.'' Software vulnerabilities in Java, Acrobat,
Flash, and Microsoft Office products are commonly exploited to allow
attackers to enter computer networks and systems (which is why users
are warned not to click on suspect websites or open suspicious
attachments). A large and growing community of researchers and white
hat hackers are busy finding these vulnerabilities and reporting them
to vendors. A related community examines actual cyber attacks to
determine which vulnerabilities were exploited in order to serve the
same end of fixing them. A world with fewer software vulnerabilities
would be a safer world (although patches do no good until installed).
Occasionally, software vendors confronted with a number of similar
vulnerability reports about their products may find correlated
architectural weaknesses in their offerings and make more fundamental
changes. The Federal Government can do more to encourage and accelerate
the process of finding software vulnerabilities with modest amounts of
funding and without passing new legislation.
Second is the use of information sharing to improve cybersecurity
practice. The collection and analysis of cyber attacks, both those that
succeed and those that may be termed near-misses, can shed light on
what organizations could have done differently to have prevented or at
least mitigated the effects of such attacks. Such analysis can provide
evidence-based assessments of the cost-effectiveness of alternative
cybersecurity tools and techniques. Such an activity is already
informally carried out to some extent at the worker level, especially
among the information security community and disseminated through
professional interaction. This should continue to be encouraged, and
should trickle up to the C-Suite and managers. Such activity can lead
to insights that are scientifically validated (or refuted), which then
become part of the cybersecurity canon, to be spread through the
literature and other formal and informal exchanges within the
information technology community, as well as taught in the various
schoolhouses. The Government can aid this process by empowering
organizations such as the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) and funding the various Advanced Research Project
Agencies (ARPAs) and the National Science Foundation (NSF) to build a
systematic body of knowledge.
These first two types of information sharing do not exacerbate the
cybersecurity divide. The first should result in better software, which
benefits everyone. The second should result in better cybersecurity
practices, which also should benefit everyone, particularly those
organizations that have at least one person who can think
systematically about cybersecurity.
This now leaves the third type of information sharing, one that is
specific to the characterization of threats and the impetus behind the
legislation. It calls for organizations to report attacks and provide
relevant details of these attacks, such as malware samples, attacker
modus operandi, IP addresses, attack vectors, induced anomalies, social
engineering methods, etc. These instances, in turn, are used to create
a profile of specific threat actors and infer signatures of their
activities, which, in turn, would be circulated to other organizations
so that they can better prepare themselves, notably by putting such
signatures into their intrusion prevention/detection systems. The
appendix of the 2013 Mandiant report (APT1: Exposing One of China's
Cyber Espionage Units), for instance, was stuffed with many signatures
that could be used by potential victims of APT1 (their name for a
specific hacker group supported by China's Peoples Liberation Army) to
recognize signs of threat activity infection. Although such signatures
could, and in many cases, would also be supplemented by intelligence
collection, the Classified nature of such additional material limits
the number and type of machines on which they could reside.
The usefulness of threat-based information sharing rests on four
assumptions about the nature of the threat itself. Such assumptions
would have to be largely or totally true before the value of
establishing an information-sharing apparatus can justify the effort to
operate it, persuade organizations to contribute to it, and offset the
residual risks to privacy that such information transfer may entail.
The first assumption is that a sufficient share of all serious
attacks comes from specific black hat hacker groups and that each carry
out enough attacks over a period of time so that their modus operandi
can be characterized. Trivially, if every black hat hacker organization
carried out just one attack, signatures derived from that one attack
would inform no further attacks. In practice, each group must carry out
enough attacks so those that are discovered can inform those that take
place later on. Furthermore, for such signatures to be useful, there
has to be time for the attack to be detected so that the signatures can
be collected, shared, and inserted into the defensive systems of
potential future victims while they are still useful. If all the
attacks were bunched together in a short period, the information
gathered from such attacks will not be gathered in time to be useful.
The second assumption is that each attacker group generates a
consistent set of signatures that recur in multiple attacks (and that
can be used reliably by defenders to distinguish their attacks from
benign activity). To wit, hacker signatures have to resemble
fingerprints. The APT1 group's attacks did have such characteristics
(similarly, those that attacked Sony Pictures Entertainment in late
2014 used the same IP addresses as those who attacked South Korean
banks and media firms in 2013). However, the possibilities of
polymorphic malware (variations in the appearance of exploits) and
fast-flux DNS (to permit shifting IP addresses) suggest that hackers
have options for varying their signatures.
The third assumption is that these signatures are detectable by
organizations interested in sharing. The average attacks by
sophisticated and advanced threats remain undetected for a year--and
those are only the ones that have been discovered. Most such attacks
are discovered not by their victims but by third parties and, for the
most part, only because the information taken from several victims is
funneled through the same intermediate servers used to hold the
exfiltrated data. If these servers are discovered, evidence from
attacks on multiple victims can be picked up at the same time.
Attackers who are sensitive to being caught can explore alternative
ways to route the data they bring home.
The fourth assumption is that such signatures will not evolve
(enough) over time--even if information sharing became so wide-spread
that the failure to evolve would make it too hard for hacker groups to
penetrate and compromise networks. Although Mandiant's publication of
APT1 activities slowed the group's activities, it only took a few
months before they were back in business using a new set of exploits
and attack vectors, with brand-new signatures that had to be inferred.
An analogy may be drawn to the anti-virus industry. The major
players--Symantec, McAfee, Kaspersky, and Microsoft--run very large
information-gathering networks fed by inputs from customers as well as
sensors that they have placed throughout the internet. But the anti-
virus model has lost most of its viability over the past 5 years in the
face of ever-shifting signatures and the practice of attackers testing
malware against anti-virus suites before releasing them into the wild.
Although threat-centric information-sharing deals with a broader range
of indicators than anti-virus companies do, the same dynamic by which
expensively-constructed measures beget relatively low-cost
countermeasures argues against being terribly optimistic about the
benefits from pushing a threat-centric information-sharing model.
This is not to say that threat-centric information sharing is
useless. Not every black hat hacker group will be conscientious about
altering its modus operandi, and there may be features of their
signatures that are not obvious to themselves (and hence would likely
persist for later detection). Forcing such groups to cluster their
attacks or to use multiple attack vectors, including obfuscation
techniques and grouping methods, resulting in new or altered signatures
over time, means more work for them. Some attackers will drop out;
others may not be able to attack as many organizations in a given
period. So, the effort to gather signatures would not be completely
wasted. Furthermore, even if threat-centric information sharing does
not work, the efforts that organizations would have to make to
understand what is going on in their networks in order to share
information effectively would, as a side benefit, also help them
protect themselves absent any information-sharing whatsoever.
Unfortunately, these recent efforts to promote a particular kind of
information sharing have achieved the status of a panacea. They are
absorbing a disproportional share of the legislative and elite media
energy on the topic of cybersecurity. Many otherwise serious people
assert that information sharing could have prevented many headline
assaults on important networks. Yet, if one works through such attacks
to understand if there were precedents that could have given us threat
signatures, one often finds no good basis for such a belief. Quelling
the Nation's cybersecurity problems is a complex, multi-faceted
endeavor not subject to a silver bullet.
In sum, there is nothing wrong with information sharing. It should
be encouraged. The President's proposal may well do so--in which case
it deserves our support. But there is something wrong with assuming
that it solves most, much less all, of the cybersecurity problem. It
only addresses one facet of a very complex space. It is therefore
highly questionable whether efforts to achieve information sharing
deserve the political energy that they are currently taking up.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss this important topic, and I
look forward to your questions.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Libicki.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions.
Mr. Eggers, I'd like to start with you. In many respects,
the Chamber of Commerce represents a single voice for
stakeholders across many of the critical infrastructure
sectors.
So, in that respect and capacity, can you address whether
industry supports the sharing of cyber threat indicators
through civilian portals, such as the NCCIC, with established
and transparent privacy protections?
Mr. Eggers. Congressman, thank you for that question.
I would say yes, we do. Just to give you an example, the
NCCIC is a key portal through which businesses are sharing and
will be sharing.
One thing I might add to that is we want businesses to be
sharing with their trusted partners, whether it's DHS, FBI,
Secret Service, Department of Energy, Treasury, you name it. I
think what we want to see is a bill that gives them the ability
to voluntarily share cyber threat indicators with associated
protections with some flexibility in terms of sharing with
Government. So it would be DHS and other entities.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Eggers.
Ms. Callahan, as I've listened to stakeholders across the
spectrum here, including privacy groups, one of the recurring
questions and concerns out there relates to the minimization of
data, which you talked about in your testimony. As the former
chief privacy officer at DHS, I know that you oversaw the
processes and procedures on how DHS protects privacy when it
comes to sharing cyber threat indicators.
Could you walk us through that in a little more detail? The
measures that are in place at NCCIC to ensure that personal
information is not shared with the Government.
Ms. Callahan. Thank you for that question.
There are several steps and several procedures that DHS
goes through, depending on how the threat is conveyed to
Homeland Security, depending on how it's integrated and whether
or not it's going to be shared.
As you mentioned, data minimization and only having the
directly associated threat information is the key element both
because it protects privacy better, of course, but, also, it
helps identify what people should really be looking at if,
indeed, information is shared and they don't have to go through
the chaff.
At Homeland Security, there are multiple steps. First, when
the threat comes in from the private sector, it can be reviewed
by a human to go and look to see if it can be identified for
what the specific threat is. It's then distilled down. It's
very frequently often IP addresses, possibly URLs associated
with it, and the very rate time associated with an email
address.
It's distilled down to that kind of core element, and then
it's compared to whether or not we know anything about this
threat, what else is happening, where is it going.
To the extent that it's going to be shared, only that
distilled element is going to be the purpose that it's shared.
It also then, before sharing, is reviewed by a DHS privacy
professional to confirm that minimization process.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific.
So, from your experience, what is your opinion on whether
the privacy community supports the privacy protections that are
currently in place at NCCIC?
Ms. Callahan. I think the privacy community very
specifically wants to have civilian control over information
sharing, and that's an important tenet for the privacy
community.
They also are very aware of the privacy protections that I
described that are detailed in the multiple privacy impact
assessments, privacy compliance reviews, and other public
documents that have been detailed by the DHS privacy office.
In addition, Homeland Security has a subcommittee that is
Classified at the Top Secret/SCI level that has had even more
detailed briefings, and those include advocates and members of
the community. So I think that, to the extent the privacy
advocates can be comfortable with the privacy protections of
information sharing, Homeland Security has met that.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you.
Mr. Garcia, I think it's pretty well-known out there that
the financial services sector has one of the most mature ISACs
and is considered by many to be the gold standard for
information sharing.
I think that we all need to be cognizant and careful from
the committee standpoint not to break something that's
currently working well. So with that in mind, a two-part
question for you.
How would the President's legislative proposal affect the
financial sector's current sharing of cyber threat information?
Then, second, what recommendations do you have for other
sectors, based on your experience, and what might be learned
from the FS-ISAC model?
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. That's a good question.
I think the President's proposal is almost explicitly with
us not targeted at the financial services sector or trying to
make any improvements to it. There is a recognition that we
have established a fairly robust and mature information-sharing
trust community and that the proposal would really try to get
at many of those noncritical sectors that have not yet engaged
in this level of information sharing.
So I would think that, on the edges, the proposal will help
information sharing broadly and maybe the financial services as
well, as long as the ISAO model is developed in a way that
doesn't create too much confusion.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, we need to have a
federated information-sharing capability, not a competitive one
where one ISAO is trying to get more members and, therefore, is
withholding information from other ISAOs. That's really
important. If we have Balkanized or siloed information sharing,
we are defeating the purpose of trying to get broader
comprehensive situational awareness.
So for ISAOs standing up, I think we'll look forward to
providing contributions to the standards development process
for what constitutes a good information-sharing environment. I
think key to that is we really started sharing robustly when we
established a traffic light protocol--red, yellow, green,
white--a cascade of different definitions of what information
can be shared with whom and what information cannot be shared.
That is enforced. It's enforceable and it is enforced. That
really cements the trust, that you know that, when you're going
to share this information, that it is not going to be released
anywhere else where it is not permitted. So that gives a
contributor some level of confidence that their information is
going to be protected, but it's also going to be used by other
members of that community. So that is a key element.
The other element is having well-trained personnel who are
able to analyze information and be able to assimilate and
synthesize all the different feeds that are coming in and make
sense of it in a way that can provide the users with some kind
of a coherent guidance for what to do about it.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you, Mr. Garcia.
Mr. Eggers, I want to come back to you for a second. As I
mentioned before, I've had listening sessions with different
groups and one of the things that we've learned is that, you
know, liability protections are clearly going to be necessary
to incentivize this information sharing.
Can you explain what types of liability protections are
needed and why?
Mr. Eggers. Sure. Let me just kind of give you a feel for
the protections, in general, where that liability protection
fits in.
So when we look at, let's say, something like the CISA
bill--which, you know, unless there's maybe hiccups at an
upcoming mark-up which could happen soon, we will support that
bill. But I think about liability in terms of kind of four key
protections. Right? So liability's probably the first and
foremost liability. Right?
In the legislation, if you're acting within the terms of
the bill, you will be getting liability protections for the
ways in which you share with the private-sector and Government
entities. There's a few nuances.
The second is regulatory protection, and the third is FOIA,
and the fourth is anti-trust. So, if anything, I would mention
that the liability protection probably sits at the top and is
probably the most important one of the bunch, if you had to
single one out.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So expounding on that, why is private-to-
private sharing so important----
Mr. Eggers. Generally----
Mr. Ratcliffe [continuing]. And the liability protections
associated with that?
Mr. Eggers. Sure. So within the construct of a voluntary
program--right?--and I think it's important just to stress
we're talking about a voluntary program where we're trying to
create some legal certainty--businesses, when they are, let's
say, fortunate to be able to identify, let's say, a breach, an
incident, they've got those bits and pieces of technical data
that they should share with business partners and the
governments to provide everyone a better sense of real
security.
But a lot of times what we hear from businesses is, ``Hey,
we want to do the right thing, but we're afraid that the
information that we share will come back to bite us''--right?--
``It will have a boomerang effect.''
So they want protections to be able to share that with
peers, and we encourage that. Right? So if there's some attacks
that you know of that you can share with others so other folks
can benefit, stop those attacks, that's a good thing. We want
them to share with their business partners.
The FS-ISAC is a great example. But we also want businesses
to share that narrow threat data with Government, too, so they
can start to build a bigger picture and help others, Government
and private sector.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you, Mr. Eggers.
Dr. Libicki, in addition to threat and indicator
information sharing, you mentioned two others: The sharing of
software vulnerabilities with the software vendor and
information sharing to improve cybersecurity practices.
In your opinion, what would you suggest as appropriate
legislative actions to address or enable these two areas?
Mr. Libicki. I am not sure that you really need that much
legislative action apart from, you know, appropriations
authorization sort of information. Let me give you an example.
I think the total amount of money spent world-wide to
reward people for finding vulnerabilities in software isn't
much more than about $10 million a year. When you consider
that, globally, $70 billion a year are spent on cybersecurity
tools and services and if you believe that, in fact, reducing
the number of vulnerabilities can make people safer, there is a
certain amount of room to increase the amount of money being
spent on finding vulnerabilities.
If I had to make a guess, I would say $10 million, which is
not particularly large in the context of, say, DHS's total
cybersecurity spending, could do a lot to encourage that kind
of discovery.
In terms of the other type of information sharing, every
particular attack in many ways can be associated with things
that you could have done differently, better practices, best
practices. Although we have a canon of best practices today, a
lot of times our best practices can be described as belt and
suspenders.
When you talk to CISOs who cannot afford both belts and
suspenders, they want some sort of guidance as to which one is
more important, how important is isolating systems, for
instance, how important is multi-factor authentication, how
important is training, how important are a lot of the various
way that organizations can improve their cybersecurity.
A lot of the way that you learn how organizations can
improve cybersecurity is to figure out when something got past
these particular defenses.
So where you would want to put more resources in is a
consolidated effort to try to assess the relative efficacy of
various cybersecurity measures in the context in which they are
used, and empowering NIST is one way to do that.
NIST tends not to want to make those sorts of, ``Well, A is
better than B decisions.'' But that's the kind of knowledge
you're going to need for cybersecurity and, I think, in terms
of R&D funding from NSF and the various ARPAs, is a way to help
systematize this learning and collect the lessons from this
learning.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Libicki.
Ms. Callahan, in listening sessions with privacy groups,
I've heard that following the Fair Information Practice
Principles is a key to protecting Americans' privacies.
In your opinion, what more can NCCIC do to increase
transparency and ensure that these principles are followed?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you, sir.
The Fair Information Practice Principles, or the FIPPs, are
the cornerstone for any analysis of analyzing the privacy
impact of certain considerations.
As you note, the NCCIC has applied the FIPPs in their
processes. However, we can always improve. The NCCIC can also
have--the transparency and the discussion of the effectiveness
of information sharing I think could be a very valuable tool in
light of the fact that, you know, we hear a lot about
information sharing and how does it work? Mr. Garcia has some
examples that I believe he'll share with you. But I think it's
also important to understand why this information's being
shared, what's happening to it, and where is it going.
Dr. Ozment's testimony earlier this month--or, I guess, in
February does have some statistics, as does Under Secretary
Spaulding's, but I think understanding the core elements would
be an important factor.
The data minimization that I talked about and the
procedures that NCCIC and CSNC go through are useful, and I
think it wouldn't be--it would be good to again describe those
in more detail and try to get some understanding.
Finally, the issue about security clearances is a difficult
one, but at the same time I think we can get more information
at an Unclassified level perhaps both to explain to the
private-sector companies who are concerned as well as those
advocates.
Thank you.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you.
So do you think that the sharing of cyber threat
information should be exempt from FOIA?
Ms. Callahan. I think that there are several factors to
think about. Candidly, the information that I have seen that's
been shared from private-sector companies or from DHS to other
Government entities is difficult to parse if you're not a
computer. You know, we're trying to identify the malware. We're
trying to identify what the threat is specifically. From a FOIA
perspective, to understand public policy issues I don't think
is very helpful.
Furthermore, I certainly think that companies would be very
reticent to share that information if, indeed, it was exposed
to FOIA. I think it probably still meets under the FOIA
qualifications of Exemption (b)(3).
So I don't know that we need necessarily new legislation on
that, but I think that the FOIA exemption is both useful and
getting the information wouldn't be all that helpful for the
advocates themselves.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Ms. Callahan.
Mr. Eggers, what's your perspective on that question?
Mr. Eggers. I think the exemption from--thank you--the
exemption from disclosure is a fundamental part of any bill.
Right? Businesses want to be sharing. We want them to share.
They don't want to see their names necessarily in the headlines
because they were trying to do the right thing.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you.
Pleased to be joined by the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Clawson. I'd like to yield to him for questions.
Mr. Clawson. So you all had the good luck or bad luck of
coming when it turns out to be a fly-out day, weather day,
votes at the last second. I mean, you know, you had everything
going against you. I wouldn't take personal offense to a bunch
of folks not being here because it is an unusual day up here.
So I think I have a grasp on what we're trying to do and
why we're trying to do it. But when I put myself, if I were a
participating company, with so many different stakeholders,
particularly if it was a multi-national, I don't know how you
get this to work.
It feels like the right thing that the anti-trust blocks
could get thrown out of the way by the Government. Liability
insurance feels like a good start, too. But there still feels
to be a lot of other obstacles that, if I were running my
company, would give me lots of pause here.
There's a long list. Right? I mean, first of all, if I was
and have operated in foreign countries and their governments
wanted to do this to me, I know I'd just say no.
So the foreign stakeholders, including security holders, I
think also makes this a lot more complicated, particularly in
former Soviet Bloc countries, by the way, where they don't like
Government involved in their IT systems. So the multi-national
nature of stakeholders is the first thing that comes to mind.
The second thing that comes to mind is who's not going to
participate. If you don't get a big block of people in my
industry participating, I am not sure I'd want to.
The third thing I'd say is, ``Isn't this going to slow me
down?'' More important, the very tool that you seem to be
putting in place here might help the bad guys. Because if the
Government does get in the middle almost at any level, it slows
down, I think what the point is, disseminating data to the
people that understand the malware as quickly as possible. So I
could keep going on and on here.
So I kind of feel like I like the idea. The devil's in the
details. If I were a business, you'd have to--you know, if I
were running a business again, you'd have to lay out pretty
clearly how we would get over some of these obstacles and me
still keep my fiduciary responsibility to shareholders and the
other stakeholders in the company.
When I hear that not everybody wants to participate, I say
to myself, ``Hmm. I can kind of understand that.'' Now, that's
from a non-IT guy, by the way. So you all know more about these
things than I do.
So take up where I've left off here. Am I on shaky ground
in terms of these kind of concerns or am I hitting on something
that you all have already anticipated and addressed prior to
this in your own studies and activities?
Mr. Eggers. Congressman, if I may--and then others can join
me--let me try to come at your questions this way. They're very
good.
We're talking about information sharing, but one of the
things that's positive about the framework is you can be using
the framework in any country, any province, any State. It's not
mandatory. It's voluntary.
So you don't have to come up specially-engineered cyber
solutions to comply with, let's say, regulations of each
country. That would not be good. That would be too costly even
for big companies.
No. 2, information sharing, voluntary at least under the
bill that we are championing, the CISA bill currently in the
Senate, at least in draft form.
The information-sharing program we're looking to achieve is
not about surveillance. It's about sharing threat data from
business-to-business, business-to-government, and, hopefully,
more and more business-to-government so that can stop future
attacks.
The Chamber--we were part of a letter that had----
Mr. Clawson. Can I interrupt just for a second?
Mr. Eggers. Sure.
Mr. Clawson. Business-to-business I understand because, if
the attack hits here, let's get at the information to--by the
way, even my competitors. Right?--and so that they can be
inoculated.
Mr. Eggers. Uh-huh.
Mr. Clawson. Why Government?
Mr. Eggers. We can't fight the bad guys without working
together. When I think about the threats out there, it's not
the wayward kid down the street that's having fun, maybe,
breaking into a computer system.
It's nation-states. It's people working on their behalf.
It's super criminal groups that I think Dr. Libicki points out
is very costly.
So if we're going to--and I like to think of an
information-sharing bill. It's trying to knock the bad guys
off-balance. Right? We need to push them off-balance. Right?
We're going to share and be more resilient, meaning
industry and Government. So we need to work together. We can't
tackle nation-states or their proxies solo. We can't do it. So
we need to work together, and we need to do it smartly.
Mr. Clawson. Anybody else?
Mr. Garcia. Sure. I agree with Mr. Eggers. I think, you
know, when you look at this very complicated world of cyber
threats, the industry has information that the Government does
not have globally. We are located around the world. The
Government has information that we do not have, Classified
information, information about nation-state activities. If
we're not fusing that together, we're really not getting a
broad situational awareness. So we are not where we should be.
The financial sector has been working closely with the
Government to think about the ways to improve the bidirectional
sharing of information between industry and Government, and the
Government agencies recognize that internally they need to
improve their processes or how do they process information
within the Government and then what's the tear line, meaning
what's the really critical information that can be sent to the
private sector, leaving the sources and methods, which is
Classified, out of it because we don't need that information.
So we're working through that process of trying to improve
content and procedures. It isn't easy. Government is not--
there's many agencies in the Government with different cultures
and different ways of doing things. The same goes with the
private sector. So----
Mr. Clawson. Am I right to say that the further down you
push the actual activity, meaning Government becomes an abler,
facilitator, as opposed to active participant, there's an
inverse relationship so you'll get more--if less Government's
involved on a direct basis, more companies will voluntarily
sign up.
Am I right or wrong about that? You see, I know what I
would feel. I know what I would think.
Mr. Garcia. Yes. And----
Mr. Clawson. It feels like it will be quicker without the
Government being a direct participant, and it feels like it
will be, you know, less risky in a lot of ways if I am doing
this peer-to-peer with protection of the Government as opposed
to the Government being the clearinghouse and interpreter of
the data.
Mr. Garcia. We wouldn't look at the Government as a
clearinghouse or interpreter either, but we do see them as a
partner that--again, they can provide information we don't have
and vice versa.
Yes, I think there will be companies and organizations out
there that have less trust in working with the Government for
the liability concerns that Mr. Eggers has articulated, but the
same goes for company-to-company at times. We're dealing with
competitors.
In the financial sector, it's not quite the same thing. We
are all competitors in financial services. But when it comes to
cybersecurity, we're all in it together. It is not a
competitive issue. So we've gotten over that hurdle.
We understand that we have to proceed on the assumption
that we are all under attack every day and we are all going to
get hit at one point or another. So let's just come to the
table with that and admit that. ``Now, what are we going to do
about it together?''
That's a trust relationship that has been building over
time. Other industry sectors, not as much. Hopefully, this
information-sharing and analysis organization model that the
administration is trying to incentivize--maybe that will move
other companies toward more trust-sharing models not just among
themselves, but with the Government.
Mr. Eggers. Congressman Clawson, if I may, let me add to
that.
So you had mentioned about business interest and
information sharing. The Chamber was one of about 35
associations representing--I don't know--back of the envelope,
maybe 80 to 90 percent of the U.S. economy, stating that, ``We
need a good bill that clears away the legal policy underbrush,
gives us certainty that, when we are sharing, we are
protected.''
Mr. Clawson. That's easy. Right? I mean, we all agree on
that. I mean----
Mr. Eggers. So one thing I might add, if I just may--you
mentioned slowing things down--one thing that we are looking
at--and the jury's still out with respect to the Executive
Order on cyber information sharing, at least February 13--is
the standards/best practices element of standing up more
ISAOs--right?--or at least having organizations declare that
they've self-certified it at a future date, that they are
following certain standards/best practices.
One of the things that I think gives our members pause is
not that you're going to be holding up an entity as a model for
how to share well. What we're concerned about is, in that
process of creating standards, highlighting best practices,
that that could kind of gum up the information-sharing works.
Mr. Clawson. Right. Right. I mean, look, if I wanted to get
a good laugh out of my employees, two lines I could say:
``We're from corporate and we're here to help''--that always
got a chuckle--or ``We're from the Government and we're here to
help.''
You know, employee stakeholders have had long-time
experience of hearing people say that and then it goes wrong on
them. You know, that's the--for this to work, whether you're
the Chamber or whoever we are, we would have to be able to
convince the companies and, more importantly, the folks that
are running the IT systems and the ERPs that both corporate
and, you know, in this case, the Government, is really not
going to slow them down.
I think clearing out the underbrush, as you say--I mean,
that's a no-brainer. Right? I mean, take away the anti-trust
and take away the liability and we're much more likely to
share.
But then, after that, after many years in the private
sector, this story gets more murky to me as, you know, good
intentions where things could easily go wrong or not get enough
companies to participate to make a difference.
I'm glad that the financial sector is in that position, but
having been involved in other sectors, I am really pretty sure
that they're not nearly as organized and that their industries,
by the way, are not nearly as consolidated.
So, you know, in the financial--we still have got a lot of
community banks left, but it's a much more consolidated
environment than it is in a lot of other industries. Those
unconsolidated environments are a different animal. I don't
know if that's even a word or not. But that's a different
animal than what you're talking about.
I don't want to take all the time here. But give me a
reaction on whether I'm all wet here.
Mr. Garcia. Well, you know, you can see where there are
times when information sharing has slowed down, for example,
when something is subject to law enforcement investigation.
Okay?
Now no one can talk about it and you can't actually
disseminate the facts about something that, if other potential
victims had that information, they could shut down systems that
might otherwise be attacked.
So, yeah, there will be situations where trying to engage
with the Government is going to slow things down. There are
other situations where it's going to speed things up.
For example, we had worked within the NCCIC cooperatively
with DHS. There was a point-of-sale malware called Backoff that
was infecting a lot of different retail outlets all over the
country.
Actually coming together, we fused information that DHS had
and what the financial sector had, and we made sense of what
this point-of-sale malware was doing. We pushed out a joint
product, basically said, ``Here's the threat. Here's what it's
trying to do. Here's what you need to do to fix it.''
One of the participants in the activity had something like
50 stores located in 24 different States where they actually
took that advice and they made the correction before it----
Mr. Clawson. Who identified the malware?
Mr. Garcia. That could have been--I don't have the
specifics. It could have been from law enforcement. Often law
enforcement can find certain malware----
Mr. Clawson. Or an outside contractor to----
Mr. Garcia. It comes from many different places. It can
come from security companies who are on contract. It can come
from law enforcement that's doing their own investigative
forensics work. It can come from a member company of the FS-
ISAC. It can come from an analyst at DHS or the intelligence
community.
It's a matter of having that automated phone tree, if you
will, where we can bring all of those sources of intelligence
together and make sense of it. Sometimes it's slow. Sometimes
it's faster.
We're trying to get ourselves to a point of more automated
threat information sharing where we actually can take out some
of the human dimension of having to pick up a phone and call
somebody or send an email saying ``Did you see what I just
saw?'' and, actually, the machines are recognizing these kinds
of----
Mr. Clawson. Looking for patterns.
Mr. Garcia. Yeah.
Mr. Clawson. Dr. Libicki.
Mr. Libicki. Yes.
Mr. Clawson. Anything to add?
Mr. Libicki. Yes. I want to add to some of the comments.
I think we have a common stake in better cybersecurity.
Okay? In a world in which, say, one bank is subject to an
attack that causes people to lose trust in the bank, their
neighbor across the street isn't going to be better off. In
many ways, they're going to be worse off.
The attack that makes people wonder if they can give a
credit card to one merchant isn't going to necessarily have
them running to another merchant. It's going to complicate the
response of everybody who wants to use credit cards in
commerce. For that reason, there is going to be a common
interest in information security, in cybersecurity, and
improving it across the lot.
To a large extent we shouldn't forget that the Government
organizations themselves have an interest in their own
cybersecurity and there's information on best practices, on how
to make good decisions, that they can learn from the rest of
the economy, or the benefits that they get from closing
vulnerabilities in software used in business also helps the
Government organizations preserve their own systems, preserve
their own confidentiality in their systems and----
Mr. Clawson. That's a good point.
Mr. Libicki [continuing]. Authentication.
Mr. Clawson. That's a good point.
Ms. Callahan. If I may, sir, just to follow up, I think
about information sharing both among the companies and, also,
with and from the Government as kind of three-dimensional
chess. You need to know where each of the different elements
are, as Mr. Garcia and Dr. Libicki talked about, and you may
not have the complete picture unless you get all of the
information.
I completely agree with you that you don't want the
Government in your business dealing with what the threat is
itself, but you do want to share the information that you've
figured out or maybe a contractor figured out or maybe the
Government figured out.
So it's to share the information as broadly as possible,
but not to have the Government come and, you know, deal with
the information or address the cyber threat unless it's a
critical scenario.
Mr. Eggers. Congressman, if I may just add a quick point,
one thing I think about or at least our members think about in
terms of getting from Point A to Point B, A to Z, on an
information-sharing bill, a bill that clears both Chambers and,
hopefully, gets to the President's desk this year, is, even
though it's important to protect privacy, that we not lose
sight of the burdens that we could place on small and mid-sized
businesses to scrub personal information.
Those kinds of provisions will be in a bill, but I want to
make sure that we not go too far that we're essentially, from a
practical standpoint, having the small and mid-sized guys sit
on the sidelines because they feel like they can't scrub
personal information adequately or do it at least under the
terms of any future bill.
Mr. Clawson. Boy, that's a tough balance. I mean, I thought
about this all day. We talked about it with our team. With
small businesses that don't have a lot of dedicated resources
and often outsource anything of any complexity with regards
to--I mean, they even outsource their own ERP system. Right?
You know, to get a bill which will convince those folks to
participate in a voluntary program that could make their life
more difficult and still get the bill through--because you're
going to have folks like me that are going to say, ``I'm just
not fond of the Government being in my cell or in my ERP,
either one, really.''
That's going to be a neat trick. Right? I mean, that just
doesn't feel like it will be easy to do. I'm not trying to be
critical. It just feels like a mountain to climb here to get it
just right where you don't make it so onerous that no one signs
up. But you have got to have something that has enough impact
to get the bill passed.
Am I making sense?
Mr. Eggers. Yes. One quick brief note on that is, when I
say small and mid-sized guys just generically, I'm thinking in
a lot of ways some of the supply chain elements of, let's say,
a bigger firm.
If those smaller companies are hacked, we want them to have
the confidence that they report, let's say, to the bigger
company and a lot of times the Government won't necessarily
have to be in their systems.
What they will be doing is sharing those technical bits and
pieces of information that the bigger company can use and,
let's say, law enforcement can use to build a case against
folks probably overseas.
Mr. Clawson. Well, if I can help you--I mean, I'm playing
devil's advocate here, obviously. But I'm doing it because I'm
trying to--you know, I hope this works. I don't want it to
fail. We want it to work.
Mr. Eggers. Agreed.
Mr. Clawson. So I think the more front-end conversations
you have like this one--and I know you're doing that every day
with people that are out there--the better your chances of
getting people to participate.
Because, if they don't come around, we're dead. Right? I
mean, if it's a voluntary program and no one signs up, then
it's not going to do us much good.
Ms. Callahan. I think, for the small and medium-sized
businesses, the automated sharing that Mr. Garcia talked about
can really help facilitate that. Therefore, the more people can
participate, the bigger the pie, so to speak, the more you can
share, the less burden it is on the small and medium-sized
enterprises.
Mr. Clawson. I yield back.
Thank you, everybody, for your patience with me.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman.
I agree with the gentleman that weather has definitely
affected attendance today. But I know that my colleagues on
both sides of the aisle see this as a critically important
issue, as evidenced by the fact that a number of them were with
me earlier this morning and with the Chairman, touring the
NCCIC.
So, with that, I am very grateful to the witnesses for
their valuable testimony. I know that it will inform this
committee as we move forward.
I thank my colleague for his questions.
The Members of the committee may have some additional
questions for witnesses, and we'll ask them to respond to these
in writing. Pursuant to committee rule 7(e), the hearing record
will be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:08 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
