- EXAMINING DHS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE'S ENGAGEMENT WITH ACADEMIA AND INDUSTRY

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING DHS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
DIRECTORATE'S ENGAGEMENT WITH ACA -
DEMIA AND INDUSTRY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 19, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-17

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
95-681 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York              Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Loretta Sanchez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Brett DeWitt, Subcommittee Staff Director
Dennis Terry, Subcommittee Clerk
Christopher Schepis, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies...................................................     1
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Mr. Jacob Parker, Director, Government Relations, Security
Industry Association:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mr. Marc A. Pearl, President and Chief Executive Officer,
Homeland Security and Defense Business Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Dr. Samuel H. Aronson, President, American Physical Society:
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    19

Appendix

Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Jacob Parker......    31
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Marc A. Pearl.....    31
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Samuel H. Aronson.    33

EXAMINING DHS SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DIRECTORATE'S ENGAGEMENT WITH
ACADEMIA AND INDUSTRY

----------

Tuesday, May 19, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection,
and Security Technologies,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:09 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Ratcliffe
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Clawson, Richmond, and
Langevin.
Mr. Ratcliffe. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and
Security Technologies will come to order.
The subcommittee meets today to examine the Department of
Homeland Security's Science and Technology or S&T Directorate.
The ability for S&T to engage with academia and industry is a
critically important function, especially in times of shrinking
budgets and limited resources.
S&T must be able to leverage the resources of academia,
Federally-Funded Research and Development Centers, industry,
and the full spectrum of what S&T Under Secretary Dr. Reginald
Brothers has called the ``S&T ecosystem'' in order to better
enable the DHS components to carry out their missions to
protect the homeland.
To accomplish this, Dr. Brothers has made the development
of the Homeland Security Industrial Base one of his top
priorities. Dr. Brothers is modeling the Homeland Security
Industrial Base off of the Department of Defense's Defense
Industrial Base or DIB, which is largely successful in being
the private-sector engine for our military.
While the DOD model is a good one for DOD, there needs to
be greater focus on meeting the needs of the Department of
Homeland Security. The DOD DIB model cannot simply be applied
to DHS; they are vastly different agencies, on vastly different
scales, and have different mission needs of their technology
investments. DHS does not buy, acquire, or conduct research and
development on the same scale as the military.
I think Dr. Brothers is on the right path, but we need to
ensure that we are addressing the needs of DHS, messaging the
needs and direction of its components to the small and medium-
sized businesses that are interested in doing business in the
homeland security ecosystem.
The S&T Directorate has several programs and divisions
within the directorate aimed at enabling the communication and
notification of business and academic research opportunities
including: The S&T Small Business Innovation Research Program;
the Technology Transfer Program; and the Commercialization
Office. Over the past year the subcommittee has met with
several industry, academic, and Federally-Funded Research and
Development Centers that collaborate with S&T to better
understand the very broad scope and research and development
mandate that S&T is presently faced with.
Additionally, we have learned about many of the successes
of the directorate, but also many of the challenges that S&T
has in fulfilling its mission. Feedback from industry and
academia informs us that S&T does not always effectively
communicate its R&D priorities and the technology needs of the
components it serves.
In turn, this poor outreach and messaging leaves small and
medium-sized businesses in the dark on how they should best
invest their internal R&D dollars to position themselves to
compete and win contracts within the Department.
Additionally, S&T's coordination of awarding contracts to
small and medium-sized businesses, FFRDCs, and academia is
inconsistent within the divisions of the directorate, which
must be problematic for these organizations that don't have the
time or resources to wait around for several months for S&T to
award a contract.
This appears to be a Department-wide issue however it is
particularly problematic when trying to develop R&D contracts
in a very fast-moving and dynamic technological environment.
Some of the actions that Dr. Brothers has taken to address
the communication of priorities and notification of business
and research opportunities have been to develop and publish
visionary goals developed in consultation with industry
leaders. These visionary goals coupled with the strategic plan
should help industry and academia better understand S&T's
priorities to inform their own technology developments to meet
the needs of the DHS components.
Today the subcommittee meets to examine the progress Dr.
Brothers has made in addressing these challenges, to hear
directly from academia and industry representatives on their
engagement experience with S&T, and what improvements still
need to be made.
I applaud Dr. Brothers for the steps that he has taken to
create visionary goals and the strategic plan, although it
remains to be seen if this strategic plan can be properly
implemented and effectively communicated to S&T's academic and
industry partners.
In Dr. Brothers' testimony before this subcommittee last
fall, he acknowledged the work S&T still has to do to improve
transparency and information sharing with industry and academia
so that they may align their investments to better suit DHS's
S&T and DHS component needs.
I look forward to working with Dr. Brothers, industry,
FFRDCs, and academic leaders to help make S&T successful in
their mission to serve the Department.
The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member of
the subcommittee, the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Richmond,
for any statement that he may have.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Chairman Ratcliffe for yielding,
and thank you for convening this hearing on the Science and
Technology Directorate.
I, too, want to thank the representatives of industry and
business for being here today. I especially want to thank Dr.
Sam Aronson for agreeing to give us his scientific research
perspective. This is an issue that he is well-versed in. We are
pleased to have you all here today.
But I want to take a moment to talk about Dr. Aronson's
experience. Not only are you the current president of the
American Physical Society and you are representing them today,
some 50,000 physicists throughout the country, you are also a
former director of the Brookhaven Laboratory, where you now
direct the RIKEN Research Center for the study of nuclear
physics, and you are a research professor at Stony Brook
University's College of Engineering. We are grateful that you
found the time to appear before us today. Thank you.
The Science and Technology Directorate is an essential
component of the Department of Homeland Security's efforts. The
mission of the Science and Technology Directorate is to help
provide innovative science and technology solutions for the
Homeland Security enterprise that will strengthen America's
security posture and resiliency capabilities.
In order to meet the needs of the many front-line
components of DHS, covering all mission areas, we have seen the
S&T Directorate strive to rapidly develop and deliver
knowledge, analysis, and innovative solutions that advance the
mission of the Department. It is a complex and difficult
mission. The ultimate goal of S&T, as I see it, is to
strengthen the homeland security first responders' capabilities
to protect and respond to disaster, whether it is a natural
disaster, like a hurricane, earthquake, flood, or tornado, or a
man-made event.
In 2009, before I came to this subcommittee, the National
Academy of Public Administration, or NAPA, published a
comprehensive overview of the directorate, and this
subcommittee initiated its own year-long comprehensive review
of S&T, led by then-Chairwoman Yvette Clarke. The purpose was
to identify areas within the directorate that could use a fresh
set of eyes and additional oversight on modifications or
legislative authorities. As a result, we produced a
comprehensive, bipartisan bill, which passed the House
unanimously in 2010.
We are at a similar moment, Mr. Chairman. I understand that
you and Chairman McCaul plan to offer an authorization of S&T
later this summer, and this hearing is a first step. I am
hoping that some of the things we learned during the process in
2010 can be used in this upcoming authorization effort. One of
the things we did learn was that with such a large and complex
portfolio, the directorate has found it difficult to craft a
cohesive, comprehensive strategy.
The NAPA analysis suggested that the Department had not
developed a clear, risk-based methodology to determine what
research projects to fund, how much to fund, and how to
evaluate a project's effectiveness or usefulness. These
questions remain today.
I want to support the scientific R&D efforts of the
directorate in every way that I can, and part of that help will
be to plan for and authorize research rules and metrics that
are more fully considered and comprehensively established.
We all know these are challenging budget times, especially
as the appropriations process is upon us. After I reviewed the
2012 sequester cuts, that basically left S&T with little more
than the lights on, I suggest that we will need to be prepared
to defend the R&D funding at S&T and defend it from sequester
efforts that can damage scientific efforts and the Department
at large.
Striving to do more with less is always the hallmark of an
efficiently-run business or Government program. But trying to
protect our citizens and our Nation with programs that are
backed by underfunded and depleted science and technology
research assets is another matter.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you and I yield back.
[The statement of Mr. Richmond follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Cedric L. Richmond
May 19, 2015
Thank you Chairman Ratcliffe for convening this hearing on the
Science and Technology Directorate.
I too, want to thank the representatives of industry and business
for being here today, and I especially want to thank Dr. Sam Aronson
for agreeing to give us his scientific research perspective--this is an
issue that he is well-versed in. We are pleased to have you all here
today.
In fact Dr. Aronson, I want to make sure that your experience is
sufficiently reflected in the record. Not only are you the current
president of the American Physical Society, and you are representing
them today--some 50,000 physicists throughout the country, you are also
a former director of the Brookhaven Laboratory, where you now direct
the RIKEN Research Center for the study of nuclear physics, and you are
a research professor at Stony Brook University's College of
Engineering. We are grateful that you found the time to appear before
us today.
The Science and Technology Directorate is an essential component of
the Department of Homeland Security's efforts. The mission of the S&T
Directorate is to help provide innovative science and technology
solutions for the Homeland Security Enterprise that will strengthen
America's security posture, and resiliency capabilities.
In order to meet the needs of the many front-line components of
DHS, covering all mission areas, we have seen the S&T Directorate
strive to rapidly develop and deliver knowledge, analyses, and
innovative solutions that advance the mission of the Department. It is
a complex and difficult mission.
The ultimate goal of S&T, as I see it, is to strengthen the
homeland security first responders' capabilities to protect and respond
to disaster, whether it is a man-made event, or hurricanes,
earthquakes, floods, or tornadoes.
In 2009, before I came to this subcommittee, the National Academy
of Public Administration or NAPA, published a comprehensive overview of
the Directorate,\1\ and this subcommittee initiated its own year-long
comprehensive review of S&T, led by then-Chairwoman, Yvette Clarke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.napawash.org/2009/1374-dhs-science-and-technology-
directorate-developing-technology-to-protect-america.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The purpose was to identify areas within the directorate that could
use a fresh set of eyes and additional oversight or modifications to
legislative authorities. As a result, we produced a comprehensive,
bipartisan bill, which passed the House unanimously in 2010.
We are at a similar moment Mr. Chairman, as I understand that you
and Chairman McCaul plan to offer an authorization of S&T later this
summer, and this hearing is a first step.
I am hoping that some of the things we learned during that process
in 2010 can be used in this upcoming authorization effort.
One of the things we did learn was that with such a large and
complex portfolio, the directorate has found it difficult to craft a
cohesive, comprehensive strategy.
The NAPA analysis suggested that the Department had not developed a
clear risk-based methodology to determine what research projects to
fund--how much to fund--and how to evaluate a project's effectiveness
or usefulness. These questions remain today.
I want to support the scientific R&D efforts of the directorate in
every way that I can, and part of that help will be to plan for and
authorize research rules and metrics that are more fully considered and
comprehensively established.
We all know these are challenging budget times, and especially as
the appropriations process is upon us. After I reviewed the 2012
sequester cuts that basically left S&T with little more than the lights
on--I suggest that we will need to be prepared to defend the R&D
funding at S&T, and to defend it from sequester efforts that can damage
the scientific efforts in the Department at large.
Striving to do more with less is always the hallmark of an
efficiently-run business or Government program, but trying to protect
our citizens and Nation with programs that are backed by underfunded
and depleted science and technology research assets, is another matter.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and I yield back.

Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman and remind the other
Members of the committee that opening statements may be
submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 19, 2015
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for holding this hearing
on the Science and Technology Directorate.
I join you in welcoming our witnesses from industry and business
associations, and I particularly want to thank Dr. Sam Aronson for
joining us today.
Many of my concerns about the Science and Technology Directorate
stem from our work in the committee a few years ago during my
Chairmanship, when we all worked together over a period of 2 years to
pass a comprehensive, bipartisan Science and Technology authorization
bill. That bill sought to provide much-needed direction for the
research and development efforts of the Department.
Within S&T, conducting R&D on technologies is a key component of
DHS's efforts to detect, prevent, and mitigate terrorist threats.
Many components of DHS conduct different types of R&D for their
respective missions, but GAO tells us that DHS does not have a unified
Department-wide policy defining R&D, or guidance directing components
to report R&D activities and investments.
We have had questions over the years on how we can determine the
Department's total investment in R&D across all the components, and how
S&T can effectively oversee components' R&D efforts to align them with
agency-wide R&D goals and priorities.
If we are going to authorize S&T this year, we should establish
policies and guidance for defining R&D across the Department, and
having clear processes and procedures for overseeing R&D, that would
provide more oversight of R&D investments across the board.
Though I have met with Under Secretary Brothers, it is still
unclear to me whether there is a system to monitor research milestones
and collect feedback from customers and end-users on the effectiveness
of the services delivered by the directorate.
These milestones and feedback would allow this committee to offer
an objective assessment of the successes and failures of the agency.
Without objective measurement tools, it is impossible for Congress
to assess what should be changed or what should be kept.
Today, we are going to hear from industry associations and academia
on how they interact with the research and development efforts of the
directorate.
I hope to hear some suggestions on how those relationships--among
the directorate, industry, and academia--can be improved, particularly
in the Small Business Innovation Research program, or SBIR.
Finally, I believe we are at a crossroads because in this budget
atmosphere of sequestered funding, the directorate will be challenged
to prioritize or eliminate programs that help protect the American
people today.
In 2012, just a few years ago, the House passed extreme budget cuts
to the fiscal year 2012 S&T funding levels with the support of many of
my Republican colleagues--and they were harsh by any standard.
There are some who are predicting that we are on the way to more
cuts, similar to the fiscal year 2012 sequester.
Officials with cybersecurity responsibilities have seen large
increases in their budgets, but research and development in the S&T
budget could be an easy target for offsets, as we have seen before.
These potential cuts will have consequences, because if you have
less money for science and technology, you can only do less scientific
and technological research.
I caution that the S&T Directorate should be prepared for such a
possibility in today's budget atmosphere.
Mr. Chairman, I hope the committee will take these matters
seriously as we learn how the directorate interacts with industry and
academia, and its operational programs going forward.
Thank you, and I yield back.

Mr. Ratcliffe. We are pleased to have a very distinguished
panel of witnesses before us today on this important topic.
Mr. Jake Parker is the director of government relations at
the Security Industry Association. Welcome, Mr. Parker.
Mr. Marc Pearl is the president and CEO of the Homeland
Security and Defense Business Council. Good to see you again,
Mr. Pearl.
Dr. Samuel Aronson, as the gentleman from Louisiana stated
in his opening remarks is the president of the American
Physical Society. Welcome, Dr. Aronson.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record. I would now like to swear in the witnesses en banc----
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Ratcliffe. You may be seated.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Parker for 5 minutes for an
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JACOB PARKER, DIRECTOR, GOVERNMENT RELATIONS,
SECURITY INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION

Mr. Parker. Good morning Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member
Richmond, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee.
I am Jake Parker, director of government relations for the
Security Industry Association. SIA is a non-profit
international trade association representing nearly 600
companies that develop, manufacture, and integrate electronic
and physical security solutions. Technology provided by the
security industry plays a key role in DHS component operations,
and in protecting each of the 16 critical infrastructure
sectors.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
on the important relationship between the DHS Science and
Technology Directorate and the private sector. The input I am
providing here is based on experiences of SIA members in
working with S&T, which I have collected and summarized for you
at a high level in order to give you a sense of the nature and
direction of this partnership.
If there is any information requested that I cannot provide
today, I will certainly work with our members to provide
helpful responses as soon as possible.
In general, we have seen an increase in S&T efforts to
engage with industry and we believe the partnership is moving
in the right direction. In 2013, S&T signed a unique memorandum
of understanding with the association to promote the use of
electronics innovation in Homeland Security applications. Since
taking the helm of the organization last year, Under Secretary
Brothers and his leadership team have certainly set the right
tone for improving engagement with industry.
In fact, almost 1 year ago, Dr. Brothers spoke at our
annual policy conference, the SIA Government Summit, and gave
us a preview of his new vision for the agency. This was
articulated further with the release of his visionary goals
last year and just last month with the unveiling of S&T's 5-
year strategic plan.
The plan properly recognizes that technology is evolving so
quickly that it often outpaces traditional Government R&D and
acquisition vehicles. Faced with very limited funding as you
alluded to and personnel, successful DHS operators need what
Dr. Brothers has called force-multiplying technology.
Indeed, the rapid pace of innovation in the security
industry especially in the identity and biometric space holds
enormous potential to counter current and future homeland
security threats. A number of S&T projects are underway to
harness these advances. We believe leveraging them will
maximize return on taxpayer dollars especially as security
technology becomes more and more affordable through economies
of scale as that market expands world-wide.
The strategic plan calls for ramping up a surge effort to
engage the homeland security industrial base by fiscal year
2016. We welcome this and we think that in order to maximize
the effectiveness of the effort, it should include certain
elements.
First, improving and articulating the value proposition of
doing business with S&T will be necessary. While S&T projects
ultimately help inform component agency decision making, few
historically have led to a successful acquisition program.
Within the industry, one barrier to potential partners is
skepticism regarding the commitment of participating DHS
components to the S&T projects that they are working with,
since they can ultimately choose alternative solutions
developed through internally-funded research programs.
It is encouraging to see an acknowledgement of this issue
within a strategic plan in several proposals on how to better
coordinate and reduce the duplication of effort between S&T and
the component agencies.
The business case could also be improved through portfolio
balance and prioritization which is one of the organization's
biggest challenges as the Ranking Member alluded to. Our
members feel that given the limited size of the S&T budget, the
portfolio may simply be too large, causing projects to be
supported at levels insufficient to capitalize on the successes
that they have as the funding runs out.
Again, the strategic plan seems to acknowledge this as an
issue. S&T estimates that the total number of portfolio
projects would be reduced as funding shifts to higher
priorities under the plan's provisions. Another critical
element, we believe, is ensuring the technology vendor
community is considered a project stakeholder that is on an
equal footing within users and other parties.
Some of our members have reported inconsistency in the part
of DHS personnel as to what communications with industry they
believe are permitted in the course of a project. Congress
should consider affirming in any reauthorization legislation
the appropriateness of communications with industry that can
help improve program results and ultimately the success of any
subsequent acquisition.
Lastly, members feel that communications on available
opportunities has improved with an increase in the number of
industry days, speaking engagements, and webinars led by S&T
leaders, but it could still benefit from additional
coordination.
To conclude, what we have heard from S&T leadership on
their plans to leverage industry partnerships is very
encouraging. Ultimately, what matters is whether the strategy
can be carried out in a meaningful way. The Security Industry
Association is committed to helping facilitate such
partnerships.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide this collective
input from our industry. We stand ready to provide any
additional information that you may need. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Parker follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jacob Parker
May 19, 2015
Good morning Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I am Jake Parker, director
of government relations for the Security Industry Association, a non-
profit international trade association representing nearly 600
companies that develop, manufacture, and integrate electronic and
physical security solutions, and employ thousands of technology
leaders. Technology provided by the security industry plays a key role
in DHS component operations, and in protecting critical infrastructure
such as chemical facilities, airports, seaports, mass transit systems,
the energy sector, and Government facilities.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today on the
critically important partnership between the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) and the private
sector. The input I am providing is based on the experiences of SIA
member companies in working with S&T, which I have collected and
summarized for you at a high level in order to give you a sense of the
nature and direction of this partnership.
I will do my best to answer any questions you may have, however if
there is any information requested I cannot provide today, I will be
happy to work with our members to provide helpful responses.
new leadership
Generally we have seen an increase in S&T efforts to engage with
industry and believe the partnership is moving in the right direction.
I will highlight aspects of planning or programing at S&T we see as
positive, as well as several areas identified by our members where
there is room for significant improvement.
Since taking the helm of the organization last year, DHS Under
Secretary for Science and Technology Dr. Reginald Brothers and his
leadership team have set the right tone for improving engagement with
industry. In one of his first major speaking engagements following
Senate confirmation, Dr. Brothers participated in our association's
annual public policy conference, the SIA Government Summit, and gave us
a preview of his new vision for the agency. This was articulated
further with the release of his ``visionary goals'' for the
organization last year, and just last month with the unveiling of S&T's
2015-2019 strategic plan.
The plan correctly acknowledges that technology is now evolving so
quickly that it often outpaces traditional Government R&D and
acquisition vehicles. Meanwhile, technology-based solutions are more
important than ever to achieving DHS component missions. Faced with
limited funding and personnel, operators need force-multiplying
technology for success. The rapid pace of technology advancement in the
security industry, particularly in the identity and biometrics space,
holds enormous potential to counter current and future homeland
security threats. Harnessing these advances funded by the private
sector and developed for commercial and international markets would
maximize the return on taxpayer dollars, especially as the technology
become more and more affordable through economies of scale.
effective use of industry expertise
From our perspective, S&T programs that have had the most success
are often those that integrate off-the-shelf technology developed
commercially, to provide solutions that both meet operational
capability gaps and provide new opportunities for industry. Take for
example, the Mobile Biometrics Program. The recent Stockton Latent
Print Mobile Pilot, concluded in fiscal year 2014, demonstrated the
results of putting mobile latent fingerprint capture devices in the
hands of law enforcement. Using this force-multiplying technology,
latent prints were collected from crime scenes then matched against the
local fingerprint search database in as little as 2 minutes. For such
projects, even if a Federal acquisition does not result, game-changing
solutions using products, technologies, and new processes may be
developed and made available to serve State and local law enforcement
needs.
The Biometric Identification at Sea pilot with the Coast Guard,
features fingerprint collection and database search using mobile
devices, during alien migrant interdiction operations in what is known
as the Mona Passage in the Caribbean Sea. Utilizing wireless transfer
of data and back-end matching to the OBIM/IDENT database, the project
resulted in several watch list hits in just the first weeks.
In building on such successes we see value in many aspects of the
strategic plan's proposals to further partner with and engage the
Homeland Security Enterprise, such as jointly-staffed Innovation
Centers within DHS components aimed at improving coordination of
internally-funded component research, late-stage technology development
and technology transfer.
The strategic plan calls for ramping up to a ``surge effort'' on
engaging the Homeland Security Industrial Base by fiscal year 2016. In
order for this to be successful, we have several suggestions for areas
of improvement.
industry as a stakeholder
When engineered systems are being developed and evaluated, versus
stand-alone devices, it is critical that industry be considered a
stakeholder in the development process and have an opportunity for
input on any end-to-end analysis.
Clear guidelines and assurances need to be provided to DHS S&T
personnel with respect to communications with industry participants. In
some cases there is a reluctance or fear that sharing information could
violate acquisition regulations or other rules, which is usually
unfounded. This contributes to a culture biased towards restricting
access to technical information and other data that would be helpful to
industry in efforts to meet the needs S&T has identified. It would be
helpful, in any legislation re-authorizing the directorate, for
Congress to affirm the appropriateness of communications with industry
that will help improve program results and ultimately the success of
any subsequent acquisition.
Further, improving the identification of high-priority operational
requirements and capability gaps from DHS component agencies, as
envisioned in the strategic plan, is extremely important. Equally
important is the communication of this information on needs to
industry, and we recommend that it be shared in a systematic way with
industry partners. If information on needs is shared openly, industry
is far more likely to be able to deliver solutions that solve problems
in the real world.
improving the value proposition of doing business with s&t
S&T project results ultimately help inform component agency
decision making on whether to pursue acquisition, and if pursued which
solutions should be acquired versus ruled out. However, some of our
members point out that historically, few S&T projects have led to a
successful acquisition program. There is also some skepticism as to
whether DHS components are fully committed to the S&T projects they are
involved with, due to the risk a component could choose solutions
developed through internally-funded research programs. While a level of
disconnect between S&T and its customers is undoubtedly due in part at
least to the fragmented nature of DHS, it is encouraging to see an
acknowledgement of this as an issue and several proposals in the
strategic plan on how to better coordinate.
We know S&T is grappling with the fact that as a research
organization, the directorate's portfolio is expected to include a mix
of high-risk/high-reward projects that explore extreme approaches to
component business/mission challenges, and actionable results that that
inform or initiative acquisition.
One of the biggest challenges faced by S&T leadership, as well as
Congress in seeking to provide guidance through re-authorization
legislation, is how to prioritize and balance the S&T research
portfolio. Our members feel that, given the limited size of the S&T
budget, the portfolio may be too wide, causing projects to be funded at
levels insufficient to be concluded in a timely or successful way.
Here, S&T appears to be moving in this direction. Under the strategic
plan, S&T estimates that the total number of portfolio projects would
be reduced as funding shifts to higher-priority programs.
communications on opportunities
Communications to industry on opportunities has increased, but it
is still fragmented and in need of better coordination. As S&T appears
to have provided in a preliminary way within the recent strategic plan,
it would be extremely helpful to provide a time line for achieving
project stages as well as deliverables to DHS components.
It takes considerable time and effort to respond to RFIs and
requests for white papers. S&T should close the feedback loop by
providing confirmation and/or responses that would help industry steer
research and product development priorities. Further, the recent
increase in number of industry days, speaking engagements, and webinars
led by S&T leaders has provided increased opportunities for
communication with industry and this trend should continue.
conclusion
What we have heard from S&T leadership on plans to improve industry
engagement is very encouraging. Ultimately what matters is whether the
strategy can be carried out in a meaningful way. We have identified
improving the business case for industry involvement, ensuring
stakeholder input from technology vendors, and communications
improvements as key elements to success.
As part of an effort to increase outreach to industry, the Science
and Technology Directorate signed a unique memorandum of understanding
(MOU) with the Security Industry Association in September 2013,
intended to facilitate information sharing that would help ``promote
the adaptation of electronics-related technological innovation at the
Federal, State, and local level for homeland security applications.''
SIA is committed to helping facilitate such communication and
productive relationships with industry.
On behalf of the Security Industry Association, I appreciate the
opportunity to provide collective input from our industry on both the
challenges and great opportunities of working with S&T. We stand ready
to answer any additional questions or provide any additional input you
may need as you craft legislation re-authorizing the DHS Science and
Technology Directorate.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Parker.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Pearl, for 5 minutes, for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARC A. PEARL, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, HOMELAND SECURITY AND DEFENSE BUSINESS COUNCIL

Mr. Pearl. Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, my
name is Marc Pearl. I serve as the president and CEO of the
Homeland Security and Defense Business Council which is a
nonpartisan, nonprofit industry organization.
Our members include the leading large, mid-tier, and small
companies that provide the homeland security and homeland
defense technology, product, and service solutions to DHS and
other Government entities, as well as in the commercial market.
We thank you for giving us this opportunity to appear before
you this morning to provide our perspective on the S&T
Directorate's engagement with industry.
Our head testimony which as you have said is now going to
be included in the record highlights three things: The progress
that S&T has made as a result of the under secretary's
leadership and its impact on industry, the key challenges that
still remain at the directorate, and lastly, a few
recommendations on what could be done to encourage even more
effective engagement with industry as well as what we believe
would be greater success with S&T.
With regard to positive steps forward, our written
testimony describes a number of areas that show how the S&T
Directorate's work is working hard to increase transparency and
communication--two areas that I would like to highlight.
Last month, as Mr. Parker said, the S&T released its
updated 5-year strategic plan, probably the best one that has
ever been put forward. It includes capability roadmaps and
specific objectives delineated by fiscal year. These capability
roadmaps are a necessary and important first step in creating a
process that will help companies align their individual
investments to where the Government needs help.
Second, the directorate is also encouraging greater
involvement of both DHS components and industry through its
APEX programs. These programs are vital to help integrate an
operational perspective, and I want to emphasize, an
operational perspective, into S&T's work earlier in the process
and helping create a deeper connection between the directorate
and the components who are the end-users.
If successful, the APEX programs will help establish a
credibility and relevance for S&T which in turn may increase
industry's desire to work more actively with the directorate.
Despite this progress, the directorate still faces a number
of uphill challenges which I outlined in the written testimony
that impact its ability to effectively engage with and motivate
industry in a manner that allows it to accomplish its mission,
particularly: Budget constraints, a lack of understanding its
audience, and an inability to make the business case for
industry involvement.
Because of budget cuts, S&T has been forced to ask the
private sector to spend its own resources on research and
development, to spend additional resources demonstrating its
capabilities at a Government-sponsored venue and then maybe
they will consider buying it.
As a result, the directorate has lost its relevance to many
mid to large companies because they are, there just is not a
compelling enough business case for their interest, for their
involvement, or their investment in the directorate's work.
Absent the promise of a future market or acquisition, why
should industry spend its money in this way?
My written testimony goes into greater detail with respect
to recommendations that could help tackle some of these
challenges, but briefly: The directorate could take more time
to better understand the market dynamics of the homeland
security industrial base; in order to build a market case to
determine what types of industry incentives are needed, it
could visit leading-edge private-sector labs to learn more
about industry's R&D; it could develop an industry engagement
strategy for the APEX programs and do a better job of sharing
their tactical business plans; and lastly, it should be
encouraged, whatever way, shape, and form to find new and
better means of ensuring greater integration of the components
into its work.
So, in conclusion, the work of this S&T Directorate is
vital and it is important. The Homeland Security industrial
base very much wants to be a partner in its mission and help it
succeed. We believe Dr. Brothers' plan is leading the
directorate in the right decision, but even more can be
accomplished if S&T focuses some time on understanding its
audience and its current work, builds a business case, and
creates incentives.
As a result, there would be a much better chance that
industry will step up and direct their work towards the needs
of S&T and the Department as a whole.
Congress, may I say at the end, can also play an important
role by supporting S&T in its effort to become more relevant to
the Department and the industry. You could either increase its
funding or narrow the scope of its work. You could enhance its
authority over the components or promote even closer
cooperation and integration between the directorate and the
components.
These are just some of our recommendations and our
oversight. On behalf of the members of the council, I
appreciate the opportunity to provide this collective
perspective of our members on S&T's engagement and look forward
to answering any questions that you might have.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Pearl follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marc A. Pearl
May 19, 2015
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, my name is Marc Pearl, and I am the
president and CEO of the Homeland Security & Defense Business Council
(Council), a non-partisan, non-profit industry organization that is
made up of the leading large, mid-tier, and small companies that
provide homeland security and homeland defense technology, product, and
service solutions to DHS and other Government and commercial markets.
We thank you for giving us the opportunity to appear before you today
to provide our perspectives on the DHS Science and Technology (S&T)
Directorate's engagement with industry.
The mission of the Council is to sponsor and promote programs and
initiatives that encourage greater and more effective communication
between Government and industry. We seek to facilitate a dialogue that
can inform the implementation of policy and process, help address
mission challenges, and improve the management and organization of DHS.
We often bring both sides together to gain a greater understanding of
each other's perspectives and processes so we can identify improved
ways of doing business together. In this regard, we have a history of
working with S&T to discuss the best ways of engaging with industry to
develop and find advanced technologies.
Effective engagement with industry is a priority area of interest
for the Council. In 2014, we developed a ``Framework for Government--
Industry Engagement Through the Planning and Execution of the
Acquisition Process.'' Through this effort, our member companies have
worked closely with the DHS directorates and components to identify
critical points of communication throughout the different stages of the
acquisition process (which includes pre-acquisition strategic and
business planning), the challenges and barriers to communication, and
to share best practices and options for effective methods and forums
for engagement. Many of the lessons learned from this initiative apply
to S&T.
The Council's testimony today will focus on the progress that S&T
has made as a result of Dr. Reginald Brothers' leadership and how it
impacts industry, the challenges that still remain, and our
recommendations for what can be done to encourage more effective
engagement with industry, as well as greater success for the
directorate.
In September of 2014, Dr. Brothers testified before this
subcommittee and outlined his vision and six priority areas of focus
for the directorate, which included:
1. Visionary goals that serve as 30-year horizon points to build
towards.
2. A 5-10 year strategic plan which would provide a nearer-term
roadmap for how the organization seeks to achieve its visionary
end goals.
3. An updated and balanced R&D portfolio that includes APEX
programs, technology engine programs, and other focused
programs not captured under one of these umbrellas.
4. A refined process for identifying capability gaps.
5. An empowered 21st Century workforce with multi-lingual program
managers that can slide between operational and technical
environments.
6. The ability to foster deeper engagement and transparency with
the homeland security industrial base.
Industry is a critical stakeholder and partner in S&T's mission and
each of these priorities impacts industry's ability and willingness to
engage with S&T.
progress within s&t
While S&T has not yet accomplished all of these goals, there have
been a number of positive changes at S&T that show progress in Dr.
Brother's priority areas of focus. He should be applauded for the
following proactive efforts that demonstrate that S&T is trying to
improve transparency and communication with industry.

Release of S&T's Visionary Goals and 5-Year Strategic
Plan.--Through the release of S&T's long-term visionary goals
and its recently-published 2015-2019 Strategic Plan, S&T has
established the necessary framework to help guide the mid- to
long-term future of the agency. The updated strategic plan is
probably the best that S&T has ever put forward, in part
because it includes capability roadmaps and specific objectives
that are delineated by fiscal year. While more communication is
still needed, the capability roadmaps are an important first
step in developing a process that helps private companies align
their own investments to where the Government needs help. The
visionary goals and strategic plan provide a basic blueprint
for the Government's future needs and allows the time for DHS
and industry to have the necessary conversations required to
align resources.

Greater Involvement of the Components and Industry through
Apex Programs.--One of the positive impacts of S&T's focus on
Apex programs is the involvement and commitment by senior
leaders of the DHS operational components. The collaborative
nature of these programs is important because it helps
integrate an operational perspective into S&T's work earlier in
the process and creates greater connections between S&T and the
end-users. If successful, this type of partnership will help
build credibility and relevance for S&T, which in turn may
increase industry's desire to work with the directorate.
We have also seen more outreach to industry through the Apex
programs. Last October, the Council coordinated an industry
tour with S&T and Customs and Border Protection at the Maryland
Test Facility of the Apex Air Entry Re-Exit Engineering (AEER)
Program. This program has used a series of briefings, webinars,
work sessions, and industry events to promote transparency
while developing a collaborative environment in which
stakeholder expertise and best practices are solicited and
incorporated into proposed solutions. Tours are an excellent
way of helping industry see and better understand the
operational working environment for technologies. In addition
to tours, the Apex AEER program solicits industry information
and ideas through an email address and uses information
submitted to determine which companies to meet with in one-on-
one discussions.
The S&T explosives division is hosting a Checkpoint Industry Day
next month to discuss with stakeholders in an open forum the
specific intentions of S&T and TSA regarding the newly-
authorized Apex Checkpoint Program. It is encouraging to see
outreach that is intended to solicit input and ideas from all
stakeholders. We hope though that this Industry Day is not the
only forum for engagement with industry. Group events are an
important starting point for pushing out information and
encouraging dialogue, however there are certain things that
industry will not discuss in this type of setting. S&T should
follow up with one-on-one meetings with relevant companies to
ensure it gains the information it needs to formulate
investment plans for checkpoint technologies and architectures.

More Information Available Through Website.--There is a
noticeable difference in the amount and type of information
that is now publicly available on the S&T website. It includes
information on its strategic direction, descriptions of its
major programs and each of the component parts that make up
S&T, identifies senior leaders, provides contact information
for program managers, lists business opportunities, and
includes upcoming events, press releases, blog entries,
articles, videos, and other archived stories. This collection
of information is valuable to those in industry who are seeking
to better understand what S&T is working on, how it operates,
and who to contact if they have questions.

S&T National Conversation.--The National Conversation is a
series of on-line and in-person discussions designed to bring
together multiple and diverse stakeholders that play a role in
innovating solutions for homeland security challenges. While it
is still early in the process to determine the effectiveness of
these tools, it is an example of S&T trying to use cost-
effective forums and technology to gain insight and
perspectives from all stakeholders in a collaborative
environment.

Increased Number of Webinars.--In the appropriate
circumstances, webinars are a cost-effective tool to push out
information to a large number of people because DHS does not
need to spend the time and money on event planning or acquiring
a large venue. Industry also saves time and money by not having
to send employees to events that may require travel and
extensive time out of the office. Over the past 2 years, there
has been a noticeable increase in webinars that include joint
participation by the components. This is one example of
improving information sharing with both industry and other
stakeholders.
challenges and recommendations
Despite this progress, S&T still faces a number of daunting
challenges which impact its ability to motivate and effectively engage
with industry in a manner that allows it to accomplish its mission.
These challenges include budget constraints, a lack of understanding of
its audience, the lack of a business case for industry involvement, and
its ability to closely coordinate and integrate its work with the
components. We believe that these challenges can be addressed through a
combination of the following actions: Taking the time to understand the
market dynamics of the industrial base, creating industry incentives,
learning about industry R&D, developing greater transparency and more
effective communication with industry through tactical business plans
and industry engagement strategies, finding ways to ensure greater
integration of the components into S&T's work, and focusing on what can
be accomplished with limited resources.
After a peak budget award in fiscal year 2006, S&T experienced a
series of decreasing and fluctuating budgets, particularly in fiscal
year 2011-fiscal year 2012, when it received its lowest budgets ever.
While its budget did increase in fiscal year 2014, the lack of an
adequate, stable, or predictable funding picture over the years has
created a number of interrelated problems.
Due to the budget cuts, many mid- to large-size companies lost
interest in engaging with S&T because it has had difficulty making an
attractive business case for their involvement. The budget constraints
have forced S&T into a trap that other resource-constrained Government
R&D organizations fall into, in which they want industry to spend its
own resources on R&D, and then spend additional resources demonstrating
its capabilities at a Government-sponsored venue, even when there is no
clear return on investment that would motivate that behavior. Most
industry providers do not have the time or money to invest in
speculative R&D unless they are convinced it will translate directly to
component acquisition or another market. Without an understanding of or
promise of a future market or acquisition, industry will not spend its
money in this way.
While the release of the S&T Strategic Plan is a necessary and
important first step in communicating future priorities, the plan
currently lacks the context of S&T's resources, its ability to
implement the contents of the plan, and an understanding of the private
sector. It is not yet credible. Industry will not align its investments
in R&D until there is follow up communication that demonstrates that
S&T understands its audience, has a tactical business plan that aligns
with budget realities to accomplish its goals, and can demonstrate
incentives and a business case to motivate industry.

Build a Business Case and Tailor Message to the Appropriate
Audience.--S&T tends to focus on trying to identify
technologies and capabilities without regard to the kinds of
companies that participate in that market. The market dynamics
for building a business case vary depending on the type and
size of company. To be successful, S&T's messaging needs to be
targeted to the appropriate audience. They should not be
talking to systems integrators about innovative technology or
talking to small companies about large systems integration. S&T
should take the time to gain a better understanding of the
market dynamics of the industrial base and tailor their
communication and engagement to the appropriate audience based
upon the need they are trying to solve.
One way to learn more about the industrial base is to consult with
industry associations like the Council and other membership
organizations that serve niche markets. These groups can
provide information on different segments of industry as well
as help push S&T's message out to the right audience.

Learn More About Industry's R&D Work.--Large companies spend
a tremendous amount of money in R&D and would welcome the
opportunity to share their future technology direction and
potentially direct research towards projects in areas where the
Government has specific needs. The release of the S&T Strategic
Plan helps provide information to industry on future direction,
but it is also critical for S&T to engage with industry so it
can learn more about industry IR&D. Particularly in a
challenging budget environment, S&T should lean towards
industry to create partnerships to assist them with technology
needs. If there are detailed future requirements and adequate
incentives, industry can assist DHS with additional out-of-the-
box solutions ready for future deployment. We have heard of a
few large companies inviting S&T to visit their laboratories so
they can see and learn more about their R&D efforts, but these
offers have not been accepted. It would be beneficial for S&T
to host more industry days focused on specific technology areas
and to visit leading-edge private-sector laboratories to learn
more about the R&D that is taking place.

Create Incentives for Industry Involvement.--S&T has been
trying to model the Department of Defense (DoD) for its process
innovation model. While the DoD model is robust, it is not
geared for a tactical law enforcement perspective and quick
acquisition. Without the carrot of visible available funding,
few vendors have the resources to engage in a protracted
dialogue with S&T that can be dropped at any step along the
way. There are many examples of vendors, particularly in
radiological/nuclear detection markets, that are building
relationships with foreign governments, obtaining a seat at the
table quickly and ramping up new technological solutions due to
the promise of immediate available funding. Many of these
companies say it does not pay to focus on this type of
innovation in the United States because there is no incentive.
If S&T cannot make the business case for industry involvement, it
needs to create or seek legislation for the appropriate
incentives. This was the approach used by Congress and the FDA
when it created new business models and incentives for the
development of drugs and other medical interventions for rare
diseases through the adoption of the Orphan Drug Act of 1983.

Develop an Industry Engagement Strategy and Tactical
Business Plans for Apex Programs.--There are two important ways
that S&T can expand on transparency and communication with
industry related to its Strategic Plan. We believe that S&T
should develop an industry engagement strategy for how it will
introduce and roll out its Apex programs and it should share
tactical business plans that explain how S&T plans to
accomplish its goals within each program.
An industry engagement strategy could consist of a flexible three-
stage process. The first stage would focus on awareness and
would introduce all of the Apex programs to industry in a
single session so that there is greater transparency into the
entire process and a better understanding of everything that
S&T is trying to accomplish across all of the programs. In this
stage, industry is introduced to the concept of Apex and they
would receive a description of each Apex program at a high
level. The information provided would include the purpose,
goals, high-level time lines, high-level process description,
goals for engaging with industry, and how other efforts from
across the Department would be tied in. By hearing about all
the programs in one session, industry would have a better sense
of which programs they have the highest interest in and may be
able to identify other efforts going on within DHS or in other
Federal agencies that relate to those efforts.
The second stage would include engagement forums to roll out each
individual Apex program. These sessions would describe the
state of play to industry for each program and would provide
opportunities to discuss the state of current and emerging
technologies. The final stage would focus on sessions that
discuss specific opportunities within each program.
As part of this engagement process, industry would be looking to
learn the following types of tactical information from S&T:

What is the time line for execution and engagement with
industry?

Who are the players and stakeholders?

Who from industry are you trying to target and attract?

What do you want to get from industry throughout the
process?

When do you want industry involved?

How do you plan to engage with industry?

What are the projects that will support this program?

Which projects have already started or are on-going?

What are the major deliverables and milestones?

What are the new business opportunities and incentives for
industry participation?

Who is the final end-user and likely purchaser?

What is the funding profile? Does this include component-
funded projects?

What are the enablers and opportunities for collaboration?

What are DHS's challenges/risks and plan to overcome them?

What actions will you take to accomplish your goals?
We know that a lot of this tactical business information is
available internally within S&T but has not yet been shared
with industry. This type of information sharing would serve to
help attract and motivate industry by giving them greater
confidence in what S&T is doing and an understanding of how
these programs will translate into opportunities for industry.
If industry had a better understanding of specific objectives
and challenges within these programs, it could also have an
early dialogue with S&T on who needs to be included in
engagement, impediments to getting those groups to participate,
how to effectively message communications, how to incentivize
the target audience, and the best forums for engagement.
Currently, the information available about different Apex programs
is inconsistent. Many in industry do not know the specifics of
each program or the business plan that S&T will use to
accomplish its goals. We realize that the Apex programs are not
all operating on the same time lines and that some will be
complete in 2016 while others will not end until 2019 and
beyond. It would be helpful to have some kind of roadmap that
allows industry to easily determine what S&T has done so far,
where it is going with each program, and if changes are
occurring along the way.

Greater Coordination, Integration, and Unity of Effort
Between S&T and the Components.--While the Apex programs are a
good start, S&T still has much to do to establish value-added
relationships and credibility with the components. Part of the
problem is the lack of incentives or authority to require the
components to work with S&T. Some components, like Coast Guard
and DNDO, have separate and independent R&D budgets and
organizations. None of the components are precluded from
carrying out their own R&D activities as long as they
coordinate with S&T. However, there is no clear guidance on
what constitutes coordination and S&T has no direct oversight
authority into their work. Partnership with the components is
voluntary and based upon relationships, however close
coordination is necessary to develop a common vision, ensure
unity of effort, and reduce the potential for duplication of
effort. S&T cannot be successful if a disconnect exists between
their work and the end-users or if they fail to consider the
operational systems perspective. The participation of
components, particularly as it relates to identifying
capability gaps and developing operational requirements, makes
it more likely that research results will successfully
transition into the field and that S&T is working on the
priority needs of a component. Since acquisition authority and
most of the money lies within the components, it is important
for industry to see and understand the close coordination and
integration between S&T and a component, because it makes it
more likely that that there is a future market.

Increase Funding or Narrow Focus.--S&T's scope of work is
vast and serves a diverse group of customers. Its
responsibilities include a wide range of activities such as
funding basic and applied research, advanced development,
oversight of testing and evaluation, technology foraging,
acquisition support and operational analysis, maintenance of
Federal research infrastructure, and providing technical,
operational, and systems engineering support to the components.
If S&T's budget is not going to increase to an amount that is
adequate for its responsibilities and authorities, perhaps it
should have a narrower focus. Right now, S&T is trying to be
all things to all people and they cannot do this successfully
with their budget. Tough decisions need to be made on what
activities should be prioritized and would have the highest
impact to its customers. If they were able to do a few things
successfully, it would help build credibility with industry,
with the components, and with Congress.
conclusion
The work of S&T is important and industry wants to be a partner in
their mission and help them succeed. We believe Dr. Brother's
leadership and the recently-released 5-year strategic plan is leading
the directorate in the right direction, but there is still more to do,
particularly as it pertains to effective engagement with industry. The
S&T budget and the lack of a business case for industry involvement
remain the top challenges to moving forward. There are many things that
S&T and Congress can do to help address the impact of these issues. We
hope that S&T is ready to build on their progress and focus on the next
steps. If they take the time to understand their audience and its
current work, build a business case and create incentives, that
industry will step up and direct their work towards the needs of S&T
and the Department. However, greater transparency and communication
through an industry engagement strategy and the sharing of tactical
business plans is another aspect to making this happen.
Congress can also play a role by supporting S&T in these efforts
with industry, by increasing funding for S&T, considering legislative
incentives for industry, enhancing S&T's authority over the components,
or promoting closer coordination and integration between S&T and the
components. As a last resort, it may have to reconsider and narrow the
scope of S&T's portfolio so that the directorate can focus on what can
be accomplished with limited resources. We know the decisions are not
easy, but are critical to producing results.
On behalf of the Homeland Security & Defense Business Council, I
appreciate the opportunity to provide the collective perspectives of
our members on S&T's engagement with industry. The Council stands ready
to answer any additional questions you may have on these topics.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Pearl.
The Chairman now recognizes Dr. Aronson for 5 minutes for
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF SAMUEL H. ARONSON, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN PHYSICAL
SOCIETY

Mr. Aronson. Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond,
thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the
scientific community's involvement with the S&T Directorate of
Homeland Security.
I am a nuclear physicist and currently serve as president
of the American Physical Society, and I thank Mr. Richmond for
saving me a paragraph's worth of reading here because I will
skip ahead to my concerns.
As a director at Brookhaven National Laboratory, I had a
large, multi-purpose research institution with world-class
facilities and an outstanding staff possessing broad scientific
and technological expertise, spanning the life sciences and the
physical sciences as well as engineering. Brookhaven's
portfolio extends from discovery-driven research like the
origins of the universe to applied research such as exploration
of energy technologies and problems relevant to National and
homeland security.
My own experience with DHS is as director at the laboratory
and somewhat indirect in the sense of actually seeking funding
from DHS. But, the people working at the lab provided me with
plenty of insight into that process which I would have to say
was mixed, at best. Unlike other Federal agencies that have
research missions, DHS at least to the outside world and I am
representing a different component of that outside world than
Mr. Parker and Mr. Pearl did, seems to suffer from a lack of
transparency and a culture that does not really encourage input
from the Nation's outstanding science and technology community.
I think this can be improved. It doesn't have to be this
way and a simple step toward that is to look at what other
agencies and departments with research agendas do in that
regard. Other agencies such as the National Science Foundation,
the Department of Energy, the Department of Defense, I am
particularly familiar with the Department of Energy since the
laboratory is funded by the Department of Energy, use their
committees--their external committees to solicit ideas, connect
with the science and technology community, and to develop
programming that helps them accomplish their mission.
The advisory committees are broadly-based scientifically.
They meet frequently in open sessions, provide opportunities
for public and community input and make their recommendations
very widely known. I know for a fact that the Department of
Energy's Office of Science actually lives by these
recommendations.
By contrast, DHS' advisory committee is a small committee
with a fairly narrow base and it meets infrequently and almost
always in closed sessions. It doesn't make its recommendations
easily accessible to interested parties, which include the
science and technology community as well as industry.
By allowing the committee to operate in such a fashion, I
think DHS is missing an important opportunity to engage the
best scientific and technical minds to help the Department
achieve its mission. The core missions themselves are daunting,
preventing terrorism and enhancing security, securing and
managing our borders, and forcing and administering our
immigration laws, et cetera.
Each of these requires the best science and technology the
Nation can muster. Collectively, they require scientific
contributions from a broad multiplicity of disciplines, and the
present composition of the S&T advisory committee is not really
up to the task of representing and providing input from that
broad constituency.
So, what should be done? First, the S&T advisory committee
should be expanded to embrace a broader and more balanced
membership, reflective of DHS' own diverse scientific and
technological needs. I don't feel it does that at the present
time. Second, an expanded advisory committee should play a more
proactive role, providing external advice to the under
secretary for science and technology.
Third, the under secretary himself should make greater use
of the advisory committee and actively seek its advice, charge
it to perform studies, request assistance and long-term
planning, et cetera. I emphasize the word ``external''. This is
an interested but separate community whose work underpins much
of the science and technology of DHS.
Fourth, the advisory committee should conduct its work in a
more transparent manner with meetings open to the public where
feasible and Unclassified documents should be posted on the
website in a timely way so that the public as well as Members
of Congress can easily access them.
Finally, the charter of the committee should be sharpened
to provide a more detailed description of its scope and
expected outcomes.
In transforming the advisory committee, DHS Science and
Technology Directorate should take its cue from the other
Federal agencies that depend on R&D in fulfilling their
missions. The Office of Science and Department of Defense
provide two rather different but very good examples.
DOE Office of Science relies on a multiplicity of
committees, staffed from outside the Department and following
the procedures set up in the FACA, the Federal Advisory
Committee Act of 1972, with each committee representing a broad
and diverse background and sets of points of view.
The Defense Science Board, the Department of Defense works
in a different way. It is a single committee, more like the S&T
advisory committee, but is also very much more effective than
the advisory committee.
I think a more robustly constituted and more open advisory
committee is the first step towards improving the Department's
connection with the science and technology community, and as I
learned from testimony already, with the rest of the interested
stakeholders.
I would be happy to answer any questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Aronson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Samuel H. Aronson
May 19, 2015
Chairman Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond and Members of the
subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to testify today on the
Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate and
its interactions with the scientific community.
I am a nuclear physicist and currently serve as president of the
American Physical Society, representing more than 50,000 physicists in
universities, industry, and National laboratories. From 2006 until
2012, I was director of Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), where I
now direct the RIKEN BNL Research Center.
As Brookhaven's director, I oversaw the operation of a multipurpose
research institution with world-class facilities and an outstanding
staff possessing broad scientific and technological expertise, spanning
the life sciences, the physical sciences and engineering. Brookhaven's
portfolio extends from discovery-driven research, such as studies of
the birth of the universe, to applied research, such as exploration of
energy technologies and problems relevant to National and homeland
security.
Although I personally have had somewhat limited direct experience
with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), I have known many
scientists who have attempted to engage with the DHS Science and
Technology Directorate. And their experiences have been mixed, at best.
Unlike other Federal agencies that have research missions, DHS to the
outside world suffers from a lack of transparency and a culture that
that does not encourage input from our Nation's outstanding science and
technology community. It doesn't have to be that way.
Like other Federal agencies with science and technology mandates,
DHS has an advisory committee that is intended to help the Department
develop and manage its S&T portfolio. But, from all appearances, it is
quite dysfunctional. Other agencies, such as the National Science
Foundation and the Department of Energy, with which I am very familiar,
use their committees to solicit ideas, connect with the science and
technology community and develop programming that help the agencies
accomplish their missions. The advisory committees are broadly-based
scientifically, meet frequently in open sessions, provide opportunities
for public commentary and make their recommendations widely known.
By contrast, the DHS S&T Advisory Committee comprises only six
members drawn from a narrow, parochial community. It meets
infrequently, almost always in closed session, and does not make its
recommendations easily accessible to interested parties. By allowing
the committee to operate in such a fashion, DHS is missing an
opportunity to engage the best scientific and technical minds to help
the Department achieve its goals.
The Department's core missions are daunting: Preventing terrorism
and enhancing security; securing and managing our borders; enforcing
and administering our immigration laws; safeguarding and securing cyber
space; and ensuring resilience to disasters. Each one of them requires
the best science and technology the Nation can muster. Collectively,
they require scientific contributions from a multiplicity of
disciplines. The present composition and operation of the S&T Advisory
Committee is shortchanging the Department and needlessly placing
Americans at future risk.
What should be done?
First, the S&T Advisory Committee should be expanded to embrace a
broader and more balanced membership, reflective of DHS's diverse
scientific and technological needs.
Second, an expanded Advisory Committee should play a more proactive
role in providing outside advice to the under secretary for science and
technology.
Third, the under secretary should make greater use of the Advisory
Committee, actively seeking advice, commissioning studies, and
requesting assistance with long-term planning from people who are not
part of his or her inner circle.
Fourth, the Advisory Committee should conduct its work in a more
transparent manner, with meetings open to the public, to the extent
feasible, and Unclassified documents posted on the DHS website on a
timely basis so that the public and Members of Congress can easily
access them.
Finally, the charter of the Advisory Committee should be sharpened
to provide a more detailed description of its scope and expected
outcomes.
In transforming the Advisory Committee, the DHS Science and
Technology Directorate should take a cue from other Federal agencies
that depend on research and development in fulfilling their missions.
The Department of Energy's Office of Science and the Department of
Defense provide two good examples.
The DOE Office of Science relies on six committees--comprising 15
to 24 members each--that follow procedures established by the 1972
Federal Advisory Committee Act, with each committee representing a
balance of viewpoints and diversity of backgrounds. The Department of
Defense relies principally on one advisory committee, the Defense
Science Board (DSB) with 32 external members chosen on the basis of
their preeminence in the fields of science and technology relevant to
the DOD mission.
A DHS S&T Advisory Committee more robustly constituted would help
the directorate maintain continuity in its programming, better capture
the expertise of the Nation's research community and instill greater
confidence in its work.
Thank you. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.

Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Aronson.
The Chairman now recognizes himself for 5 minutes of
questions.
My first question relates to Dr. Brothers' public statement
that developing a homeland security industrial base is one of
his top priorities as under secretary. In that regard, he has
referenced the success of the defense industrial base at the
Department of Defense as an example.
I would like to start with you, Mr. Pearl. You mentioned
this briefly in your testimony. But from an industry
perspective, can you give us your thoughts on the progress of
this goal and what are some of the things that S&T could be
doing better to develop this industrial base?
Mr. Pearl. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think what first needs to be pointed out is that while we
have internally discussed the concept of a homeland security
industrial base, up until Dr. Brothers' testimony last fall,
the phrase could not be found even over the last 13, 14 years
since 9/11, most certainly, but since the formation in 2003 of
the Department. There was--there is no concept of a homeland
security industrial base and we have had internal discussions
within our industry on whether or not it can and should it
mirror the DOD model.
In many respects, it is very difficult and I think that we
have to approach that. Notwithstanding Dr. Brothers coming out
of DOD and Secretary Johnson and his chief of staff, this is
not a DOD-lite organization, I think, that you probably have
come to realize. In many respects, it mirrors a law enforcement
organization.
There is also the history of using the term ``industrial
base'' which came out of World War II with the need to make
sure that there was an industry and there were labs even at
peace time, able to kind-of get us to where we needed to be and
in a time of emergency.
So, we take that very seriously when the Government starts
calling the industry, the enterprise a homeland security
industrial base. In many respects, it is not building tanks and
fighter jets. It is almost like an intellectual base as opposed
to an industrial base.
But that having been said, what the under secretary does
realize is that there is an opportunity to reach out beyond
just the National labs to excite, encourage industry. I would
like him to include large and mid-tier companies beyond the
small because there are a lot of opportunities that are going
on there as well, but the context of industry being able to
support the homeland security enterprise, not with subsidies,
but with in essence, its creativity, its innovation, its
capability set, its experience.
So that, in many respects, just setting the tone, I think,
is--as I think we have all said, a great first step. What has
to come is that the policy has to turn into a reality and that
is what we are all looking for--an operational deployment
implementation plan that is not just a policy plan that looks
good and sounds good, but doesn't get us to where we need to
go.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Pearl.
Mr. Parker, I would like to give you an opportunity to
respond to the same question or expound on what Mr. Pearl just
related.
Mr. Parker. Well, I guess I would echo Mr. Pearl's comments
and that there could be more participation from mid-sized and
large companies and it is something that I think is necessary.
Of course, small business engagement is something that is very
important, as well.
But, I think with the homeland security industrial base,
what that really gets at is having a stable source of
technology development. You know, I think in cases where you
have a lot of entry and exit from a market, that can interfere
with having a stable source to go to. So, I would echo his
comments.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Parker.
Dr. Aronson, the Centers of Excellence within S&T are meant
to engage academic institutions, specifically consortium of the
universities, to address specific research and technology
development issues relevant to homeland security.
There seems to be a mix of basic and applied research
centers and others are more targeted to incremental technology
development. My question to you is: Do you think there is an
appropriate balance of research activities and developmental
activities?
Mr. Aronson. If the question is--is S&T possessed of an
appropriate balance, I would say the answer is no. I think
there is a limited capacity to devote resources to longer-
range, medium-range, and long-range issues that probably depend
more on scientific and technological input and some of the more
incremental and--or shorter-term activities.
While I understand the needs to put the right tools,
robust, and easy-to-use, and cutting-edge tools in the hands of
first responders, and that is a top priority for the
Department. But there has to be more, in my opinion, look ahead
at evolving threats and more emphasis on technologies that are
in a pipeline that I don't think industry can afford to drive.
The National labs and academic institutions are more set up
that way, and it seems to me that that balance has not been
struck yet.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Aronson. My time has expired
on this first round of questions. The Chairman now recognizes
the Ranking Member, Mr. Richmond for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. I will address this to all three
and we will just go from my right to left and start with Dr.
Aronson and end with Mr. Parker.
Over the years this subcommittee has spent a lot of time on
S&T issues. Like I said early in 2009 to 2010, we did a
complete staff review of S&T and a comprehensive bipartisan
bill was passed out of committee and went on to be passed
unanimously by the House of Representatives.
One of the things we asked then, and continue to ask for,
is a clear and transparent mission statement and listing of
goals, so industry, academia, and the public at large can
understand what the goals of the directorate are.
In your opinion, what are the three most important things
the S&T directorate does or should be doing and how does the
scientific community and industry at large know, or will know,
when S&T is succeeding at doing them?
Mr. Aronson. Thank you for the question. In my opinion, the
three most important issues for the S&T directorate are these:
To ensure that the DHS components, in particular the first
responders, are able to address the evolving homeland security
challenges that face our Nation with, as I said earlier the
most up-to-date, robust, and easy-to-use technologies that are
on offer.
Second, to make full use of our Nation's scientific and
technological minds and facilities in pursuit of those
technologies, and third to anticipate medium- and long-term
homeland security challenges by funding more high-risk, high-
reward RND to produce game-changing scientific breakthroughs
and innovations.
With regard to your second question, I think the under
secretary has to proactively lay out in a clear and concise and
transparent manner the directory's near- and longer-term goals
and how the roster of activities proposed in the strategic plan
accomplish those goals. Doing so might include benchmarks, how
those benchmarks are reached and how and when goals are
accomplished; in other words, transparency about the plan and
its state of accomplishment.
Again, this should entail communicating not only within the
homeland security community but more broadly with the wider
science and technology community, the public, Members of
Congress and others of the stakeholders.
Mr. Richmond. Mr. Pearl.
Mr. Pearl. Mr. Richmond, I guess the question--your first
question in terms of the most important things comes--is a two-
part question; one is for S&T and then, one is the most
important things for industry.
I mean it is time for me to be a little selfish and
reflecting as well. With respect to the things that the
director can do, they have to do the things that are most
beneficial and of most value to their customers, which is in
essence the components that are within DHS.
The decisions need to be coordinated and decided by the
customers. It can't be done outside and what they produce in
the fastest and available time with the least amount of
dollars. That is where from an industry standpoint we would
differ with the scientists. DHS has to in essence, unlike DOD,
get stuff done now.
You as Members of Congress, as citizenry wants it done
yesterday and it is not a long-range, you know, the long-range
testing and the way that a strategic plan might be usually
viewed upon.
But the industry in the end can't decide what those
priorities are. It is a partner but the end-user. From an
industry perspective we are saying, No. 1, there needs to be
built a business case for industry to be involved in what is
going on.
No. 2, as I think it has been said by all of us, we have to
increase transparency and communication across the board
through a sharing of tactical business plans that explain how
they plan to accomplish those goals, and No. 3, find more ways
to increase collaboration with the components.
If those three things are the most important one, we as
industry are not going to direct what those priorities are for
the Department, for the Secretary, for the President. But we
then can respond accordingly with the best, most effective, and
most efficient solutions.
Mr. Parker. I do agree with what Mr. Pearl said and not to
duplicate his comments, I will add few other things I think are
at the core of the mission. One is to make sure that the DHS
components have the tools and information they need to make
decisions about what technology to deploy or not, depending on
the results.
I think that, you know, there is an enormous amount of
innovation going on in the security industry, the commercial,
developed for commercial and international markets.
You know, from our perspective, one of the types of S&T
projects that have had the most success is where you are
integrating essentially off-the-shelf technology developed
commercially into a system or solution to fulfill an urgent
operational need in the components.
So, I think being able to harness that innovation is a key
element of the mission.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank the gentleman and I recognize myself
for an additional 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Pearl, I would like to start with you again. I
mentioned this in my opening statement. S&T has a number of
programs, offices, and initiatives to work with small and
medium-sized businesses like the S&T small business innovation
research program, the technology transfer program, and the
commercialization office.
I would like to know: What experience do your stakeholders
have with these programs and are they effective in working with
industry from your perspective?
Mr. Pearl. Well, I don't want to speak to maybe any one
particular one like the SBIR program. In many respects, some of
our small businesses have been involved in it. Sometimes, they
invite one or two large businesses to do a kind-of lecture or
discussion.
I don't think that--I think that if we begin to draw lines
between what your revenue is versus what your capabilities are,
I think we get into trouble. I think DHS as a whole, this is an
issue for all of DHS, you shouldn't just be checking a box to
say we have hit these numbers in terms of small businesses. But
that we have accomplished these goals and we are providing
these solutions based on whatever size the business is and we
need to work with you and the full committee on getting to
that.
But having said that there have been a number of instances,
the APEX program that I talked about. There is out in Landover
a special entry/exit reengineering program, an APEX program
that they are testing on site what that looks like.
We were the first organization to be able to bring a group
of companies that were not necessarily submitting to that plan
that S&T is running with CDP, but we could see what was going
on.
The openness of the APEX programs and as I think my written
testimony talked about, the more that there is this kind of
transparency as a whole on what those APEX programs are going
to be trying to do, the better off they are.
I am impressed with Dr. Aronson's, you know, suggestion on
sharing information. The website now is in better shape than it
has ever been. Just using the website, that kind of social
media in its own way is something that has been done and our
industry has responded.
I think next week there is going to be an industry day that
S&T is putting together in the Rad/Nuc arena. Bottom line is
more and more of encouraging industry's involvement and
awareness far to the left of needs and requirements to what is
the problem.
Let's all meet together, let's not push up intellectual
property and proprietary rights. Let's just talk as an
experienced group of scientists and the industry officials who
have provided those solutions to talk together would be
something that I would--I have seen beginning to happen. We
just want to encourage more of it.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Pearl. So as you mentioned
APEX programs, let me move to you, Dr. Aronson to get your
perspective there. Under Secretary Brothers has plans to
significantly expand the APEX programs in S&T including the
creation of an APEX engines entity that performs crosscutting
RND and technology development.
I would like to know your impressions of the APEX programs
generally, and do you think that the planned expansion is a
good idea.
Mr. Aronson. Well, I am not terribly familiar with the APEX
programs, but I do believe in general the issue of risk-taking
and interdisciplinary research are important for any program
that is attempting to look across a range of time horizon
points that cover both very near-term and urgent needs to
technologies that have to develop in order to provide the
expected capabilities for emerging threats.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Dr. Aronson.
We have talked a little today about the problem of
timeliness and contracting and awards. Mr. Parker, how would
you suggest that S&T improve the awarding of research and
development contracts, since in the past there typically has
been a delay between the award and the allocation of funds?
Mr. Parker. Well, I think just--I mean opening the lines of
communication is a good start. I mean there is, you know, one
of the ideas that has come to us that maybe there should be
industry day type of events or technology summits that are
hosted at either the S&T labs or company labs, and many
companies have innovation labs, to foster this open dialog
between the director and the industry.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Parker. My time has again
expired, and I would like to again recognize the Ranking Member
for an additional 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Richmond. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I hope not to use it
all. Again, I will pose this question to the entire panel and
this time we will start from my left to my right.
As you know this subcommittee and committee has passed some
important cyber authorization and security legislation. One of
the recurring issues is developing, educating, and attracting a
diverse work force to come work at DHS.
Can you give us some examples, specifically, probably, you,
Dr. Aronson, of how Brookhaven, your laboratory or other labs
have interacted with or collaborated with minority-serving
institutions that are part of the S&T university programs,
especially in the areas of internships, mentoring, or faculty
exchanges?
So however you all want to answer. I am okay with that.
Whoever wants to jump on it first?
Mr. Aronson. Well, since you mentioned Brookhaven my ears
went up, and I would like to say a couple of things, but I
would like to introduce it by saying that this is an issue for
the entire S&T and R&D community in this country.
We don't have a good record of inclusivity and we
desperately need to fill the ranks of the next generation of
scientists and engineers. Mostly I think or to a greater extent
than before from domestic resources.
So just out of a pure business sense it is crazy not to be
looking for all the brightest minds in the country. At
Brookhaven like many of the other National labs, we have a lot
of educational programs and work force development programs
serving K through 12 as well as college undergraduates,
graduate students, of course, come to do their advanced
research there.
Even science teachers. We run programs to bring the local
communities' science teachers to the lab to understand how
science is really done is something I think is missing in the
schools in general.
A lot of our programs are targeted to minority-serving
institutions. I am just going to mention one of them, there are
a bunch. But we have a program we started about 8 years ago
called INCREASE that stands for Interdisciplinary Consortium
for Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering.
It trains teams from minority-serving institutions, both
faculty and students in the use of some of the cutting-edge
scientific facilities that the Government has paid for and we
operate at Brookhaven National Laboratory, like our nanoscience
center, the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, and our
currently world-leading X-ray light source. These teams learn
how to write scientific proposals, how to build and conduct
experiments, how to do those experiments and analyze the data
and publish the results.
Basically, provide them the resources, if they can write a
proposal that is deserving of time on those machines, they get
the time on those machines at no cost and they get to join the
scientific team that way. So I am extremely proud of that
program, it is only one of a number that we do, but I will end
by saying we have an awful long way to go in terms of
inclusivity.
Mr. Richmond. Mr. Pearl.
Mr. Pearl. I think your question which went to the issue of
science and long-range planning is something that is naturally
in the labs and naturally in the academia world.
To a great extent, industry is a here-and-now as DHS has
been the components of here-and-now. What can you do for me in
this context? The length of time that it takes to even get from
the beginning of an identity of a problem to the solution, it
takes so long sometimes. Sometimes there are a lot of
inquiries, but the responses by industry going to like another
sphere, we don't hear back from them and what is going on, that
many companies have gone across the pond.
My written testimony gives an example of that where they
have, in certain areas, they can get a decision made
particularly in radiological and nuclear detection markets much
faster in the foreign countries and they get a seat at the
table and they are developing aspects of R&D in the moment of
potential business opportunity.
So I think that to a great extent, how we get women,
veterans, minorities, the most capable and dedicated and
effective people who whether they are in the sciences or
whether they are in the applications of the solutions, we have
to do a better job.
In the cyber bills that you have been talking about that
are out there, we now have offices within Government that are
competing for the top cybersecurity specialists, forget about
what industry might be able to have in terms of expertise.
We have to do a better-coordinated effort. That is
something that a science and technology directorate possibly
could take on and how do you coordinate taking the best and the
brightest and putting them in the spots that they are most
valuable and most needed?
Mr. Richmond. Mr. Parker, my time has expired but if you
can answer very quickly, I would appreciate it and I would
yield back.
Mr. Parker. I will just say that, you know, finding a
qualified workforce in the science field is very challenging,
but we have a number of members who are small or minority-owned
businesses, veteran-owned businesses that benefit enormously
from Federal programs that encourage their involvement, so
thank you.
Mr. Richmond. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I would
just say for the record that just last week Google announced
that it is going to send some of their engineers to HBCUs so
that they can attract a more diverse workforce and work
students and faculty.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back and thank you for
indulgence in letting me go over a little while.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, gentlemen. The Chairman now
recognizes other Members of the subcommittee for 5 minutes of
questions beginning with the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you. Thank you to the three of you for
coming today, and sorry I was late, so if any of my questions
is repetitive you all will forgive me for that.
So I am putting this in a box in my mind and what is coming
out is we are using public money either directly for research
or through the small business innovation program to companies
to try to motivate the private sector at some level to help
solve a problem which is a public good program, security is a
public good, right?
So sometimes it is through universities, which is why they
have research parks, sometimes it is--you are trying, we are
trying to get, DHS is trying to get a private company without
any involvement through a grant to solve a security problem
through innovation, right, so I got that right. Okay.
Now, I think most technological innovation is driven by the
profit motive; that may be shorter, Mr. Pearl in your mind, and
I understand that. There is always a mismatch of incentives
between public and private sectors because the time lines are
different, because the public sector doesn't have quarterly
profits.
So it doesn't make the private guys bad, they just have a
different incentive? Correct. I think you are with me so far,
right?
Can you give me, given that that is the framework here, if
I have understood at all, right through my study and listening,
do we have any examples, and I know you all are not DHS and no
one is here from DHS, where DHS is kind-of saying, look, we
have this security problem. This is the kind of innovation we
need. We are spending all this money to try to get a catalyst
for that--a solution to that. Either a private company or a
private pseudo-company through a research park or a university
or whatever comes up with an innovation that is now in the
security sector that I could see.
So, yes, this is--has made the public good of security more
secure, and the private guys have made some money and their
shareholders were already--are also happy about that. Can you
all give me any exam--I think that is how this is supposed to
work. We are spending a lot of money on it.
Am I wrong in my--in how I am viewing this? If not, can you
give me any--knowing you all are not DHS, do we have any real
live examples of success?
Mr. Pearl. There are a number of individual examples and
for the purposes of the record what I would love to do and I
assume that Mr. Parker will do likewise is go back and talk to
our members specifically and answer to the question about from
our point of view from industry, what has worked.
But the general statement is this and that is my concern--
Government only knows what Government knows. So when Government
says, any agency says, I want this, it is only based on maybe
the person they talk to.
It is not based on knowledge of what exists in the market.
It doesn't know what is going on down the road. To a certain
extent that is the role that S&T could and should play,
particularly with its funding of the National labs, et cetera.
The analogy I used of 100 years ago, a department said I
need the fastest horse, that was the RFP. Give me the fastest
horse to get from point A to point Z. All the horse guys would
come in, but if Henry Ford had walked in, they would have said,
``No, no. You are not the fastest horse.''
I think that we have got to get to a point that before we
come up with the need, with the requirement, with the solution,
we have to have an earlier conversation that talks about, how
do you frame the problem? What is your problem?
Oh, I can't get stuff from point A to point Z fast enough.
Well, locate it at point Y might be the case. So all that I am
saying hypothetically is that we have to have more
communication, more discussion and get all of the players in
who can come up with--no one company has the solution. I am
sure a lot of my members think so, but they don't. We need to
have that collaborative discussion.
Mr. Clawson. So we would say before we came up with a
strategy, we would have to understand conditions on the ground
or the market conditions, if you will. Okay? So does that mean
the Government comes up with the market conditions and then
outsources the strategy given those conditions or do--or are we
outsourcing the market conditions analysis?
Mr. Pearl. You have to define the problem. Congress defines
the problem. The administration through its Executive branch
defines how it is going to best address the problem. Labs and
the industry comes in, not to tell you what the problem is but
to provide the solutions to what you have identified as our
public policy leaders is the way I would see it.
Mr. Clawson. Yes, sir. Can I continue? You are--Mr. Lee?
Go ahead, Mr. Parker----
Mr. Parker. Sir, I would--Congressman, I would--I have two
examples that are kind of a little bit further down the line
once, you know, the problem has been identified. One is years
ago US-VISIT which is now open had a challenge, they issued a
challenge to industry.
They are expanding the use of biometric technology to
record fingerprints. The type of device they were using was as
big as a large microwave that sat on a customs officers, you
know, desk and they said, ``We need to get this down to a 6-by-
6-inch cube size.''
They had many other technical requirements that were very
clear and performance requirements that were laid out. They--it
was also, certainty was provided; it was, hey, we are going to
buy X number of these devices.
So then industry responded, investment occurred, and
several prototypes were produced and one was eventually chosen
giving the agency that capability within 1 year. So it is one
of the, which one of the success stories of how this has worked
out.
In one more example, right now, there is a mobile
biometrics program, it is using a lot of technologies that is
developed commercially. There is one called the Stockton Latent
Print mobile pilot where they are using--law enforcement
officers were using mobile devices to take latent fingerprints
from crime scenes and doing matches within a few minutes to
fingerprint databases.
That is something that even if the Federal Government
doesn't develop an acquisition program directly from it,
products will be developed that will be available for State and
local law enforcement.
Mr. Clawson. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I thank the gentleman from Florida. I would
like to recognize my friend and colleague from Rhode Island,
Mr. Langevin for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I too want to thank
our panel of witnesses for their testimony today. It has been
very helpful, and I am sorry that I couldn't get here sooner,
but I appreciate what I have heard and look forward to
reviewing your testimony further.
So my question is--so like many members of the panel I am
so deeply interested in cybersecurity and DHS's role in
protecting our networks. The S&P Directorate considers itself
the lead Unclassified cybersecurity--lead provider of
Unclassified cybersecurity R&D in the Federal Government.
So how does that mesh with your experiences in the industry
and academia? I am particularly interested, Dr. Aronson, in how
the directorate is viewed by university researchers in the
field as it has never established an information security,
information engineering center of excellence, which I find a
bit curious.
But I am very curious to hear all your perspectives on
DHS's role in this vital area of research.
Mr. Aronson. I think the landscape of interest in
cybersecurity is certainly Government-wide and probably
universal. I think it is a little difficult. I think for the
lack of a more comprehensive R&D policy that spans departments
in the Government for academia to address it in any coherent
way.
It is kind of a multi-dimensional space and people, I
think, tend to work with agencies that they are familiar with,
if they have the capability, and the need is there and it is--
the need is everywhere. So it is a little bit hard to see DHS
in particular as an attractor for that.
I think it is just--the problem, we haven't recognized the
appropriate level or coordinated at the appropriate level.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Anyone else from the panel got a
comment?
Mr. Pearl. I would only piggyback to what Dr. Aronson said,
Congressman, in the context of when you are talking about
dollars as one incentive to doing it, yes, there are the
altruistic reasons for doing it and working on cyber. Even
academia will go where the dollars are.
DHS is in charge of in essence the .gov space and the .com
space as it oversees cyber. But the major amount of dollars
going in is going more into our National security arena, so why
would--if you are going to provide a specific need, you are
going to go to where to a certain extent where the dollars are,
whether it is research dollars or it is industry dollars.
Having said that, however, I think that we need to in
essence look at the overall aspect of specificity. Meaning, if
Government is going to ask for something, it can't be a
general, well come up with something that is cyber-related, and
we will look at it. Because nobody is going to spend the time
and the resources doing that and then nothing happening.
There is no acquisition that comes out of it. No
procurement that comes out of it. No even response that comes
out of that and that is what this whole, I think what the
Chairman has put together as a hearing is to say, how can we
encourage S&T to in essence be more specific, more clear, more
transparent about what it is looking for so that academia and
industry can better respond to a specific need? In this case, I
want to say a specific problem that exists that we then can put
our minds to and tackle.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. So let me--I could build off of that
because I think it is a good segue to this question--following
up on Chairman Ratcliffe's earlier question, Dr. Aronson in
your prepared testimony you lament the fact that the S&T
research is not well-guided by an independent advisory
committee, and I am curious beyond setting priorities among
different capabilities and threats, do you believe that this
lack of guidance might also affect the balance of basic
research, applied research, and development funded by the
directorate? Do you see specific ways that balance could be
improved?
Mr. Aronson. Yes, I do see that that situation exists where
there is not sufficient balance across the spectrum of science
and technology. I believe it is because there is not good
communications between the community that can say, you know,
what their capabilities are, what is physically possible, what
is, you know, reasonably buildable to inform discussions about
priority--technology priorities or even policy priorities.
I remember in the Department of Energy during an earlier
phase in the cybersecurity wars, somebody came up with the idea
that we would essentially close the Government except for two
penetrations to the firewall to the rest of the world.
It is an idiotic idea. But nobody asked a computer
scientist I guess or somebody who actually uses the system.
That is a kind of problem you can get into if you are missing a
piece.
I see that in the science and technology strategic plan. If
you look at the stakeholders, there is a nice little pie chart
that describes the stakeholders in there; there is almost
nobody from non-Governmental or academic sectors contributing
to the thinking about the strategic plan. That is the issue.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you.
Anyone else? Or I will yield back. Mr. Chairman, thank you
very much. I yield back.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I think the gentleman and I thank the
witnesses for their very insightful and thoughtful testimony
today. I thank the Members for their questions. If Members have
additional questions for the witnesses, we will ask you to
respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule 7(e), the hearing will be held
open for a period of 10 days. Without objection the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:11 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Jacob Parker
Question 1a. One of the areas highlighted in testimony was the
enormity of the research space tied to protecting our homeland. During
debate on any reauthorization bill we consider in this subcommittee, I
am sure we will address the scope of the S&T Directorate. Assuming a
budgetary environment that remains constrained, what should the
directorate focus on?
Should it have a narrow and deep focus--for instance, meeting
immediate Departmental technological needs or funding a portfolio based
primarily on extramural basic research?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 1b. Conversely, should it have a broad and shallow focus
knowing that, given budgetary restrictions, such a focus will
necessarily preclude expertise? This will be one of the chief
challenges facing the committee during reauthorization, and the more
specific the guidance, the more helpful it will be.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. A lot of the focus on R&D tends toward the hard
sciences--math, physics, chemistry, computer science, etc. However,
experience in cybersecurity domain suggests that social science
research, such as psychology or economics, can play a vital role in
combatting threats. Social engineering--convincing people to take
actions that compromise their security (by, for example, clicking on a
phishing email)--is one of the most-used cyber attack vectors.
Similarly, the committee has spent a good deal of time studying the
reasons that individuals become radicalized and turn to violent
extremism, which is a sociological/psychological question at heart.
Do you believe that social science research is an important part of
the S&T Directorate's portfolio?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Marc A. Pearl
Question 1a. One of the areas highlighted in testimony was the
enormity of the research space tied to protecting our homeland. During
debate on any reauthorization bill we consider in this subcommittee, I
am sure we will address the scope of the S&T Directorate. Assuming a
budgetary environment that remains constrained, what should the
directorate focus on?
Should it have a narrow and deep focus--for instance, meeting
immediate Departmental technological needs or funding a portfolio based
primarily on extramural basic research?
Question 1b. Conversely, should it have a broad and shallow focus
knowing that, given budgetary restrictions, such a focus will
necessarily preclude expertise? This will be one of the chief
challenges facing the committee during reauthorization, and the more
specific the guidance, the more helpful it will be.
Answer. This question should not be answered in isolation and
without the proper context. S&T's role and portfolio should be
consistent with a Departmental view of how the entire spectrum of R&D
is to be accomplished to meet the most critical needs. The right answer
depends on the overall R&D strategy for the Department, which is the
missing piece needed to guide this decision.
For any organization, whether public or private, there is no one
best model for R&D. The success of any R&D organization results from
the interaction of many different factors and choices. R&D
organizations cannot be designed to do all things equally well. Every
approach to R&D has strengths and weaknesses that must be managed
through a strategy.
To best understand why a strategy is so important, I urge this
subcommittee to read the work of Gary P. Pisano on ``Creating an R&D
Strategy.''\1\ This working paper provides a framework for designing an
R&D strategy. It starts with the simple notion that a strategy is a
system approach to solving a problem. An R&D strategy is defined as a
coherent set of interrelated choices and decisions based on:
Organizational architecture (how R&D is structured organizationally and
geographically), processes (the formal and informal ways that R&D is
carried out), people (choices about human resources), and project
portfolios (desired allocation across different types of R&D projects
and the criteria used to sort, prioritize, and select projects).
Performance hinges on consistent and coherent choices across all four
components. A good strategy must also align to the realities and
limitations of the environment and the broader organizational context
in which they operate. To illustrate the framework, Pisano use examples
of three pharmaceutical companies and examines how their different R&D
strategies were rooted in different assumptions about the core driver
of R&D performance. The examples provide an understanding about how and
why different organizations pursue different strategies to address the
same problem.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See ``Creating an R&D Strategy,'' Gary P. Pisano, (Working
Paper, 12-095, April 24, 2012), HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL. http://
www.hbs.edu/faculty/Publication%20Files/12-095_fb1bdf97-e0ec-4a82-b7c0-
42279dd4d00e.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
His work suggests that the very first question to be answered in
strategy development is: What is our shared understanding of the root
cause of the problem we are trying to solve? Another way of looking at
it is to also ask ``what does it take to win?'' The answer to these
questions will then drive decisions about how to organize, prioritize,
and conduct R&D within any given organization. Finally, because a
strategy is a hypothesis, an R&D strategy must be evaluated against
performance data, and organizations must recognize when the time has
come to reject their initial hypothesis and change strategies.
In the Government context, a good example of how a strategy is
driven by the answers to these questions is the ``2011 Federal
Cybersecurity R&D Strategic Plan.''\2\ The direction of this plan
relies on the hypothesis and principle that research must focus on
addressing the root causes of cybersecurity vulnerabilities as opposed
to just treating the symptoms. Cybersecurity is a multi-dimensional
problem, involving both the strength of security technologies and the
variability of human behavior. Therefore, solutions depend not only on
expertise in mathematics, computer science, and electrical engineering
but also in biology, economics, and other social and behavioral
sciences. Due to these underlying principles, the strategic plan thus
focuses on the need for expertise and resources from a wide range of
disciplines and sectors. It is the underlying agreed-upon principles
associated with how to address the problem that then help drive
decisions about architecture, people, processes, and portfolio.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/
fed_cybersecurity_rd_- strategic_plan_2011.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Federal cybersecurity R&D plan includes four strategic thrusts
that help organize and drive the direction of cybersecurity R&D. It
provides a vision for the research necessary to develop game-changing
technologies and also provides guidance for Federal agencies,
policymakers, researchers, budget analysts, and the public in
determining how to direct limited resources into activities that have
the potential to generate the greatest impact. The themes compel a new
way of doing business because they give focus to underlying causes in
order to bring about change, which in the case of cybersecurity
requires prioritization on interdisciplinary efforts. The plan also
looks closely at the realities of the operating environment and the
resources of all stakeholders. It recognizes that within that context,
Government investment in basic research is essential because industry
does not have the economic interest or return on investment time
horizon to conduct that type of research. The themes present a logical
path from research to transition, deployment, and cooperation with the
private sector.
As you can see from the cybersecurity example above, the answer to
the question of what the S&T Directorate should focus on depends on an
agreed-upon Departmental strategy for how to address an underlying
problem set. The Department as a whole should have a balanced R&D
program, including funding for basic research, technology assessment,
advanced development, test and evaluation, and capability integration.
However, the allocation of funding to each of those areas and the
division of responsibility (among all stakeholders) for those
activities needs to be consistent with a Departmental view of how the
entire spectrum of R&D should be accomplished to meet the most critical
needs. S&T should not be seen as a competitor to the components. There
are critical questions that need to be answered about the value that
S&T's past and current activities have and will provide to its
customers and end-users, which activities have and will produce results
that reduce risk and address priority problems, as well as who is best-
suited to conduct specific activities. Without a Departmental R&D
strategy to serve as a guide, it is quite difficult to make an educated
and informed decision on these issues and to determine what should be
prioritized and funded.
Question 2. A lot of the focus on R&D tends toward the hard
sciences--math, physics, chemistry, computer science, etc. However,
experience in cybersecurity domain suggests that social science
research, such as psychology or economics, can play a vital role in
combatting threats. Social engineering--convincing people to take
actions that compromise their security (by, for example, clicking on a
phishing email)--is one of the most-used cyber attack vectors.
Similarly, the committee has spent a good deal of time studying the
reasons that individuals become radicalized and turn to violent
extremism, which is a sociological/psychological question at heart.
Do you believe that social science research is an important part of
the S&T Directorate's portfolio?
Answer. Social science research is an important and appropriate
part of the S&T Directorate's portfolio when it aligns with an agreed-
upon strategic approach to how to address a specific problem set.
As mentioned in our response to Question 1, social and behavioral
science research is a critical aspect to the 2011 Federal Cybersecurity
R&D Strategic Plan because the developers of the plan agreed that
cybersecurity vulnerabilities could not be successfully mitigated
unless research and solutions were focused on root causes to bring
about change. Since cybersecurity is a multi-dimensional problem that
involves both the strength of security technologies and the variability
of human behavior, it was critical that solutions depend not only on
expertise in mathematics, computer science, and electrical engineering
but also in biology, economics, and other social and behavioral
sciences.
Questions From Honorable James R. Langevin for Samuel H. Aronson
Question 1a. One of the areas highlighted in testimony was the
enormity of the research space tied to protecting our homeland. During
debate on any reauthorization bill we consider in this subcommittee, I
am sure we will address the scope of the S&T Directorate. Assuming a
budgetary environment that remains constrained, what should the
directorate focus on?
Should it have a narrow and deep focus--for instance, meeting
immediate Departmental technological needs or funding a portfolio based
primarily on extramural basic research?
Question 1b. Conversely, should it have a broad and shallow focus
knowing that, given budgetary restrictions, such a focus will
necessarily preclude expertise? This will be one of the chief
challenges facing the committee during reauthorization, and the more
specific the guidance, the more helpful it will be.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. A lot of the focus on R&D tends toward the hard
sciences--math, physics, chemistry, computer science, etc. However,
experience in cybersecurity domain suggests that social science
research, such as psychology or economics, can play a vital role in
combatting threats. Social engineering--convincing people to take
actions that compromise their security (by, for example, clicking on a
phishing email)--is one of the most-used cyber attack vectors.
Similarly, the committee has spent a good deal of time studying the
reasons that individuals become radicalized and turn to violent
extremism, which is a sociological/psychological question at heart.
Do you believe that social science research is an important part of
the S&T Directorate's portfolio?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
