- ENHANCING PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES TO ADDRESS CYBER THREATS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ENHANCING PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES TO ADDRESS CYBER
THREATS

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE,
AND COMMUNICATIONS

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY,
INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION,
AND SECURITY TECHNOLOGIES

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 24, 2016

__________

Serial No. 114-71

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S  GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
23-243 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
___________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS, RESPONSE, AND COMMUNICATIONS

Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York, Chairman
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia            Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Martha McSally, Arizona              Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Kerry A. Kinirons, Subcommittee Staff Director
Kris Carlson, Subcommittee Clerk
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY, INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION, AND SECURITY
TECHNOLOGIES

John Ratcliffe, Texas, Chairman
Peter T. King, New York              Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Loretta Sanchez, California
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., New York     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Brett DeWitt, Subcommittee Staff Director
Katie Rashid, Subcommittee Clerk
Christopher Schepis, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Daniel M. Donovan, Jr., a Representative in
Congress From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., a Representative in Congress
From the State of New Jersey, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and Communications:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable John Ratcliffe, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Cedric L. Richmond, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies:
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     9

Witnesses

Mr. Mark Ghilarducci, Director, Emergency Services, Office of the
Governor of California:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Mr. Daniel J. Cooney, Assistant Deputy Superintendent, Office of
Counter Terrorism, New York State Police:
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    18
Brigadier General Steven Spano, (Retired, USAF), President and
Chief Operating Officer, Center for Internet Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    23
Mr. Mark Raymond, Vice President, National Association of State
Chief Information Officers:
Oral Statement.................................................    28
Prepared Statement.............................................    30
Mr. Robert Galvin, Chief Technology Officer, Port Authority of
New York and New Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................    33
Prepared Statement.............................................    34

ENHANCING PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE CAPABILITIES TO ADDRESS CYBER
THREATS

----------

Tuesday, May 24, 2016

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Communications, and
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Security Technologies,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:07 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Daniel M. Donovan
[Chairman of the Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Communications] presiding.
Present: Representatives Donovan, Walker, McSally,
Ratcliffe, Watson Coleman, Jackson Lee, Langevin, and Payne.
Mr. Donovan. The Subcommittees on Emergency Preparedness,
Response, and Communications and Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Security Technologies will come to order. The
subcommittees are meeting today to receive testimony regarding
efforts to enhance preparedness and response capabilities to
address cyber threats.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. First, I
would like to thank Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member
Richmond for working with me and Ranking Member Payne on this
issue. Also, I would like to thank all out of our witnesses
today for coming to join us in this important discussion.
We are all aware the cyber threat is real, from both state
and non-state actors. The countless cyber attacks against the
United States and its citizens, including major attacks against
Target, Home Depot, OPM, and Anthem are just the tip of the
iceberg.
I believe that the number and magnitude of attacks will
only increase, especially as more and more of our lives become
connected to the internet. It is imperative that we ensure that
our State and local officials, as well as our first responders,
are prepared to protect against and respond to a cyber attack.
Furthermore, we are seeing an increase in the number of
cyber attacks that, if successful, can cause widespread
physical damages to a community and require a whole-of-
community response. Already, state and non-state actors have
attempted to interfere with 9-1-1 call centers, sent out
inaccurate alerts and warnings, and tried to take over the
controls of a dam. While we have taken numerous steps to
enhance our capabilities, we have a long way to go in
addressing these threats.
As a member of Chairman Ratcliffe's subcommittee, I have
heard about the progress the Federal Government, States, and
localities have made in enhancing our cybersecurity
capabilities. But I am left scratching my head when I see that
for the fourth year in a row, the National preparedness report
released by FEMA indicates that States continue to report
cybersecurity as the lowest core capability.
What is preventing us from reaching the appropriate level
of cybersecurity? What obstacles are States facing, and what
can we do to help? I am especially interested in learning more
about what happens after a cyber attack that has physical
consequences. Who is in charge of the response, and how are
first responders coordinating with cyber officials who are
trying to mitigate the attack? I know States like California
have set up a task force to answer these exact questions.
Additionally, in 2012, the National-Level Exercise looked
at the Nation's ability to respond to a large-scale cyber
attack with physical consequences. One of the key
recommendations from this exercise was to finalize a cyber
response plan that clearly defines the roles and
responsibilities of all of the potential response entities.
Four years since that exercise and 6 years since the
interim draft of the National cyber incident response plan was
released, we do not have a finalized and approved plan.
Developing and finalizing this plan needs to be a priority of
the Federal Government. I understand that the Department plans
to finally begin stakeholder engagement on the development of
the final plan in the coming weeks. I certainly hope that they
will be engaging with all of today's witnesses to get their
feedback.
Also, I have heard that while sharing cyber information is
becoming more prevalent, there is still confusion on who States
should talk to when an incident occurs. The sharing of cyber-
related information with the emergency management and first
response communities is, at best, ad hoc.
These people are going to be the first on the scene and
should have insight into whether the incident they are
responding to has been caused by a cyber attack. Can States
utilize their fusion centers to be a force multiplier to
disseminate critical cyber information? I know that my State is
taking this approach, and I am interested to hear if it has
been successful.
A few years ago, Secretary Johnson made a statement that I
feel is still true today. He said, ``Cybersecurity is a shared
responsibility, and it boils down to this: In cybersecurity,
the more systems we secure, the more secure we are. We are all
connected on-line, and a vulnerability in one place can cause a
problem in many other places. So everyone needs to work on
this. Government officials and business leaders, security
professionals and utility owners and operators.'' That is why
we are here today.
I want to thank all the witnesses for testifying today, and
I look forward to highlighting the good work that you are all
doing to enhance your cybersecurity capabilities and learning
about what areas are still a challenge and how the Federal
Government can help in mitigating those gaps.
[The statement of Chairman Donovan follows:]
Statement of Chairman Daniel M. Donovan, Jr.
May 24, 2016
First, I'd like to thank Chairman Ratcliffe and Ranking Member
Richmond for working with me and Ranking Member Payne on this issue.
Also, I would like to thank all the witnesses for coming today to join
in this important discussion.
As we are all aware, the cyber threat is real from both state and
non-state actors. The countless cyber attacks against the United States
and its citizens, including major attacks against Target, Home Depot,
OPM, and Anthem, are just the tip of the iceberg. I believe that the
number and magnitude of attacks will only increase, especially as more
and more of our lives become connected to the internet. It is
imperative that we ensure that our State and local officials as well as
our first responders are prepared to protect against and respond to a
cyber attack.
Furthermore, we are seeing an increase in the number of cyber
attacks that if successful can cause wide-spread physical damages to a
community and require a whole-of-community response. Already, state and
non-state actors have attempted to interfere with 9-1-1 call centers,
send out inaccurate alerts and warnings, and tried to take over the
controls of a dam. While we have taken numerous steps to enhance our
capabilities, we have a long way to go in addressing these threats.
As a Member of Chairman Ratcliffe's subcommittee, I have heard
about the progress the Federal Government, States, and localities have
made in enhancing our cybersecurity capabilities, but I'm left
scratching my head when I see for the fourth year in a row, the
National Preparedness Report, released by FEMA, indicates that States
continue to report cybersecurity as the lowest core capability. What is
preventing us for reaching the appropriate level of cybersecurity? What
obstacles are States facing and what can we do to help?
I'm especially interested in learning more about what happens after
a cyber attack that has physical consequences. Who is in charge of the
response and how are first responders coordinating with cyber officials
who are trying to mitigate the attack? I know States like California
have set up task forces to answer these exact questions.
Additionally, in 2012, the National Level Exercise looked at the
Nation's ability to respond to a large-scale cyber attack with physical
consequences. One of the key recommendations from this exercise was to
finalize a cyber response plan that clearly defines the roles and
responsibilities of the all the potential response entities.
Four years since the exercise and 6 years since the interim draft
of the National Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP) was released, we
still do not have a finalized and approved NCIRP. Developing and
finalizing this plan needs to be a priority of the Federal Government.
I understand that the Department plans to finally begin stakeholder
engagement on the development of the final plan in the coming weeks. I
certainly hope they will be engaging with all of the witnesses at
today's hearing to get their feedback.
Also, I have heard that while sharing cyber information is becoming
more prevalent, there is still confusion on who States should talk to
when an incident occurs and the sharing of cyber-related information
with the emergency management and first responder communities is ad hoc
at best.
These people are going to be the first on the scene and should have
insight into whether the incident they are responding to has been
caused by a cyber attack. Can States utilize their fusion centers to be
a force multiplier to disseminate critical cyber information? I know my
State is taking this approach and I'm interested to hear if it has been
successful.
A few years ago, Secretary Johnson made a statement that I feel is
still true today. He said ``[c]byersecurity is a shared responsibility,
and it boils down to this: In cybersecurity, the more systems we
secure, the more secure we are. We are all connected on-line and a
vulnerability in one place can cause a problem in many other places. So
everyone needs to work on this: Government officials and business
leaders, security professionals and utility owners and operators.'' And
that is why we are here today.
I want to thank all the witnesses for testifying today and I look
forward to highlighting the good work you all are doing to enhance your
cybersecurity capabilities and learning about what areas are still a
challenge and how the Federal Government can help in mitigating those
gaps.

Mr. Donovan. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from
New Jersey, Mr. Payne, for an opening statement he may have.
Mr. Payne. Good morning. I would like to thank Chairmen
Donovan and Ratcliffe for holding today's hearings to assess
our ability to respond to cyber threats. The last time our
subcommittee held a joint hearing on the subject was in the
113th Congress, about 3 years ago. What we have learned is that
cyber threats are the new frontier of disaster response.
Our legacy response doctrine from the National Response
Framework to the Stafford Act are rooted in the era that
predates reliance on cyber networks and growing threats posed
by sophisticated actors. Despite our best efforts to ensure
that our National preparedness doctrine is responsive to
evolving threats, it has not kept pace with cyber threats.
My district is rich with critical infrastructure, all of
which rely on cyber networks. Within 2 miles, we have major
transit systems, chemical facilities, and refineries mixed
among homes, schools, and hospitals. A hack of any one of these
targets could have devastating, cascading effects and could
risk overwhelming our brave first responders. We know that the
threat is real.
Earlier this year, Iranian hackers breached the Bowman
Avenue's Dam network in Rye, New York. Fortunately, the dam was
off-line for repair when the authorities discovered this
breach. But I am worried that it is only a matter of time
before the hackers are successful, and we need to be prepared
when they are.
I applaud efforts at the State level to confront cyber
threats head on. Some States, like California and my home State
of New Jersey, have established State-level cyber information-
sharing centers modeled after the National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center, or NCCIC. I would be
interested to learn whether these centers facilitate improved
information sharing and encourage better relationships among
non-traditional partners who would play an important role in
cyber response.
At the same time, I would be remiss if I did not note that
while States annually indicate that they lack the confidence in
their cybersecurity capabilities in the National preparedness
report, very few invest homeland security grant funding to
address the capability gap. I would be interested in
understanding why. Is it because the Federal Government has not
provided adequate guidance on how to address the threat or
whether the amount of grant funds available after cuts to grant
programs in the recent years prevent States from investing in
cyber capability?
The witnesses at that hearing made two points that stuck
with me: First, the witnesses emphasized that the response to
cyber attacks will require people from chief information
officers to emergency managers to private-sector partners to
break out of their silos and coordinate with non-traditional
partners; second, they said that the existing disaster response
guidance does not adequately address the complexities of
responding to cyber events these days.
I look forward to hearing our witnesses' opinions on how
the National Incident Management System, the National Response
Framework, and other disaster management doctrine should be
updated to reflect the unique qualities of a cyber event. I
appreciate the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to their testimony.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Payne follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Donald M. Payne, Jr.
May 24, 2016
The last time our subcommittees held a joint hearing on this
subject was during the 113th Congress--about 3 years ago. What we
learned is that cyber threats are the new frontier of disaster
response.
Our legacy response doctrine--from the National Response Framework
to the Stafford Act--are rooted in an era that predates reliance on
cyber networks and growing threats posed by sophisticated hackers.
Despite our best efforts to ensure that our National preparedness
doctrine is responsive to evolving threats, it has not kept pace with
cyber threats.
My district is rich with critical infrastructure, all of which rely
on cyber networks. Within 2 miles, we have major transit systems,
chemical facilities, and refineries mixed among homes, schools, and
hospitals. A hack of any one of these targets could have devastating
cascading effects and could risk overwhelming our brave first
responders.
And we know the threat is real. Earlier this year, Iranian hackers
breached the Bowman Avenue Dam network in Rye, New York. Fortunately,
the dam was off-line for repair when the authorities discovered the
breach. But I am worried it is only a matter of time before the hackers
are successful--and we need to be prepared when they are.
I applaud efforts at the State level to confront the cyber threat
head on. Some States--like California and my home State of New Jersey--
have established State-level cyber information-sharing centers modeled
after the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center.
I will be interested to learn whether these centers facilitate improved
information sharing and encourage better relationships among non-
traditional partners who would play important roles in a cyber
response.
At the same time, I would be remiss if I did not note that while
States annually indicate that they lack confidence in their
cybersecurity capabilities in the National Preparedness Report, very
few invest Homeland Security Grant funding to address that capability
gap.
I will be interested in understanding why--is it because the
Federal Government has not provided adequate guidance on how to address
the threat or whether the amount of grant funds available after cuts to
grant programs in recent years prevents States from investing in cyber
capabilities?
While I am on the subject of grant funds, I have been outspoken
about my opposition to the proposed cuts to the Homeland Security Grant
Program as well as the Port and Transit Security Grants. I have serious
concerns that the proposed cuts would only further jeopardize whatever
progress States and other grantees are making to address cyber threats,
and I will be interested in the witness' thoughts on that point.
Finally, as I indicated, our subcommittees held a joint hearing on
responding to a cyber attack about 3 years ago. The witnesses at that
hearing made 2 points that stuck with me.
First, the witnesses emphasized that a response to a cyber attack
will require people--from chief information officers to emergency
manager to private-sector partners--to break out of their silos and
coordinate with non-traditional partners. Second, they said that
existing disaster response guidance does not adequately address the
complexities of responding to a cyber event.
I look forward to hearing our witness' opinions on how the National
Incident Management System, the National Response Framework, and other
disaster management doctrine should be updated to reflect the unique
qualities of a cyber event.

Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognizes the Chairman of the Subcommittee
on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure Protection, and Security
Technologies, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Ratcliffe, for an
opening statement he may have.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Good morning, everyone. I want to thank
Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, for working with me and
with Ranking Member Richmond on putting this issue together
today.
I also want to thank the witnesses for being here today. I
am looking forward to hearing your testimony.
On the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Security Technologies, we talk a lot about the
variety and high number of growing cyber threats that are out
there. But today, we are going to hear about the other part of
the equation, which includes the people, the hours, the
programs designed and dedicated to preparing for and responding
to the dangers that these cyber threats pose.
Hopefully, having this discussion at a National level, will
help bring to light some of the best practices and most evident
areas for improvement at every level of government, whether it
be the Federal, State, or local level. Because the truth is,
every level of government is constantly having to face and
respond to these threats, so we all need to be working together
to understand the tactics and techniques and procedures that
hackers are using so that we are better equipped to face the
threats of tomorrow.
It is important that we spend as much time and energy
thinking about the solutions that secure Americans as we do
examining the dangers. The purpose of today's hearing is to
focus on seeking those solutions to make Americans safer. In
that spirit, we are constantly seeking to improve upon and
expand the programs and partnerships in both the private sector
and State and local governments that function to help keep
Americans safe. These partnerships are the nuts and bolts to
secure Americans against the havoc that is possible if a bad
actor were to successfully disrupt or damage one of the many
systems that we rely upon for everyday life, like our water and
our power.
What we are hoping to gain from today's hearing is what
more we can be doing to further these partnerships and
programs. The importance of the flow of information can't be
stressed enough, as information is the currency with which
security and insecurity is established in today's digital age.
As fast as the bad actors are moving in cyber space, we
have to be constantly moving faster to stay ahead of them, and
right now we are not. While they have to only be right one time
to cause damage, we have to always be resilient and stand
perpetually ready with a plan and with answers. I am glad to be
having this joint hearing to highlight the interconnectedness
of the response plans that are in place in case of a
devastating cyber event, and the first responders who carry
them out.
At the Federal level, we have the ability to push out and
develop plans beyond the capability currently available to the
50 States. But it is the responders already in those areas who
will be the first people that those most directly affected will
see if a catastrophic cyber attack occurs.
As Chairman Donovan mentioned, the draft National incident
response plan, or NCIRP, was delivered to the White House in
fall 2009, and in March 2010, an interim draft was released but
not approved, subject to on-going review by the administration.
It has now been 6 years since the release of the interim draft
with stakeholder engagement just now starting. Six years is
entirely too long for any type of response plan to sit on a
shelf in the White House, but it is especially dangerous in the
case of cyber.
In 2014, Congress passed a law to require this cyber
incident response plan to be finalized. Clearly, the
administration, by not finalizing this plan doesn't seem to be
taking cyber incident response planning seriously. It begs the
very obvious questions: What if there is a significant cyber
attack in the United States? Does every level of government
know their role? And how cyber response will be coordinated?
We are neither too ignorant nor too proud to think that a
major cyber event is outside the realm of possibility right
now. So I would like to take this moment to convey that we are
watching the development of this document very closely.
Look, it is very apparent that we have a lot more work to
do. Securing our States from cyber threats now includes
entirely new roles and responsibilities that didn't exist 50
years ago. Discussing, examining, and encouraging the programs
and partnerships that Americans rely upon is absolutely
critical to being able to preserve and guarantee the American
way of life.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today to learn
what more we can and what we should be doing to advance the
security of the American people.
Thank you. I yield back.
[The statement of Chairman Ratcliffe follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Ratcliffe
May 24, 2016
Good morning, I want to thank Chairman Donovan and Ranking Member
Payne for working with myself and Ranking Member Richmond on this
issue. I also want to thank the witnesses for coming today to speak on
this important topic. On the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Security Technology, which I chair, we
often discuss the wide variety and high number of cyber threats that
are out there and growing. Today, we are going to hear about the other
part of the equation, which is the people, the hours, and programs
designed and dedicated to preparing for and responding to the dangers
that these cyber threats pose.
Hopefully having this discussion at a National level will help
bring to light some of the best practices and most evident areas for
improvement that will be applicable to every level of government
whether it be at the Federal, State, or local level. Because the truth
is, every level of government is constantly having to face and respond
to these threats. We all need to work together to understand the
tactics, techniques, and procedures of hackers in order to better equip
ourselves and face the threats of tomorrow.
It is important that we spend as much time and energy thinking
about the solutions that secure Americans as we do on the examination
of the dangers. The purpose of today's hearing is to focus on seeking
those solutions to make America safer. In that spirit, we are
constantly seeking to improve upon and expand the programs and
partnerships with both the private sector and State and local
governments that function to make Americans safe. These partnerships
are the nuts and bolts to secure Americans against the havoc that is
possible should a bad actor successfully disrupt or damage one of the
many systems that we rely on for everyday life such as our water and
our power.
What we are hoping to gain from today's hearing is what more we can
be doing to further these partnerships and programs. The importance of
the flow of information cannot be stressed enough as information is the
currency with which security and insecurity is established in today's
age. As fast as the bad actors are moving in cyber space, we have to be
constantly moving faster to stay ahead of them. While they only have to
be right once to do damage, we must be resilient and stand perpetually
ready with a plan and with answers.
I'm glad to be having this joint hearing to highlight the
interconnectedness of the response plans that are in place in the case
of a devastating cyber event, and the first responders who carry them
out. At the Federal level we have the ability to push out and develop
plans beyond the capability currently available to States, but it is
the responders already in the area who will be the first people that
those most directly affected will see when a catastrophic cyber attack
occurs.
As Mr. Donovan mentioned, the draft National Incident Response Plan
or NCIRP was delivered to the White House in the fall of 2009. In March
2010, a draft interim was released but not approved, subject to on-
going review by the administration. It has now been 6 years since the
release of the interim draft, with stakeholder engagement just now
starting. While 6 years is entirely too long for any type of response
plan to sit on a shelf in the White House, it is especially dangerous
in the case of cyber. In 2014, Congress passed a law to require this
cyber incident response plan to be finalized. Clearly, this
administration, by not finalizing this plan, does not take cyber
incident response planning seriously. It begs the very obvious question
``What if there is a significant cyber attack in the United States?
Does every level of government know their role and how cyber response
will be coordinated?'' We are neither too ignorant nor too proud to
think that a major cyber incident is outside of the realm of
possibility so I would like to take this moment to convey that we are
watching the development of this document very closely.
It is very apparent that we have a lot more work to do. Securing
our States from cyber threats now includes entirely new roles and
responsibilities that didn't exist 50 years ago. Discussing, examining,
and encouraging the programs and partnerships that Americans rely on is
absolutely crucial in guaranteeing the solvency of our ways of life. I
look forward to hearing from the witnesses to learn what more can and
should be done to advance the security of the American people.

Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne.
Mr. Payne. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to submit
the gentleman from Louisiana, the Ranking Member, Mr.
Richmond's statement into the record.
Mr. Donovan. Without objection, so ordered.
[The statement of Ranking Member Richmond follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Cedric L. Richmond
May 24, 2016
In developing policy and budgeting for cyber preparedness and
response, it is crucial we know what needs protecting, how badly
protection is needed, and what kinds of redundancies can be made
available.
For critical infrastructure entities, after knowing what machines
are operating on a network, what applications they are running, and
what privileges have been established, the posture of cybersecurity for
each of these entities and systems networks is key.
Also, for critical infrastructure enterprises and supply chains,
the advent of, ``bring your own devices'', along with the growing
sophistication of smart phones and tablets involved in day-to-day
infrastructure operations, compounds cybersecurity efforts and
increases our resiliency challenges.
Knowing where to devote efforts to protect our information security
in critical infrastructure organizations is a core choice, particularly
in determining how much defense to commit to the perimeter, and how
much to commit to internal threats.
Consider the potential for adversaries to employ countermeasures .
. . as defenses are installed on our systems, we must acknowledge that
we are dealing with a thinking and competitive opponent in the cyber
world . . . and that as we install measures to thwart hackers that very
act tends to induce countermeasures from our foes, as hackers probe for
ways around or through our new defenses.
As new versions of cyber attacks emerge affecting critical
infrastructure, it will be important to have the DHS Industrial Control
Systems Computer Emergency Response Teams, or ICS-CERT, and the Joint
Interagency Task Force consisting of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, or NIST, the Department of Defense, and the
intelligence community, clearly delineate and prioritize their roles in
protecting critical infrastructure, and to have that as well-defined as
possible.
A good place to start is to build a body of cyber knowledge on how
various critical infrastructure cyber systems are likely to fail, which
is a necessary prerequisite to preventing failure, and then share that
information among all sectors.
Most experts tell us this is a daunting proposition, in light of
the fast pace and range of cyber threat vectors that present themselves
daily, but we must try.
In closing, any critical infrastructure sector that is prepared to
share what went wrong and what could be done better next time, will
create the most likely scenario to produce higher levels of
cybersecurity and resiliency for future regional and National cyber
emergency situations.

Mr. Donovan. Other Members of the subcommittees are
reminded that opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 24, 2016
Over the past 15 years, the Nation has experienced man-made and
natural disasters that caused damage beyond our expectations and
overwhelmed the response capabilities of the impacted communities.
After each disaster--from the 9/11 attacks and Hurricane Katrina to the
Boston Marathon bombings and Hurricane Sandy--we take the lessons
learned and adjust the response plans so that we are better prepared
for the next version of the same event.
Preparing to respond to those kinds of events has become almost
routine. We assess terror threats and the potential for various natural
disasters. We conduct vulnerability assessments of our communities, and
we hone, train, and exercise our disaster response plans. The doctrine
guiding how we prevent, protect against, mitigate, respond to, and
recover from more conventional disasters is well-established and
incorporates important lessons learned from past events.
Unfortunately, National guidance of a similar caliber is lacking
for a response to a cyber attack. When I am home in Mississippi, local
emergency managers tell me that roles and responsibilities are not
clearly defined for a cyber response and that the statutory authority
for the Federal Government to render aid to affected States is murky at
best.
We need to do better. The frequency of cyber attacks is increasing
and the attacks are becoming more sophisticated. I fear a cyber Katrina
if we do not establish a ``whole community approach'' to prevent,
respond to, and recover from cyber attacks soon, before hackers disable
part of the electric grid, gain control of one of our transit systems,
or infiltrate our water treatment facilities.
Addressing the growing cyber threat and equipping emergency
managers with the tools they need to effectively respond to disasters
triggered by hackers will require at least 3 changes.
First, we have to improve information sharing. Second, we have to
improve communication among the emergency response community and non-
traditional response partners, including private-sector infrastructure
owners and chief information officers. Third, we have to do a better
job defining roles, responsibilities, and authorities related to a
cyber response.
Late last year, the House of Representatives took an important step
advancing those objectives by passing H.R. 3878, the Strengthening
Cybersecurity Information Sharing and Coordination in Our Ports Act.
Introduced by Congresswoman Torres, H.R. 3878 would improve
information sharing and cooperation in addressing cybersecurity risks
at our Nation's ports by directing DHS to establish voluntary
guidelines for reporting of cybersecurity risks, implement a maritime
cybersecurity risk model, and make recommendations on enhancing the
sharing of cyber information.
The legislation also directs the Coast Guard to ensure area
maritime security and facility security plans address cybersecurity
risks. H.R. 3878, along with several other important pieces of
cybersecurity legislation from this committee, has passed the House is
currently pending in the Senate. I urge our Senate colleagues to act on
these bills before the summer recess.
In the mean time, I am eager to learn from our witnesses about
existing challenges in developing response plans for cyber events and
what the Federal Government can do to help.

Mr. Donovan. We are pleased to have a distinguished panel
before us today on this important topic. Mark Ghilarducci
serves as the director of the California Governors Office of
Emergency Services, a position he has held since July 1, 2013.
As a member of the cabinet, Director Ghilarducci serves as the
Governor's Homeland Security Adviser, and oversees State-wide
public safety, emergency management, emergency communications,
counterterrorism efforts, and a State threat assessment system.
Mr. Ghilarducci previously served as the secretary of the
California Emergency Management Agency. Welcome, sir.
Lieutenant Colonel Daniel J. Cooney currently serves in the
Office of Counterterrorism of the New York State Police. He
serves as adviser to the director of the New York State Office
of Homeland Security and oversees the staff of the New York
State Intelligence Center, New York's fusion center. He has
been a New York State police officer for 23 years, and has been
awarded a master's degree in security studies from the Naval
Postgraduate School. Welcome, Colonel.
Brigadier General Steven J. Spano is president and chief
information officer of the Center for Internet Security. Most
recently, he served as the general manager for defense and
national security for Amazon Web Services Worldwide Public
Sector. Prior to Amazon Web Services, General Spano served over
28 years in United States Air Force in a variety of leadership
roles. He retired in 2011 from Air Force combat command where
he served as the director of communications. Welcome, General,
and thank you for your service to our country.
Mr. Mark Raymond began serving as the chief information
officer for the State of Connecticut Department of
Administrative Services, Bureau of Enterprise Systems and
Technology on June 2, 2011. He has over 2 decades of technology
and business experience consulting in New York, Connecticut,
and Massachusetts; that includes working in the areas of
finance, payroll, human services, budgeting, procurement, human
services revenue, and transportation. As a consultant, he has
worked with Federal agencies, including the United States
Treasury, Federal Highway Administration, National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration, and the U.S. Department of
Transportation. Welcome, sir.
Mr. Robert Galvin serves as the chief technology officer
for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, a position
he has held since December 2013. In this capability, he
provides oversight, direction, and management for all of the
agency's technology, information systems, and technology
service delivery. Prior to joining the Port Authority, Mr.
Galvin served as the chief technology officer at the New York
City School Construction Authority.
The witnesses' full written statements will appear in the
record. The Chair now recognizes Mr. Ghilarducci for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK GHILARDUCCI, DIRECTOR, EMERGENCY SERVICES,
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Ghilarducci. Okay. Well, good morning, Chairman and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Mark Ghilarducci,
and I am the director of OES in California. I am here today on
behalf of the National Emergency Management Association, which
represents State emergency management directors of the 50
States, territories in the District of Columbia.
I appreciate the opportunity to come before you today to
discuss concerns related to the consequences of a cyber attack
and the role of emergency management community in responding to
this unique and evolving threat. As our lives, our systems, our
critical infrastructure, as well as our emergency management
coordination and communication platforms become more and more
integrated with and dependent upon the Internet of Things, so
does the proliferation of threats and complexities from cyber
attacks, and, of course, the need to continue to evolve
capabilities and countermeasures.
These emerging threats, ushered in by advancements in
technology, are a challenge for emergency management at a time
when the adversary is unpredictable, asymmetrical, and very
active. The range of threat actors, the methods of attack,
targeted systems, and victims are ever-expanding. Because
information systems are now the backbone of critical
infrastructure in the United States, we are at an age of
transitioning into next generation public safety due to its
significance to National and economic security.
Of concern to the emergency management community is the
threat and potential cascading impacts of a cyber attack to our
critical infrastructure systems. Lifelines and assets, whether
physical or virtual, by actors with malicious intent to exploit
vulnerabilities, disrupt or destroy control systems, or
incapacitate the delivery of essential services, all which
places the security and safety of our communities, our
citizens, and the economy at great jeopardy.
Like the consequences of other asymmetrical terrorist
threats, consequence management of cyber attacks is challenging
due to its unpredictable and ubiquitous nature. It requires a
considered and coordinated effort of collaborative planning,
risk identification and management, communications, information
sharing, interdiction, response and mitigation.
As information technology becomes increasingly integrated
with physical infrastructure operations, emergency management
must plan and prepare for the increased risk for large-scale or
high-impact events and that cascading impacts that could harm
or disrupt services, or worse, cause fatalities or destruction
in our communities. Widespread and long-term power outages,
loss of water telecommunications systems, disruption of public
health or public safety systems, destruction of control
systems, interruption of food production and distribution, and/
or the movement of commodities or people are just a few
potential consequences of a successful cyber attack on our
critical infrastructure; all consequences emergency management
must consider, plan, and prepare for.
There is no doubt that the potential aftermath of a
significant cyber attack resulting in physical consequences
will challenge existing hierarchies, dependencies, reporting
structures, and planning assumptions. Emergency managers will
need to leverage all necessary local, State, and private-sector
resources; implement redundant capabilities for continuity of
operations, and possible continuity of Government; and will
require Federal support for both technical and Stafford Act
assistance. But it remains unclear today how the consequences
of an attack will be defined and meet requirements for Stafford
Act assistance.
Another challenge facing State emergency management and
homeland security organizations is the ability to effectively
manage cyber risk as it is not possible to eliminate it. Like
many other hazards, both natural and human-caused, State
leaders must build cybersecurity systems, communication, and
information capabilities, and procedures designed to not only
preempt attacks through adequate cyber defense systems, but
enable an organization to withstand attacks when they succeed,
or, in other words, to build cyber resilience.
A logical approach to cybersecurity preparedness and
incident response begins at all levels of government and in
partnership with the private sector. As the Federal Government
continues to build its capabilities, policies, and strategies,
it has left States to build cybersecurity capacities with
limited resources, trained personnel, and guidance or a
specific blueprint to follow, all while facing threat actors
who are advanced, nimble, quick to adapt, and overcome defenses
in intending to do harm to private citizens and government
services.
Dedicated cybersecurity grants for planning and operational
capabilities, developing, training, and supporting the
blueprint of a workforce of cyber warriors, as well as
identified post-event, remediation funding streams that do not
currently exist, but are absolutely necessary to ensure States
are prepared to adequately build cyber capabilities and
defenses, this needs to be a priority.
For example, in California, one key cybersecurity
capability we recently stood up is the California Cybersecurity
Integration Center as a way to measure our whole-of-Government
and public/private sector integration approach. The Cal-CSIC,
as it is called, integrates critical cybersecurity functions
directly impacting my ability to manage both the homeland
security and emergency management portfolios in California.
It is co-located with the California State Threat
Assessment Center, our State's primary fusion center, which
maximizes information sharing and allows for communications to
be properly vetted and classified, ensuring conductivity and
information sharing between the intelligence community, law
enforcement, and California's other 5 regional fusion centers,
and it expands upon our current capabilities focused
specifically on protecting California.
It resides within our homeland security division, aligned
with DHS's organizational structure, and integrates both the
academic and private sectors. It provides a State-wide nexus
for cyber threat information sharing for the State of
California, our critical infrastructure sector partners that
provide essential services, our
9-1-1 system, the intelligence community, and law enforcement.
It promotes proactive situational awareness of the cyber
threat, cyber hygiene, and best cybersecurity practices, and it
augments the State Emergency Operation Center during
activations for emergency incidents through systems analysis
and resilient communication. Most importantly, it provides
support to our State's emergency support Function 18, the
component of the State emergency plan that focuses on the
impacts and countermeasures related to a major cyber attack.
A key element for success of this capability, but,
nonetheless, a challenge we are working with, is establishing a
blueprint for integrating desperate agency sector efforts and
mission sets into a unified, coordinated, and streamlined
operation that reflects the full intelligence cycle from
collection analysis to dissemination that supports situational
awareness and the complete emergency management cycle.
The Cal-CSIC design forces collaboration between all of the
major State agencies and sector representatives that have a
role in cybersecurity through protocols and the integration of
respective cybersecurity staff. This partnership forces down
the silos and stovepipes and generates a level of collaboration
on the cyber front not seen before in our State government,
which helps to define the roles and responsibilities of each
organization during cyber events at a State-wide significance.
As well, through partnerships with the National
Cybersecurity Communications Integration Center and a multi-
State information-sharing analysis center, the Cal-CSIC
addresses prevention, protection, response, and recovery while
providing detail on cyber threats and trends specifically to
California. The Cal-CSIC can use this analysis to notify
residents of current threats and how to prevent and mitigate
those threats.
The consolidation of National, State, and local cyber
threat data will provide a more strategic picture benefiting
prevention and response. To further our resiliency platform, we
are also moving to implement the DHS and CCIC cyber hygiene
campaign across California's State agencies and departments.
In closing, collaboration, coordination, training,
planning, clear protocols, real-time information sharing, and
processing of indicators of attack are essential elements of a
robust cybersecurity and emergency management posture for all
governments. Linking up critical infrastructure assessors and
analysis, and analysts with cybersecurity personnel and
emergency planners also needs to be approached holistically and
sustainably.
At all levels, Government must be prepared to deal with an
ever-changing and increasingly complex set of challenges that
test our traditional approaches to emergency preparedness and
response to disasters. Changing demographics, emerging
technologies, and the interdependencies of our infrastructure
and systems create vulnerabilities that defer from those of the
past.
The cyber threats facing our Nation are not subsiding, but,
in fact, are evolving in such a way that these threats demand
purposeful, proactive action, adequate funding support, and a
more forward-thinking and collaborative approach at all
government levels and critical infrastructure sectors. This has
to be one team, one fight.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ghilarducci follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mark Ghilarducci
May 24, 2016
introduction
Thank you Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, and distinguished Members
of the committee. My name is Mark Ghilarducci, and I am the director of
the Governor's Office of Emergency Services as well as the Homeland
Security Advisor to Governor Jerry Brown for the State of California.
I am here on behalf of the National Emergency Management
Association (NEMA), which represents the emergency management directors
of the 50 States, territories, and District of Columbia. NEMA's
members, many of whom, like me, also serve as Homeland Security
Advisors, are prepared to deal with an ever-changing and increasingly
complex set of challenges that test traditional approaches to natural
and man-made disasters. I appreciate the chance to come before you
today to discuss the current concerns related to consequences of cyber
attacks and the role of the emergency management community in
responding to these unique events.
where are we now?
We are witnessing a more diverse array of threats than at any other
time in history. The skill, speed, and adaptability of these threats
are challenging our defense in ways we have not seen before. The
emerging threat landscape for the Nation is characterized both by
standing threats, as well as dynamic and fluid ones ushered in by
advancements in technology. As we witness our society make
unprecedented advancements in innovation, we become more and more
reliant on information technology and increasingly vulnerable to
devices that are developed and distributed with minimal security
requirements. The ranges of threat actors, methods of attack, targeted
systems, and victims are also expanding.
We are transitioning into Next Generation Public Safety, and
information systems are now the backbone of National and economic
security in the United States. Our success as a Nation depends upon
critical infrastructure functioning reliably at all times. The threat
to this infrastructure by those with malicious intent to exploit
vulnerabilities, steal information and money, and disrupt, destroy, or
threaten the delivery of essential services are unlike any other.
Cybersecurity threats exploit the risks associated with the increased
complexity and connectivity of these systems, which places our Nation's
security, economy, and public safety at greater risk.
This risk affects both the private and public sectors. We have seen
``Ransomware'' in the public and private sector in California and
across the United States designed to prevent public and private
institutions from accessing their own data. Criminal tools and malware
are increasingly being discovered on State and local government
networks.
As information technology becomes increasingly integrated with
physical infrastructure operations, there is increased risk for wide-
scale or high-impact events that could cause harm or disrupt services
upon which our economy and the daily lives of millions of Americans
depend. Long-term power outages, loss of water, and disruption in the
movement of goods, services, and people as a result of disrupted
transportation systems are a few of the potential consequences of a
successful cyber attack on our critical infrastructure.
The aftermath of a cyber event with physical consequences will
challenge existing hierarchies, reporting structures, and planning
assumptions. In the event of an incident, most emergency managers will
turn to the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance
Act (Pub. L. 92-288) for Federal assistance, but unless the
consequences of a cyber attack have large-scale physical consequences,
funds from the Stafford Act will be limited.
Many of the fixes, whether administrative or legislatively
initiated, throughout the last few years seem to only address the
prevention and preparedness side of cybersecurity. While the pre-event
aspects of cybersecurity maintain a high level of importance, so too
will the post-event considerations especially when considering the
potential disastrous physical consequences of a cyber attack.
current challenges facing state emergency management/homeland security
While cybersecurity and cyber response capabilities continually
rate very low in FEMA's annual National Preparedness Report,
identifying the capability gaps and needs is often a difficult task for
State and local government and has limited measurable improvement
toward the National Preparedness Goal.

Cyber risk must be managed as it is not possible to
eliminate; the diverse possibilities of malicious actors
penetrating, intruding, and circumventing from the inside
continue to grow and will hold every internet communication
technology system at risk for years to come.

The risk calculus employed by some State and local
organizations does not adequately address the top cyber threats
or systemic interdependencies across critical infrastructure
sectors.

State leaders must accept the predictability of cyber
attacks, and build security systems and procedures that can not
only preempt attacks through cyber defense, but enable
organizations to withstand attacks when they succeed, or in
other words build cyber resilience.

A coordinated approach to cybersecurity preparedness and
incident response is in its nascent stages, even at the Federal
level. As the Federal Government is still working to build
Federal institutions, policy, and strategy, it has left States
to build cybersecurity capacities with limited resources and
trained personnel, and a lack of guidance or successful
blueprint to follow--all while facing threat actors who are
advanced, nimble, quick to adapt and overcome defenses and who
intend to harm private citizens and Government services.

A dedicated cybersecurity grant funding stream would also
ensure States were prepared to adequately build their cyber
capabilities and defenses. Currently there is no funding
dedicated specifically to this priority.

States are still playing catch-up in developing a ``whole-
of-Government,'' State-wide approach to cybersecurity.
best practices at the state level/on-going efforts to improve
resilience
I am excited to discuss some California examples of best practices
we are implementing to ensure the Golden State is safe and secure and
cyber resilient.

Cyber Hygiene Partnership with DHS's National Cybersecurity
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC).--We are moving to
embrace and implement the DHS's National Cybersecurity
Communications Integration Center's Cyber Hygiene campaign
across California State Agencies. Working with NCCIC staff, we
are working to push this program to all of California's State
executive agencies as a start. This program is voluntary, but
it will allow us to baseline State agencies' vulnerabilities
and provide an overall State profile for a majority of public-
facing assets. This is a good metric for performance and will
help our team develop a long-term State strategy. To date, only
13 organizations across all of California are taking advantage
of this Federal program.

Integrating and Automating Data Feeds.--One of the things we
are spearheading in California is a Cal OES-supported project
at our California fusion centers that supports automating cyber
threat intelligence, as we believe that is a fundamental facet
to cyber resilience on all levels of Government. We must get
past the manual human-to-human transactions that continue to
dominate State and local cyber information sharing and move
towards an automated cyber threat intelligence design, which we
believe should anchor States' resilience and inform cyber
response efforts. We are also working, in conjunction with DHS/
NCCIC, on a program called Automated Indicator Sharing
Initiative, which shares observable cyber ``indicators'' to
also help bolster the State's defense through a machine
indicator exchange.

California Cybersecurity Integration Center (Cal-CSIC).--We
recently stood up our California Cybersecurity Integration
Center (Cal-CSIC) (pronounced Cal-SICK) as a way to mature this
approach, but one of the biggest challenges we face is
establishing a blueprint for integrating disparate efforts and
mission sets into a unified, coordinated, and streamlined
operation that reflects the full intelligence cycle from
collection, analysis, to dissemination, and that supports a
robust cyber response.
The Cal-CSIC does the following critical cybersecurity functions,
directly impacting my ability to manage both the homeland security and
emergency management portfolios in California:

Expands upon current capabilities in our State's primary
fusion center to build out a cybersecurity center focused
specifically on protecting California.

Resides within the Cal OES Homeland Security Division,
aligning with DHS's organizational structure.

Its co-location with the California State Threat Assessment
Center (STAC) allows for communications to be properly vetted
and classified, ensuring connectivity between the intelligence
community, law enforcement, and fusion centers.

Provides a State-wide nexus for cyber threat information
sharing for the State of California, intelligence community,
and law enforcement.

Promotes situational awareness of cyber threats, cyber
hygiene, and best cybersecurity practices for all California
organizations.

Augments the State Operations Center activities during
emergency incidents through media analysis and resilient
communications.

Marries our critical infrastructure analysts and assessors
to our cybersecurity professionals to create a novel holistic
security assessments capability.
The National Cybersecurity Communications Integration Center
(NCICC) and Multi-State Information Sharing Analysis Center (MS-ISAC)
operate as focal points for cyber and physical protection of Federal,
State, local, Tribal, territorial government (FSLTT) and Critical
Infrastructure/Key Resources (CI/KR) network, storage, and
communications systems and seeks to address prevention, protection,
response, and recovery.
The Cal-CSIC will address prevention, protection, response, and
recovery while providing detail on cyber threats and trends
specifically to California. The Cal-CSIC can use this analysis to
notify residents of current threats and how to prevent and mitigate
those threats. The consolidation of National and State cyber threat
data will provide a more strategic picture benefitting prevention and
response. The NCCIC will also be a partner in the Cal-CSIC as will
other Federal agencies to ensure for real-time collaboration and
coordination that is needed.
The Cal-CSIC design forces collaboration between all of the major
State agencies that have a role in cybersecurity because those agencies
have, or are going to, embed their cybersecurity staff there. This
partnership will force down the siloes and stove pipes, and generate a
level of collaboration on the cyber front not seen before in State
government, which helps to define the roles and responsibilities of
each agency during cyber events of State-wide significance.

Governor's Cybersecurity Task Force.--This task force
facilitates cybersecurity outreach to private industry,
academic, law enforcement, and Government partners both inside
and outside of California. The Governor's Cybersecurity Task
Force is a public-private partnership that serves as the
advisory body to the Cal-CSIC to raise awareness of new threats
and mitigation techniques.
Sometimes, simply assembling the right players to have the tough
conversations is half the battle. In this case, educating cybersecurity
professionals about emergency management, and vice versa, remains a
significant challenge. This is why the State of California created the
Governor's Cybersecurity Task Force to be wide-reaching, pairing up
local emergency management experts with cybersecurity professionals to
collaborate on the bigger strategic questions. It has made a tremendous
impact, but more work needs to be done to align State and local defense
with Federal efforts.
recommendations for the future
As a Nation we must map out a comprehensive collaborative strategy
that delivers timely, cost-effective, and actionable responses. This
will strengthen our National security by better preparing us to respond
to potential disruptions that would have cascading consequences on the
country. Collaboration, employee cybersecurity training, enterprise
defense-in-depth, and real-time information sharing and processing of
indicators of attacks are essential elements of a robust cybersecurity
posture for all governments. Marrying critical infrastructure assessors
and analysts with cybersecurity personnel also will breed unique and
nuanced synergies by approaching the problem holistically. This would
include:

Review current statutory authorities for emergency
management personnel and ensure resources can and will be
available to respond to a cyber attack.

Encourage information sharing between intelligence and
operational officials to ensure stovepipes do not unnecessarily
hinder collaboration and integrated planning.

Coordinate with State and local officials to ensure their
priorities are included in legislative reforms and changes
within the administration's cybersecurity policies.

Avoid mandating State and local governments without also
providing Federal funding.

Provide adequate and sustainable funding to ensure for the
development of robust cybersecurity interdiction, response and
preparedness/education systems at the State and local levels,
to better inform and empower communities, where the
consequences of cyber attacks are most impactful.

Ensure that we communicate to American citizens our
commitment to protecting their privacy, when incorporating
emerging technology--specifically, the Internet of Things or
``smart devices.''
While these devices maximize efficiency and carry the allure of
convenience, we must incorporate the benefits of innovative technology
into State and local government with the utmost appreciation for their
potential to threaten data privacy, data integrity, or continuation of
services. This also opens vulnerabilities by allowing threat actors to
not only steal data, but also, manipulate it. Threat actors almost
certainly will adapt and introduce new tactics that will challenge our
defenses so we must seize the opportunities to implant past
intelligence from cybersecurity investigations back into the
intelligence cycle for further analysis and dissemination.
conclusion
At all levels, Government must be prepared to deal with an ever-
changing and increasingly complex set of challenges that test our
traditional approaches to emergency preparedness and responses to
disaster. Capability, experience, and flexibility are critical in
dealing with emerging issues and the unknown. Changing demographics,
emerging technologies, and the interdependencies of our infrastructure
and systems create vulnerabilities that differ from those of the past.
The cyber threats facing our Nation are evolving in such a way that
demands purposeful action and a more forward-thinking approach in our
National preparedness efforts.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today and stand
ready to answer any questions the committee may have.

Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Ghilarducci.
The Chair now recognizes Lieutenant Colonel Cooney for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF DANIEL J. COONEY, ASSISTANT DEPUTY SUPERINTENDENT,
OFFICE OF COUNTER TERRORISM, NEW YORK STATE POLICE

Mr. Cooney. Good morning, Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member
Payne, Chairman Ratcliffe, and Members of the subcommittees.
Thank you for inviting me to testify today.
My name is Dan Cooney. I am a lieutenant colonel with the
New York State Police responsible for overseeing the New York
State Intelligence Center or NYSIC, the State's designated
fusion center, which is staffed by approximately 90
individuals, drawn from nearly 20 law enforcement and homeland
security agencies at the local, State, and Federal levels.
Since we opened our doors in 2003 as one of the Nation's
first fusion centers, NYSIC has maintained an all-crimes
approach with the ultimate goal of preventing criminal and
terrorist activity in our State, and supporting our partners'
on-going law enforcement investigations.
The New York State Police has long had a computer crimes
unit. NYSIC incorporated cyber threat intelligence into its
mission in 2014 by creating a cyber analysis unit when the
NYSIC had just moved to co-locate with the Center for Internet
Security and the Multi-state Information Sharing and Analysis
Center.
Our approach is based on partnerships, intelligence
production, and outreach. To further our outreach, NYSIC
spearheaded creation of the New York State cyber partners
working group, which meets monthly and is comprised of State
and Federal Government law enforcement, homeland security, and
information technology personnel, and a National Guard.
As the intelligence center, our role is to take the lead in
developing cyber intelligence products for both the technical
and nontechnical audiences, and we leverage the partnerships
formed through this group to accomplish this mission.
The NYSIC also relies on National cyber information-sharing
networks. Routinely, we access the National Fusion Center
Association's cyber intelligence network through which over 250
Federal, State, and local law enforcement members act as a
virtual fusion center, utilizing a cloud service provided by
the homeland security information network to share cyber threat
intelligence in real time at the ``For Official Use Only,'' or
FOUO level.
Within the State, our distribution lists are separated by
sector and between technical and nontechnical audiences to
ensure recipients receive exactly the information they need:
Actionable intelligence for IT staff, so they can deploy
appropriate prevention or mitigation controls; and more
strategic information on trends in cyber actors' tactics,
techniques, and procedures for executives and policy makers to
better inform policy decisions and resource allocation.
NYSIC's intelligence liaison officer network maintains
points of contact in fire, EMS, and emergency management
agencies in each county with whom we engage in 2-way threat
information sharing. Additionally, nearly all of the 500-plus
law enforcement agencies in New York State have a designated
field intelligence officer that regularly communicates with the
NYSIC. More technical products are shared directly with county
chief information security officers.
At both the fusion center and across State agencies, New
York State is sharing more information more effectively than
ever before. Despite a constantly changing environment, we have
made excellent progress. But I want to highlight two specific
areas for continued growth from the full statement I submitted
on the record.
First, the information-sharing lessons of the last 13 years
in the counterterrorism space must be applied to cybersecurity
today. At the State level, the fusion center is DHS's single
point of contact for terrorism-related information, and we know
from where within DHS this information is coming. This is not
yet the case with cyber threat information, and more often than
not, the fusion centers do not receive cybersecurity
intelligence information in a timely manner. The more
information that fusion centers receive, the more we can share
with agencies and businesses within our State, allowing us to
close the current intelligence gaps, and push information to
smaller entities that direct Federal sharing currently does not
reach.
Second, we observe a large amount of cyber threat
information is Classified. While fusion centers have the
capability to receive Classified documents, we cannot share
useful contents with many of our customers unless the
classification is downgraded.
On behalf of New York's fusion center and as part of the
larger National network of fusion centers, thank you for this
opportunity to speak before your subcommittees, and I welcome
any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cooney follows:]
Prepared Statement of Daniel J. Cooney
May 24, 2016
Good morning Chairman Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, Chairman
Ratcliffe, Ranking Member Richmond, and Members of the subcommittees:
My name is Dan Cooney and I am an assistant deputy superintendent with
the New York State Police, responsible for overseeing the New York
State Intelligence Center, the State's designated fusion center. Thank
you for inviting me to speak today about our cyber threat information
and intelligence-sharing efforts.
The New York State Intelligence Center, or ``NYSIC'', is managed by
the New York State Police and staffed by approximately 90 people
representing nearly 20 law enforcement, homeland security agencies at
the local, State, and Federal levels. Since we opened our doors in 2003
as one of the first fusion centers in the Nation we have maintained an
``all-crimes'' approach, with the ultimate goal of preventing criminal
and terrorist activity in our State and supporting our partners' on-
going law enforcement investigations. We are primarily responsible for
supporting the 57 counties outside New York City, but we work closely
with our New York City Police Department colleagues on New York City-
based issues.
NYSIC incorporated cyber threat intelligence into its mission in
2014 by creating a Cyber Analysis Unit. The catalyst was two-fold: We
recognized the need to dedicate resources to the growing threat of
cyber attacks, and we had just co-located with the Center for Internet
Security and the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center
(MS-ISAC), which the U.S. Department of Homeland Security has
designated as the cybersecurity information sharing and analysis center
for State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments. This provided a
timely opportunity for us to learn best practices from top
cybersecurity experts. Over time, we were able to staff the unit with
an Investigator and 4 intelligence analysts who possess a mix of
specialized technical knowledge or intelligence and analysis
experience, a hiring model that has worked well. Our approach is based
on partnerships, intelligence production, and outreach, and I will
highlight a few examples of the benefits to the State's cybersecurity
efforts.
best practices in information-sharing efforts
The New York State Police has long had a Computer Crimes Unit, and
other agencies in New York have worked on cyber threats for some time.
We have worked to bolster our relationships with other agencies, not
only to learn from them, but to ensure proper information sharing,
identify collaborative opportunities, and avoid duplication of effort.
To that end, the NYSIC spearheaded the creation of the New York State
Cyber Partners Working Group. This group of State and Federal
Government agencies--including law enforcement, homeland security,
information technology and the National Guard, to name a few--formally
meets on a monthly basis to review cyber threat intelligence and
discuss training, exercise and joint project opportunities. As the
intelligence center, our role is to take the lead in developing cyber
intelligence products for both technical and non-technical audiences,
and we leverage the partnerships formed through this group to develop
and share intelligence. The Cyber Partners Working Group also joins
together for training and exercises. NYSIC, along with its working
group partners, has participated in table-top and National-level full-
scale cyber-related exercises, as both observers and participants.
Examples include GridEx III, Cyberstorm V, and New York agency-specific
tabletops.
Effective State and Federal collaboration is also vital to
confronting these challenges. For example, recently NYSIC and its State
and Federal partners collaborated on the production and dissemination
of a joint cyber intelligence bulletin detailing the analyses of
detected malware. During the analysis, which determined the malware was
a well-documented downloader and credential stealing Trojan, an
encrypted file was discovered. Encryption often prevents further
investigation; however in this case the team obtained a tool from a
partner agency that allowed us to decrypt the file. The file revealed
specific and actionable data that could protect IT assets. The NYSIC
published these findings as a joint cyber intelligence bulletin and
received positive feedback from recipients.
The NYSIC also relies on National cyber information-sharing
networks. Routinely, we access the National Fusion Center Association's
Cyber Intelligence Network (CIN), which is a relatively new network of
fusion center cyber analysts, to ascertain whether the intelligence we
are developing in New York may be part of a broader trend. The CIN is
comprised of over 250 Federal, State, and local law enforcement members
who focus on cyber crimes. These members come together and act as a
Virtual Fusion Center utilizing a cloud service provided by the
Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN) to share real-time cyber
threat intelligence in support of an incident, event, or mission. This
level of cyber threat information sharing was impossible only a few
years ago, yet now is becoming routine.
There are several instances in which the CIN collaborated during
high-profile events to great effect. For example, the CIN launched the
HSIN's secure, web-conferencing platform, called CINAWARE, in response
to Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks launched by cyber
hacktivists against several State and local government networks which
included law enforcement and emergency medical service entities that
were responding to an incident. The CIN immediately began sharing real-
time intelligence on the attacks with the relevant local agencies. The
National Fusion Center Association reports that more than 350
individuals from fusion centers and other Federal, State, and local
agencies around the country participated in the CINAWARE room over a
period of several weeks, with an average of 50 to 90 users in the room
at any given time. The room was supported 24/7, which included
overnight support from the MS-ISAC. During that period, more than 250
queries were submitted and answered via the CINAWARWE room, enabling
rapid sharing of information with decision makers. Leaders in State,
local, and Federal agencies were consistently briefed on the
information from the CINAWARE room.
Since that event, the CINAWARE room on HSIN has been opened to
support the response to the Vikingdom DDoS attacks against State and
local networks across the country, the sharing of cyber-specific
information related to the Paris Bombings, and to support the law
enforcement and homeland security mission for Super Bowl 50. The CIN
also facilitates daily sharing throughout the country of indicators of
system-compromise identified in discrete geographic regions, issues and
responds to Requests for Information, and acts as a team of subject-
matter experts to support local operations. All of this sharing occurs
between fusion centers utilizing the Federal platform, HSIN, and occurs
at the For Official Use Only (FOUO) level.
Similarly, the NYSIC's co-location with the Center for Internet
Security and the MS-ISAC allows our staff to walk downstairs and talk
with their intelligence or operations analysts about Nation-wide
reporting and how it may impact New York State. Any relevant, sharable
information these networks provide NYSIC ultimately benefits our Cyber
Partners Working Group and the State's broader cybersecurity prevention
efforts.
This intelligence is of limited use, however, if we cannot provide
it to consumers and decision makers. Equally as important is
communication with those outside of NYSIC. The NYSIC team is constantly
meeting and briefing local governments and private critical
infrastructure sectors on cybersecurity concerns. Participants leave
with contact information needed to build distribution lists for
intelligence products. Our distribution lists are separated by sector,
and between technical and non-technical audiences, to ensure recipients
receive exactly the information they need. We provide IT staff with
actionable intelligence that can be cross-referenced with traffic on
their networks, so they can deploy appropriate prevention or mitigation
controls. Other partners, such as executives, appreciate more strategic
information on trends in cyber actors' tactics, techniques, and
procedures relevant to their sectors that can help inform better policy
decisions. We listen to their feedback and tailor our intelligence
products appropriately.
The NYSIC Cyber Analysis Unit may receive or develop intelligence
that is particularly relevant to the first responder community, or a
subset thereof. For the Fire/EMS/Emergency Management agencies in New
York, our team leverages NYSIC's Intelligence Liaison Officer (ILO)
network--points of contact in each county from those 3 disciplines that
participate in two-way sharing of threat information with our center.
We educate them on cyber threat reporting and the types of technical
and analytical support NYSIC can provide. For example, we crafted a
cyber bulletin distributed specifically to 9-1-1 call centers with an
``E-911'' capability based on our receipt of threat and vulnerability
information relevant to technology that is employed.
Information specific to law enforcement is pushed to agencies in
the field using another outreach program called the Field Intelligence
Officer (FIO) program. In support of this program, nearly all of the
more than 500 law enforcement agencies in New York has a designated FIO
that regularly communicates with the NYSIC to advance the homeland
security and counter-terrorism mission. We utilize these members to
share cyber information in their jurisdictions as well. More technical
products, which may include vulnerability and consequence information,
are shared directly with county Chief Information Security Officers
(CISOs).
New York State is currently working to expand its information
sharing with the health care sector--both public- and privately-owned
facilities. The NYSIC is finding that this sector is willing to partner
with the State to discuss intelligence requirements, information
sharing, training opportunities, and best practices in mitigating cyber
threats.
recommendations for continued growth in information sharing
New York State has made significant strides in building its
cybersecurity capabilities, both at the fusion center and across State
agencies. We are sharing more information more effectively than ever
before. Policies and best practices have been developed by consensus
through multilateral and interagency policy bodies and professional
associations. They are reinforced through daily engagements between
Federal, State, local, and private-sector partners. Despite a
constantly-changing environment we have made excellent progress.
In order to build upon our successful efforts, we have identified 4
areas for continued growth.
First, information-sharing regarding cyber threats between the
Federal Government and the States should be further streamlined. The
information-sharing lessons of the last 13 years in the counter-
terrorism space must be applied in the cybersecurity today. In 2003, as
the first New York State fusion center director, I remember working
through information-sharing issues with DHS, FBI, and others.
Ultimately, an agreed-upon vertical information-sharing pathway was
developed between Federal partners and the fusion centers. At the State
level, the fusion center is DHS's single point of contact for
terrorism-related information, and we know from which subset of DHS to
expect information. This is not yet the case with cyber threat
information. There are many entities within DHS that gather, analyze,
and disseminate various types of cyber threat intelligence, whether
it's tactical indicators of compromise, strategic intelligence
assessments, or organizing outreach campaigns with private-sector
entities in our jurisdiction. Given this information--whether it is raw
information or finished intelligence--does not come together in one
place at the Federal level with a designated unit to ensure rapid
communication with the fusion centers, more often than not the centers
do not receive information in a timely manner. This problem is
exacerbated by the fact that other Federal agencies also have a cyber
mission, and many have not yet built relationships with the fusion
centers like DHS or FBI have over the last 13 years. This includes
sector-specific agencies like Energy, Treasury, and Health and Human
Services that play an important role in protecting key sectors of the
Nation's critical infrastructure and economy, and who conduct outreach
and information dissemination campaigns with private-sector entities
under their jurisdiction. Any steps that DHS can take to streamline the
overall Federal cyber intelligence-sharing processes with the fusion
centers will help States and our local partners better understand the
current threat landscape and more efficiently align our own cyber
information sharing with the private sector. Working together will
better enable us to protect against and respond to inevitable cyber
attacks. The more cyber threat intelligence that fusion centers
receive, the more we can share with agencies and businesses in our
jurisdictions. This will close intelligence gaps and help us
communicate threats to smaller entities that Federal information-
sharing currently does not reach.
Second, we must also continue to evaluate how we share Classified
cyber-threat intelligence from the Federal Government to the fusion
centers. There is no central Federal system that stores indicators of
compromise against which fusion center cyber analysts can run
comparisons and lookups. The National Network of Fusion Centers does
not have a space on the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC) floor, and therefore lacks access to that
critical data source which is available to other Federal information-
sharing partners. The network has interactions at the DHS Office of
Intelligence and Analysis' Cyber Intelligence and Analysis Division
(CIAD), but that interaction primarily occurs at the FOUO level and
involves information being shared up to the Federal level, but not
necessarily back down. Additionally, we observe that a large amount of
cyber threat information is Classified. While the NYSIC understands why
that might be the case, the Federal community needs to continue to
focus on creating Unclassified tear lines of actionable intelligence.
The fusion centers may have the capability to receive Classified
documents, but cannot share useful contents with many of its customers
unless the classification is downgraded. We would be pleased to work
with authors of Classified documents to develop Unclassified actionable
information for our non-cleared partners. I believe there has been some
effort to share more Unclassified indicators based on recent production
efforts by one Federal agency, and I hope that effort continues across
the Federal community.
Third, we need to continue our efforts to share information with
local and county governments and private sector. We need to make sure
there is consistency, and not confusion, regarding ``who to call'' when
a local government or private entity experiences a cyber incident. We
successfully worked through similar issues in the counter-terrorism
area and I believe collective development of clear guidance would
better serve our customers.
Finally, the parallels between counter-terrorism and cyber extend
beyond information sharing. Adequate cyber preparedness requires wide-
spread implementation of best practices and mitigation efforts, which
invariably can exceed the capacity of local and county governments
facing a growing myriad of threats. In our ever-more connected world,
your network is only as strong as its weakest interconnection, yet
implementing strong cybersecurity solutions is often costly. As we
continue the hard work of policy development and adoption of best
practices, the need for Federal Government support of State and local
cybersecurity preparedness should not be overlooked. Much the same way
the DHS Homeland Security Grant Program provides essential Federal
support for counter-terrorism initiatives, similar support for
cybersecurity would further enhance the capacity of States, fusion
centers, and local governments to prevent and respond to cyber
incidents that threaten our Nation's critical infrastructure and
economy.
Thank you for this opportunity to speak before your subcommittees.
On behalf of New York's fusion center, and as part of the larger
National Network of Fusion Centers, I appreciate the invitation to
participate in this discussion and I welcome any questions you may
have.

Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Lieutenant Colonel.
The Chair now recognizes General Spano for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL STEVEN SPANO, (RETIRED, USAF),
PRESIDENT AND CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER, CENTER FOR INTERNET
SECURITY

Mr. Spano. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, Members of the
committee, I am Steve Spano, the president and chief operating
officer for the Center for Internet Security, or CIS. I
appreciate the opportunity to share our thoughts on the state
of National cybersecurity, and offer a number of suggestions
and address some of the challenges that lie ahead.
I would like to talk a little bit about our organization,
what we do, our primary ambition, and how that feeds into our
assessment of the current state of cybersecurity in the area
that we know best, which is State, local, Tribal, and
territorial governments. Then I will talk a little bit about
how we service and are enhancing that mission, working with our
partners, like the fusion center, and State and local
governments, and then offer some ideas moving forward
strategically that perhaps this committee can begin to address
as the challenges we face continue to grow.
About CIS, it began in 2000 out of the passion and the
belief that everybody deserves a secure on-line experience. The
100-plus professionals work collaboratively to enhance the
cybersecurity mission, readiness, and response, and we do that
in 3 core areas: Beginning from the foundation, we believe that
it is inherently practical and important to establish a secure
framework to build your cyber strategy on and evolving to.
We call that security framework the critical security
controls, or the CIS controls. They are a set of prioritized
actions that organizations of any size can take in a priority
order to deal with the current threats that exist in today's
environment. That security framework serves as a foundation for
some of the products and services that we offer, one such being
the security benchmarks, which are automated configurations
that lock down devices, operating systems, and software. So
these security benchmarks help execute and implement the CIS
controls, along with many of the services and products that our
partners out in industry also support and provide.
The controls, the benchmarks, the products, and services
are put into execution in our primary mission, and that is
running the Multistate Information Sharing and Analysis Center,
or the MS-ISAC. The ISAC was established in a partnership with
DHS in 2010, and we began the journey of beginning to monitor
all 56 SLTTs, where we are approximately more than two-thirds
of the way through bringing the States and these local
governments and Tribal networks onto our network.
We currently have 41 that we actively monitor that we
provide network intrusions, that we provide intelligence
analysis to, that we provide forensics capability and response
as part of a computer emergency response team. That mission
continues to grow and strengthen.
What I would like to talk about now is how that mission
feeds our assessment of where we believe the current state of
National cybersecurity is within the SLTTs. We inform it
through the day-to-day mission and the operation over the last
several years, our experience, and global situational awareness
and engagement. We are also responsible for producing the
National cybersecurity in this report to DHS, which every 2
years is provided to Congress. We are working to finalize this
year's report.
The NCSR is a self-assessment by the States in 13 key
categories, and we measure those categories in a number of ways
through the self-assessment amongst these entities. We find
that in each of the 13 categories, while year to year, there
has been improvements among the States, there are still
challenges that reside in all 13 categories to meet the self-
prescribed benchmarks metrics that they want to achieve.
Progress is being made. I characterize in my written
testimony that the current state within the SLTTs is improving,
but there are still a number of challenges that are facing the
States, to include under-resource budgets, a workforce that I
would characterize as high-demand, low-density in its assets
and that is insufficient to address on many of the challenges,
and a number of other areas of dealing with basic hygiene in
terms of executing some of their strategies. But progress is
being made, and I would characterize it as improving.
I look forward to the dialogue and the questions and to
diving into some of the specific details on how we can improve
moving forward in two key areas: One is establishing a basic
hygiene campaign, whether that is a built upon the critical
security controls or other frameworks; and the other areas I
mentioned that I believe is a strategic challenge for us
Nationally is how to inspire and generate a cybersecurity
workforce that can grow and meet the challenges. Because as I
mentioned, they are high-demand, low-density asset across, and
the trends we are seeing within K through 12 and interest in
STEM, colleges and universities are offering programs but it is
insufficient to get to scale. We are seeing that just the basic
capabilities to keep up with the growing threats and the
expertise and the training of existing professionals is a
challenge for a lot of the SLTTs.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to address you. I
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Spano follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steven Spano
May 24, 2016
Chairmen Donovan and Ratcliffe, Ranking Members Payne and Richmond,
and Members of the committee, thank you for inviting me today to this
hearing. My name is Steve Spano, and I serve as the president and chief
operating officer of the Center for Internet Security--or ``CIS.'' I
appreciate the opportunity today to share our thoughts on the current
state of National cybersecurity, focusing in the area we know best:
State, local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT) government entities. As
the Nation addresses the complicated issue of cybersecurity, your
efforts to assess the current state of National cyber preparedness and
response capabilities and determine how best to improve our National
cybersecurity posture is noteworthy. I look forward to offering our
ideas on how we can collectively build on the progress being made in
this important area of critical National security.
Established in 2000 as a not-for-profit organization, CIS's primary
mission is to advance cybersecurity readiness and response. CIS was
instrumental in establishing the first guidelines for systems hardening
at a time when there was little on-line security leadership. In 2010,
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), under the National
Protection and Programs Directorate (NPPD), partnered with CIS to host
the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center, or MS-ISAC.
Under a cooperative agreement with DHS, the MS-ISAC was established as
a 24x7 cybersecurity operations center that provides real-time network
monitoring, threat analysis, and early warning notifications to SLTTs.
MS-ISAC also consolidates and shares threat intelligence information
with the DHS National Cybersecurity and Communications Information
Center (NCCIC), where we have 2 employees serving as liaisons for MS-
ISAC. In 2015, we became the home of the CIS Critical Security
Controls, previously known as the SANS Top 20. With this expanded
operational mission, CIS has evolved as a trusted resource to help
public and private organizations start secure and stay secure.
Today, CIS collaborates with the global security community to lead
Government and private-sector entities to on-line security solutions
and resources. While I will elaborate more fully below, the 100-plus
professionals at CIS provide cyber expertise in three main program
areas:
1. As I just mentioned, the MS-ISAC operates a 24x7 Secure Ops
Center to support SLTTs.
2. The CIS Critical Security Controls (CIS Controls), a consensus-
driven, prioritized set of cyber best practices created to stop
today's most pervasive and dangerous cyber attacks. The CIS
Controls are referenced in several policy and security
frameworks such as the NIST 800.43; and
3. The Security Benchmarks, a program that provides well-defined
configuration best practices to help organizations world-wide
assess and improve their cybersecurity. Over 100 consensus-
based Security Benchmarks have been developed to date, and
Security Benchmarks members can access tools and automated
content for both traditional hardware and software as well as
cloud-based services.
More information about CIS is included at Attachment A and
incorporated herein by reference.
the current state of cybersecurity preparedness
CIS's assessment of the current state of cybersecurity preparedness
and response capabilities is based on our collective daily experience
with the MS-ISAC, represented by over 1,000 SLTT members (including all
50 States), as well as our dealings with those using the CIS Security
Benchmarks and the CIS Controls, all of which provide us unique and
wide-ranging insight into the cybersecurity posture of those we serve.
Today, thanks to Congressional and DHS support and SLTT
participation, the MS-ISAC is actively monitoring the networks of 41
States and territories. In 2016, our goal is to have all 50 States and
all 6 territories being monitored by the MS-ISAC. Our members represent
local governments, public universities, critical infrastructure
entities, and public authorities that own and operate critical
infrastructures. In 2015, our monitoring program analyzed over 3
trillion records, which generated over 56,000 actionable alerts to our
SLTT partners. In 2015, our CERT team managed 161 incidents for our
partners, largely focused on computer forensics. Their efforts actively
identify types of threats, origins of attack, and root causes of the
attack. Our intelligence team has produced a large number of analytical
reports that both DHS and the FBI have cited as key resources to help
in their investigations and high-level threat detection. Our cyber
support for SLTTs also includes a computer emergency response
capability, and the issuance of real-time cyber alerts, advisories, and
intelligence products.
Based on this work, we can state that since 2004, when the MS-ISAC
partnership with DHS began, we have seen progress in the state of
cybersecurity of our SLTT partners that can be characterized as
improving, with many positive trends. There are, however, significant
challenges that we are collectively working to improve. These
challenges include under-resourced cybersecurity budgets, poorly
crafted and vulnerable software provided by vendors, misconfigured
networks, and insufficient numbers of qualified professional staff.
Our assessment of SLTT cybersecurity preparedness and response
capability is supported in the findings of the DHS-funded Nation-wide
Cyber Security Review (NCSR). This annual review, tasked to the MS-ISAC
by DHS, is produced in conjunction with the National Association of
Counties and the National Association of State Chief Information
Officers, and is reported to Congress by DHS every 2 years. It is a
voluntary, self-assessment survey designed to evaluate cybersecurity
management within, and the cybersecurity posture of, SLTT governments.
To gauge the Nation-wide level of cybersecurity readiness, the NCSR
measures maturity of cybersecurity programs within the SLTT community
by assessing how SLTTs are performing in 13 key cybersecurity areas.
The 2013 and 2014 NCSRs found SLTT respondents continuing to improve
towards the highest level of maturity, ``risk aware'', in all 13 of
these measured functions, but they have not yet reached that maturity
level in any of the 13 categories. Further support for our assessment
is found in the DHS 2015 National Preparedness Report (the
``Preparedness Report''), which acknowledges both that SLTTs place
significant emphasis on the importance of cybersecurity, but have been
challenged to find sufficient financial resources and staffing to meet
growing cybersecurity demands.
The MS-ISAC, the NCSR and the Preparedness Report all recognize
that steady progress is being made in many areas of SLTT cybersecurity,
in the face of cyber threats that continue to increase in scope,
sophistication, and number, but that challenges remain for SLTTs to
reach full cybersecurity preparedness. This reality will not change any
time soon. The strategy and execution of defensive responses must
evolve at a faster pace. This will require continued investment, strong
leadership, and collaboration at all levels of government.
Outside of the SLTT space, our experience with our Security
Benchmarks customers and those using the CIS Controls also show
increased efforts to improve organizations' cybersecurity posture. In
the last 3 years, the number of organizations purchasing Security
Benchmarks memberships has almost tripled, and the growth in the use of
automated machine image versions of the Benchmarks has grown tenfold
since they were first released a year ago. This shows us that there is
increasing emphasis on ensuring that organizational networks and
devices are securely configured.
In October 2015, we released Version 6 of the CIS Controls. In the
period of time since the release, the CIS Controls have been downloaded
over 32,000 times. This data, coupled with on-going requests for
information and assistance in learning more about the Controls, shows
us that companies and organizations are seeking guidance in how to
start secure and stay secure, and are looking for the roadmap to tell
them how to get there.
how cis is working to increase cybersecurity preparedness
Since its inception, CIS's mission has been focused on increasing
cybersecurity preparedness, both for SLTT governments through the MS-
ISAC and for the private sector as well with the CIS Controls and
Security Benchmarks programs. I appreciate the opportunity to highlight
our work in these 3 areas, and why we believe our work is making a
difference.
MS-ISAC
The on-going work of the MS-ISAC has and will continue to improve
the cybersecurity posture of SLTT governments. Our continuous
monitoring of SLTT networks across the country provides us with the
ability to see and analyze the scope of potential malicious activity
and identify when there are multiple incidents of the same nature and
source. As noted above, in 2015 alone, MS-ISAC detected and analyzed
malicious activity events that generated over 56,000 incident reports.
We provide response assistance if needed, including CERT team
assistance. Equally importantly, we provide timely issue alerts to all
our SLTT members, which include steps to take to avoid or mitigate the
risk of the identified malicious activity event. We also share SLTT
event information with Federal agencies and other trusted partners
through our liaisons on the NCCIC floor, so our work also informs the
cybersecurity posture of the Federal Government and the Nation as a
whole.
In addition to our monitoring and response services, we produce a
monthly situational awareness report that shares timely cybersecurity
information with our over 1,000 members. We distribute weekly reports
of cyber threat indicators and support an automated indicator sharing
platform (STIX/TAXII). We hold monthly webcasts focusing on particular
cybersecurity issues. We also offer group purchasing opportunities for
cybersecurity training and products, with substantially discounted
pricing for SLTTs, educational and not-for-profit entities. Since
starting the purchasing alliance in 2012, we have been able to save
SLTT governments almost $30 million in their purchase of essential
cybersecurity training and products. Our work with the NCSR is
providing SLTTs with a tool to monitor and track their progress, both
internally and against other SLTT entities.
More information on MS-ISAC services is included in Attachment B
and incorporated herein; further information is available here: https:/
/msisac.cisecurity.- org/.
CIS Critical Security Controls
CIS is the home of the Critical Security Controls, the set of
internationally recognized prioritized actions that form the foundation
of basic cyber hygiene, demonstrated to prevent 80-90% of all known
pervasive and dangerous cyber attacks. The CIS Controls were initially
created, and are regularly updated, by a global network of cyber
experts based on actual attack data derived from a variety of public
and private threat sources, so they are informed by both professional
expertise and real-world threat information.
The CIS Controls act as a blueprint for network operators to
improve cybersecurity by suggesting specific actions to be done in a
priority order. In this regard, we strongly believe that the CIS
Controls can help all organizations, especially the small- and mid-
sized entities, many of which need help in identifying exactly what to
do and when.
The CIS Controls are recognized by a number of cybersecurity
frameworks and reports as an effective and practical tool for improving
an organization's cybersecurity preparedness. The CIS Controls are
specifically called out in the NIST Cybersecurity Framework as one of a
handful of cybersecurity tools that help organizations implement the
Framework. Just recently, the California Attorney General released the
California Data Breach Report (2016), which specifically points to the
Controls as a tool that if followed, would meet the requirement of
``reasonable security'' under California law. (The full report can be
accessed here: https://oag.ca.gov/breachreport2016).
Additionally, the Controls are included in the following
foundational frameworks, reports, and documents:

NIST Framework

Symantec 2016 Internet Security Threat Report, https://
www.symantec.com/content/dam/symantec/docs/reports/istr-21-
2016-en.pdf, pages 75-77

Verizon DBIR 2015, page 55

Tripwire, ``The Executive's Guide to the Top 20 Critical
Security Controls,'' http://www.tripwire.com/state-of-security/
featured/20-csc-list-post/

Zurich Insurance/Atlantic Council ``Risk Nexus: Overcome by
Cyber risks? Economic Benefits and Costs of Alternate Cyber
Futures''--page 28

NGA ``National Governors Association Call to Action on
Cybersecurity'', page 4

UK CPNI (the British infrastructure protection directorate--
entire web page references the Controls)

Conference of State Bank Supervisors, ``Cybersecurity 101: A
Resource Guide for Bank Executives, pages 8, 12, 24, https://
www.csbs.org/CyberSecurity/Documents/
CSBS%20Cybersecurity%20101%20Resource%20Guide%20- FINAL.pdf
We make the CIS Controls available for download at no cost to the
general public, as well as free companion guides that provide more
detailed information and support for the implementation of the CIS
Controls. Find out more information about the Controls and download
them for free at: https://www.cisecurity.org/critical-controls.cfm.
Additional information about the CIS Controls is also included at
Attachment C and incorporated herein by reference.
CIS Security Benchmarks
CIS is also the world's largest producer of authoritative,
community-supported, and automatable security configuration benchmarks
and guidance. The CIS Security Benchmarks (also known as
``configuration guides'' or ``security checklists'') provide highly
technical, detailed security recommendations for specific components of
information technology, such as operating systems and devices, and are
vital for any credible security program. The Security Benchmarks are
developed though a collaborative effort of public and private-sector
security experts. CIS has developed over 100 consensus-based Security
Benchmarks have been developed today and are available in PDF format
free to the general public, or in an automated format through the
purchase of a membership. We have also created a number of Amazon
Machine Images (AMIs) for the most utilized Security Benchmarks, which
are available for purchase in the AWS Marketplace and in Amazon
GovCloud, and we are discussing similar arrangements with other cloud
providers. CIS Security Benchmarks are used world-wide by organizations
ranging from small, nonprofit businesses to Fortune 500 companies.
The CIS Security Benchmarks are referenced in a number of
recognized security standards and control frameworks, including:

Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard v3.1
(PCI) (April 2016)?

NIST Guide for Security-Focused Configuration Management of
Information System;

Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)
System Security Plan;

DHS Continuous Diagnostic Mitigation Program; and

CIS Critical Security Controls, Version 6
More information about CIS Security Benchmarks is included at
Attachment D and incorporated herein by reference.
what more can be done?
The current cyber threat is clear, unmistakable, and unlikely to
abate anytime soon. Fortunately, much is currently being done to
improve cybersecurity--but more needs to be done. We would like to
focus our comments on 2 areas that we believe are of significant
importance to both SLTT and non-SLTT organizations: (1) Improving cyber
hygiene; and (2) creating a comprehensive approach to both increasing
and improving the cybersecurity workforce.
Improving Cyber Hygiene
Probably the single most important effort that we can undertake to
dramatically make our networks more secure is to adopt basic cyber
hygiene. Like personal hygiene, it involves basic, regular routines and
actions that are needed to maintain basic safety and security.
Despite a growing understanding of the threats and vulnerabilities
in the technical community, wide-spread adoption of safe cyber behavior
in cyber space is the exception, not the norm. It is our experience
that the vast majority of cyber incidents result from either the
failure to patch known vulnerabilities in software and web applications
or failure to adopt proper security configurations on network operating
systems or devices.
We believe that part of the difficulty in getting more traction for
cyber hygiene is the existence of a plethora of defensive tools,
security frameworks, and guidelines, combined with the complexity of
our networks, which have simply overwhelmed and confused consumers,
private-sector companies and governments. For example, while the NIST
Framework lays out a process for beginning a dialogue on cybersecurity
measures, it is by design not a framework listing prioritized actions
based on effectiveness.
As we have discussed above, we believe that the CIS Controls
provide the specific, actionable controls in priority order that will
thwart the most pervasive attacks. This is supported in a study by the
Australian government Department of Defense, which revealed that 85% of
known cybersecurity vulnerabilities can be mitigated by deploying the
Top 5 CIS Controls. Whether by using the CIS Controls or some other
framework, increased efforts by the Federal Government to promote a
roadmap for basic cyber hygiene will yield proven results in mitigating
the most prevalent and pervasive cyber attacks.
Creating a Comprehensive Approach to Improving Our Cybersecurity
Workforce
One of the major reasons that organizations have struggled in
achieving basic cyber hygiene is the lack of available and qualified
cybersecurity professionals to undertake the necessary cyber protection
actions, particularly on an on-going basis. There are simply too few
qualified cyber professionals in the workforce. This is the result of
several factors:

too few students in the K-12 level of education are
interested in pursuing further education in computer science
and cybersecurity;

too few universities and colleges are offering cybersecurity
degree or certificate programs that offer the practical
training needed to meet the qualifications of cybersecurity
professional roles;

there is a need for more continuing cyber education of staff
in the current cybersecurity workforce to keep up with the
ever-changing technical landscape of cyber threats; and

for SLTTs and smaller organizations, the ability to hire
from the limited existing cybersecurity workforce is hampered
by the inability to compete with private-sector salary levels.
We believe that there are several areas in which the Federal
Government can assist with increasing and improving the cybersecurity
workforce:
1.   Help to increase awareness and promote STEM education at the
K-12 level;
2.   Because of our DHS support, CIS is able to recruit students
from the National Science Foundation's Scholarship for Services
Program (SFS) for certain MS-ISAC positions. This program has
been a great tool in helping us recruit and maintain entry-
level cyber professionals. We would recommend considering
additional funding for the SFS program to open the program up
to more students. This would assist in growing the number of
students entering cybersecurity studies at the college level.
We would also suggest considering broadening the organizations
that qualify to hire SFS students to include non-governmental
critical infrastructure organizations and not-for-profits, all
of whom share the same challenges that Federal and SLTT
governments face in recruiting and retaining cyber talent.
3. Providing more opportunities for cyber exercises and simulations
and expand participation by SLTT entities. In addition to
allowing SLTTs more opportunities to assess their cyber
readiness and response capabilities, these exercises and
simulations provide on-going training for the SLTT
cybersecurity workforce.
The threat to our Nation is real and extends down to every
individual. As such, improving our cybersecurity defense of this
country demands the combined efforts of us all. We will continue our
efforts at CIS to help SLTTs protect citizen data at every level of
Government. We will also continue our excellent partnership with the
Federal Government as we work to extend monitoring services to all 56
States and territories as the foundation of best practice in
cybersecurity information sharing.
I want to thank the committee for the opportunity to participate in
this important hearing, and look forward to addressing any questions
you might have.
Find out more information about CIS here: https://
www.cisecurity.org/.
Attachment A.--The Center for Internet Security
Attachment B.--MS-ISAC
Attachment C.--CIS Critical Security Controls
Attachment D.--CIS Security Benchmarks

Mr. Donovan. Thank you, General Spano.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Raymond for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARK RAYMOND, VICE PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF STATE CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICERS

Mr. Raymond. Thank you, Chairman Donovan, Chairman
Ratcliffe, and Ranking Members Payne and Richmond for inviting
me to testify for you today.
My name is Mark Raymond, and I serve as the chief
information officer for the State of Connecticut and the vice
president of the National Association of State Chief
Information Officers. NASCIO is a nonprofit association that
represents State CIOs and IT executives and managers from
States, territories, and the District of Columbia.
Today, I would like to provide the committee with an
overview of cybersecurity preparedness in the States, what
States are doing to improve our resilience, and opportunities
to enhance the security profile of our Nation.
State CIOs are Executive branch officials who serve as
business leaders, advisers of IT policy, and implementation at
the State level. The most critical role for the CIO today
includes the security of State networks, protection of State
data, and helping formulate the response for cyber incident or
disruption. These responsibilities are shared with the chief
information security officer, or CISO, a position that exists
among all 50 States and for whom are becoming increasingly
standardized in their roles.
State CIOs and CISOs operate in an increasingly challenging
environment. In the 2014 Deloitte-NASCIO Cybersecurity Study,
we found that the top barriers for States addressing
cybersecurity were insufficient budgets, increased
sophistication of threats, and the inadequate availability of
security professionals.
Regarding insufficient funding, the majority of the States
spend in the range of 1 to 2 percent of their overall IT budget
on cybersecurity. The Federal Government spends around 14 to 16
percent. Combined with recent events, this disparity shows that
there is no one correct amount or percentage. States must
assess their cybersecurity risk and spend commensurate with
that risk.
The lack of qualified IT security professionals are also a
challenge for States. People with IT security skills are the
most difficult to recruit and retain for States, and the State
government salary rates and pay structures are the biggest
challenge in bringing on IT talent.
Another obstacle for CIO and CISOs is the increasing
sophistication of threats. The top 3 are malicious code,
hacktivism, and zero-day attacks. State CIOs are playing
defense, but we have been able to better prepare for known
threats through information sharing.
Despite these challenges, States are progressing towards a
more secure cyber environment. NASCIO has long called for
States to adopt a cybersecurity framework, and quickly endorsed
the NIST framework upon its release. From 2015 data, we know
that 80 percent of the States have adopted a cybersecurity
framework based on National standards and guidelines.
States are utilizing public and private resources to
enhance their cybersecurity posture in both times of relative
rest and in times of emergency. To better identify and detect
cyber threats, States are increasingly sharing threat
information through fusion centers and MS-ISAC. Eighty percent
of States have established trusted partnerships for information
sharing and response. Eighty percent of the States have also
acquired and implemented continuous vulnerability monitoring
capabilities to better identify and detect malicious cyber
activity.
Many States also participate in ALBERT, a joint program
between MS-ISAC and DHS, which brings an EINSTEIN-based, cyber-
traffic monitoring system to the States. Knowing that the
ability to identify and detect is our first line of defense,
Connecticut is the first State to take advantage of DHS's
threat intelligence offering provided by iSight partners.
In the realm of response and recoveries, States are also
showing maturity. In a disaster, State officials expect the
State CIO to maintain reliable and secure infrastructure,
coordinate with other State officials, and restore
communications services. I am responsible for these duties in
my State as outlined in our disaster response framework.
Recognizing that States could face a catastrophic disaster
that coincides with or is caused by a cyber event, NASCIO has
called on States to develop a cyber disruption plan that
contemplates massive disruptions to the business of State
government. States like Michigan have taken the whole-community
approach and have developed disruption plans that outline roles
and responsibilities during a disaster.
A key partner to the States has been DHS. States are heavy
utilizers of DHS State and local cyber programs like ICS-CERT
and FedVTE. Also Federal programs like CyberCorps helps shore
the IT security workforce gap that all States are facing.
Another way the Federal Government could aid in enhancing
State's ability to identify, protect, detect, respond, and
recover is by harmonizing Federal security requirements. CIOs
must comply with IRS publication 1075, FBI-CJIS, HIPAA, FERPA,
CMS's MARS-E, amongst others. Regulation harmonization could
lessen the burden on States, enabling us to focus on providing
security services rather than checking off boxes.
Thank you for holding this important hearing and for the
opportunity to testify today on this truly critical issue.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Raymond follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mark Raymond
May 24, 2016
Thank you Chairmen Ratcliffe and Donovan and Ranking Members Payne
and Richmond for inviting me to testify before you today.
My name is Mark Raymond and I serve as the chief information
officer (CIO) for the State of Connecticut and also as the vice
president of the National Association of State Chief Information
Officers (NASCIO). At NASCIO, I also co-chair the cybersecurity
committee. NASCIO is a nonprofit, 501(c)(3) association representing
State chief information officers and information technology executives
and managers from the States, territories, and the District of
Columbia.
Today, I would like to provide the committee an overview of the
status of cybersecurity preparedness in the States, what States are
doing to improve and enhance resilience to cyber attacks, and
opportunities to enhance the security profile of our Nation.
State chief information officers are State executive branch
officials who serve as business leaders and advisors of information
technology policy and implementation at the State level.--All States
have a CIO and all CIOs serve within the executive branch of State
government. The office of the State CIO takes many forms, some are
cabinet officials and others are executive directors; regardless of the
title, all State CIOs share a common function of setting and
implementing a State's IT policy.
State CIOs are also responsible for providing IT services to State
executive branch agencies. This not only includes the more typical
business of provisioning enterprise data or phone services but also
securing the digital business of State government. The most critical
role today for the CIO includes the security of State networks,
protection of State data, and helping formulate the response for a
cyber incident or disruption. These responsibilities are shared with
the chief information security officer (CISO), a position that exists
among all 50 States and duties for whom are becoming increasingly
standardized.
State CIOs and CISOs operate in an increasingly challenging
environment.--In the 2014 Deloitte-NASCIO Cybersecurity Study, State
governments at risk: Time to move forward, (2014 Deloitte-NASCIO Study)
[http://www.nascio.org/Portals/0/Publications/Documents/Deloitte-
NASCIOCybersecurityStudy_2014.pdf], we studied the current
cybersecurity environment in the States, common challenges, and
barriers to a strong State cybersecurity posture. The 2014 Deloitte-
NASCIO Study showed that the top barriers to States addressing
cybersecurity were insufficient budgets, increased sophistication of
threats, and the inadequate availability of security professionals.
These challenges remained the same in 2015.
Insufficient budgets for cybersecurity have been cited as a top
barrier since the inception of the Deloitte-NASCIO Cybersecurity Study
in 2010. The majority of States spend in the range of 1-2 percent of
their overall IT budget on cybersecurity. The Federal Government spends
around 14-16 percent of their IT budget on cybersecurity. Combined with
recent events, this disparity shows that there is no one correct amount
or percentage; States must assess their cybersecurity risk and spend
commensurate with that risk.
Funding challenges also affect the ability of States to hire and
retain skilled IT security personnel. NASCIO's State IT Workforce:
Facing Reality with Innovation [http://www.nascio.org/Portals/0/
Publications/Documents/NASCIO_StateIT- WorkforceSurvey2015_WEB.pdf]
survey shows that a shortage in the State IT workforce has been
predicted for some time and States are finding that those with IT
security skills are the most difficult to recruit and retain (67.3%)
followed by application development, programming, and support (57.1%);
and architecture (55.1%). Ninetey-two percent of respondents reported
that salary rates and pay structures are a challenge in bringing on top
IT talent. States are responding to the dearth of qualified IT security
personnel by getting innovative.
In Maine, State CIO Jim Smith confronted the reality that 24
percent of his 480 State IT workers would be eligible to retire in the
next 2 years thus highlighting the need to recruit and retain new IT
talent. He has addressed 1 aspect of the workforce issue by updating
the application process, moving it on-line, and making it mobile
friendly. He has also created an IT intern program and over 70 percent
of those interns have become full-time employees. High school students
are also welcome to visit Maine's Office of Information Technology for
its annual ``Technight,'' [http://www.maine.gov/oit/technight/
index.shtml] where students participate in a variety of tech-related
activities, which introduces them to exciting IT careers.
While insufficient budgets and workforce shortages continue to be
obstacles for State CISOs, 3 out of 5 also reported that the increasing
sophistication of threats was also a major barrier to addressing
cybersecurity. In the 2014 Deloitte-NASCIO Study, CISOs reported their
top 3 cyber concerns: Malicious code (74.5%), hacktivism (53.2 %), and
zero-day attacks (42.6%). Malicious cyber activity happens daily in
State government, but State CIOs have been able to better prepare for
known threats through information sharing, a concept with which
emergency managers are acutely aware.
Despite these challenges, States are progressing toward a more
secure cyber environment. NASCIO has long called for States to adopt a
cybersecurity framework and quickly endorsed [http://nascio.org/
Newsroom/ArtMID/484/ArticleID/34/NASCIO-Supports-Adoption-of-the-NIST-
Cybersecurity-Framework] the National Institute of Science and
Technology's (NIST) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure
Cybersecurity (NIST Cybersecurity Framework) upon its release in
February, 2014. In the 2014 Deloitte-NASCIO Study, we found that 88
percent of States were reviewing or planning to leverage the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework within the year. In the NASCIO, Grant Thornton,
CompTIA 2015 State CIO Survey, The Value Equation: Agility in Sourcing,
Software and Services, [http://www.nascio.org/Portals/0/Publications/
Documents/2015/NASCIO_- 2015_State_CIO_Survey.pdf] we found that 80
percent of States had adopted a cybersecurity framework based on
National standards and guidelines.
States are adapting to shared cybersecurity challenges and
utilizing public and private resources to enhance their cybersecurity
posture both in times of relative rest and in times of emergency. The
NIST Cybersecurity Framework identifies 5 basic functions: Identify,
protect, detect, respond, and recover. States are making progress in
each of these areas.
To better identify and detect cyber threats to protect a wealth of
State digital assets, States are increasingly sharing threat
information through established forums like fusion centers and the
Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC). From the
2015 State CIO Survey, we know that 80 percent of States have
established trusted partnerships for information sharing and response.
Additionally, 80 percent of States have also acquired and implemented
continuous vulnerability monitoring capabilities in order to better
identify and detect malicious cyber activity. Knowing that the ability
to identify and detect are our first line of defense, NASCIO has called
on States to invest in advanced cyber analytics as a part of the
practice of business intelligence and recently published, Advanced
Cyber Analytics: Risk Intelligence for State Government. [http://
www.nascio.org/Portals/0/Publications/Documents/2016/
NASCIO_AdvancedCyberAnalytics_FINAL_- 4.18.16.pdf] To that end,
Connecticut is the first State to take advantage of DHS's threat
intelligence offering provided via iSight Partners. Many States also
participate in ALBERT, a joint program between MS-ISAC and DHS which
brings an EINSTEIN-based, cyber-traffic monitoring system to the
States.
In my State, in addition to participating in the information
sharing through MS-ISAC and utilizing ALBERT, Emergency Management
Deputy Commissioner and State Homeland Security Advisor, William Shea,
and I co-chair a cybersecurity task force whose membership includes a
diverse mix of stakeholders including higher education, law
enforcement, public utilities, private businesses, and others. We meet
regularly to discuss the latest threat and vulnerability information
because we know that information sharing is key to cultivating a
culture of information security and is a best practice to which States
should conform.
In the realm of response and recovery, States are also showing
maturity.--State CIOs are expected to play a role in helping State
governments respond to and recover from natural and man-made disasters.
According to the 2015 State CIO Survey, the top 3 functions for which
State CIOs were responsible are maintaining a robust, reliable, and
secure infrastructure; coordinating with other State officials; and
restoring communications services.
When riots broke out in and Baltimore, Maryland, Governor Larry
Hogan declared a state of emergency. Maryland's CIO organization, led
by Secretary of Information Technology David Garcia, assisted with the
swift deployment of ``Maryland First Responders Interoperable Radio
System Team (FIRST),'' the State-wide radio communications equipment
for first responders and stood up a website, ``Maryland Unites'' to
which State and local leaders could direct members of the affected
community. They also worked with public and private partners to reverse
engineer Anonymous' attack on State networks. Information sharing was
also helpful; officials in Missouri shared their experience with
Maryland as they had faced a similar crisis. In ways like these, State
CIOs are showing maturity in response in both the cybersecurity and
emergency management fronts and especially when those two worlds
collide.
Recognizing that States could face a catastrophic emergency event
that coincides with or is caused by a cybersecurity event, NASCIO has
called on States to develop a cyber disruption plan and recently
released the ``Cyber Disruption Response Planning Guide.'' [http://
www.nascio.org/Portals/0/Publications/Documents/2016/
NASCIO_CyberDisruption_040616.pdf] A cybersecurity disruption is
defined as: ``an event or effects from events that are likely to cause,
or are causing, harm to critical functions and series across the public
and private sectors by impairing the confidentiality, integrity, or
availability, of electronic information, information systems, services,
or networks that provide direct information technology services or
enabling and support capabilities for other services; and/or threaten
public safety, undermine public confidence, have a negative effect on
the state economy, or diminish the security posture of the state.'' A
cybersecurity disruption differs from a cybersecurity incident which is
limited in scope and impact.
Examples of a cybersecurity disruption include: A cyber attack on
the power grid which leads to a loss of power for a significant
population; a cyber attack on water treatment and delivery leading to a
loss of water supply to a significant population; a cyber attack on
network capabilities leading to loss of communications which then
hampers, interrupts, or prevents the operation of government and
requires implementation of a continuity of operations plan; or a
hurricane, flood, or other natural disaster that impairs or destroys
key infrastructure assets that then precipitates the loss of
connectivity over the internet or internal network.
With these scenarios in mind, States like Michigan, taking the
``whole community'' approach, convened State and local government
representatives and private-sector critical infrastructure owners and
operators to develop the Michigan Cyber Disruption Response Strategy,
initially completed in 2013. Michigan's Cyber Disruption Response
Strategy [https://www.michigan.gov/documents/cybersecurity/
Michigan_Cyber_Disruption_Response_Strategy_1.0_438703_7.pdf] provides
a common framework to encourage a State-wide effort among public and
private partners to defend Michigan's critical networks. Specifically
the plan prompts critical infrastructure owners and operators to
address: Data backup, disaster recovery/business continuity, halt key
processes, equipment shutdown, log file, communications, and how to
activate the cyber disruption response plan.
States like the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and
Rhode Island have taken a regional approach to cyber disruption
planning, an effort supported by FEMA's Regional Catastrophic
Preparedness Grant Program and Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI)
funding. In 2012, as part of the New England Regional Catastrophic
Preparedness Imitative (NERCPI), these 3 States along with the city of
Boston and Providence completed regional cyber disruption planning and
created a Cyber Disruption Response Annex which outlines how cyber
responders will support industrial control system (ICS) structure in
each jurisdiction, how critical cyber incident information will be
shared, and how IT organizations can support public safety and each
other. NERCPI also created cyber disruption teams in each State and the
city of Boston; these teams are comprised of experts from IT, emergency
management and public safety and are responsible for coordinating
resources and information during catastrophic events.
As these previous examples exhibit, protection from cybersecurity
attacks requires a ``team'' or ``whole community'' approach and a key
partner to the States has been the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
(DHS). States are heavy utilizers of DHS's cybersecurity-focused State
and local programs including: ICS-CERT, FedVTE (virtual training
environment), and cybersecurity advisors (CSA). Also, Federal programs
like ``CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service'' allow qualifying students
to serve in an IT assurance role with a Federal, State, or local
government after graduation; this helps shore the IT security workforce
gap that all States are facing.
The Federal Government, principally through DHS, has and hopefully
will continue to provide support for successful cybersecurity programs.
There is, however, another way the Federal Government could aid in
enhancing States' ability to identify, protect, detect, respond, and
recover--by harmonizing Federal security requirements.
When States receive Federal funds, they are required to certify
that certain security measures are in place; this is mandated by the
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA). CIOs and CISOs
must also comply with a variety of Federal regulations, typically
promulgated in a silo-ed fashion. Some of the Federal regulations with
which our community must comply include: IRS Publication 1075, FBI-
Criminal Justice Information Services (FBI-CJIS), the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), social security
administration security standards, Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act (FERPA), Office of Child Support Enforcement (OCSE)
security requirements, the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services'
Minimum Acceptable Risk Standards for Exchanges (MARS-E), among others.
The overarching goal of these regulations is data/information
security. Knowing that the vast majority of States are utilizing
National standards like those issued by NIST, the Federal Government
could lessen the regulatory burden on States by harmonizing Federal
requirements especially since most if not all of these regulations
share a common security goal.
Cybersecurity is an issue that will only become more complex as we
enter an age where the Internet of Things will become more prominent
and technology like unmanned aerial systems (UAS), body-worn cameras,
and cloud adoption are a norm. New technologies will require State
governments to constantly assess security vulnerabilities as citizens
demand consumer-level technology services to be deployed on a whole-of-
Government or enterprise basis. Given this background, the Congress and
Federal agencies should continue to partner with State CIOs and CISOs
when reviewing or promulgating new data security laws or regulations to
ensure that the goal of security is achieved without undue burden or
redundancy.
Thank you for opportunity to testify today on this critical issue.

Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Raymond.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Galvin for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT GALVIN, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, PORT
AUTHORITY OF NEW YORK AND NEW JERSEY

Mr. Galvin. Good morning, Chairman Ratcliffe, Chairman
Donovan, Ranking Member Payne, and Members of the
subcommittees. Thank you for this opportunity to discuss
strategies for strengthening our Nation's cybersecurity.
Since December 2013, it has been my privilege to serve the
Port Authority of New York and New Jersey as its chief
technology officer. The Port Authority builds, operates, and
maintains infrastructure critical to New York and New Jersey
transportation and regional trade. These facilities include
America's busiest airport system, including JFK, LaGuardia, and
Newark Liberty International Airports, the World Trade Center,
the PATH rail transit system, 6 tunnels and bridges between New
York and New Jersey, the Port Authority Bus Terminal, Hudson
River ferries, and marine terminals.
For more than 90 years, the Port Authority has worked to
improve the quality of life for more than 18 million people who
live, work, and visit New York and New Jersey metropolitan
region.
Safety is the No. 1 priority across all of the authority's
locations. Technology touches virtually all of our operations
so the secure and reliable functioning of our computing assets
is vital to public safety.
In our limited time, I would like to briefly discuss 3
areas in which I believe the Federal Government can assist
technology professionals in addressing cyber threats. These
areas are communication, readiness, and public education. In
the realm of communication, events like today's public hearing
play a valuable role. Government and technology leaders need to
work together to create safe forums to discuss prevention
strategies and deconstruct cybersecurity incidents. Through the
avenues of improved communication, best practices can be shared
across many organizations to the benefit of the whole.
Turning now to readiness. When I joined the Port Authority,
the organization was in the planning stages of designing a
comprehensive cybersecurity program. We adopted a framework,
the NIST 800-53, which was developed by a joint task force of
people from the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
DOD, Department of Homeland Security, intelligence community,
and Committee on National Security Systems. This was an
invaluable tool saving us time and money as we put our
cybersecurity program in place.
I believe the Federal Government has a similar opportunity
to assist organizations by coordinating regular drills,
simulating large-scale cybersecurity events. Facilitating these
exercises would allow those involved to understand whether they
have the right procedures in place to respond effectively and
to identify any deficiencies. At the Port Authority, our Office
of Emergency Management conducts regular readiness drills
simulating such things as active-shooter scenarios and aircraft
emergencies. From these exercises, teams learn how to improve
their response. Cybersecurity professionals can benefit from
the same rigorous testing of our readiness.
Like many organizations, the Port Authority invests
resources to detect, prioritize, and examine suspicious
activity on our computer networks. We also use strong, complex
passwords across all mission-critical systems, restrict
administrator access to only essential personnel, and staff a
247 operations center to respond to alarms generated by our
cybersecurity tools and alerts received from other agencies.
But probably the single most important thing we do to
improve our cybersecurity posture is to require all staff who
access Port Authority computers to participate in mandatory
cybersecurity training programs. Themes such as ``Think Before
You Click on Email Links'' and ``Be Aware Before You Share on
Social Media'' encourage people to contact our help desks and
the operations center before they open questionable links and
attachments.
Education is essential. I believe the Federal Government
can play a significant role in strengthening America's
cybersecurity by sponsoring a National public education
campaign to promote safe computing practices. In my experience,
people are more likely to exercise good cyber hygiene if they
understand the important role their individual actions play in
keeping our computer network secure.
In the physical world, we rely on the American public to
see something and say something. We need to develop Nation-wide
awareness and training programs to empower people to do the
same in the realm of cybersecurity. I thank the committee and
look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Galvin follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Galvin
May 24, 2016
about the pa
The Port Authority of New York & New Jersey conceives, builds,
operates, and maintains infrastructure critical to the New York/New
Jersey region's trade and transportation network. These facilities
include America's busiest airport system, including: John F. Kennedy
International, LaGuardia, and Newark Liberty International airports,
marine terminals and ports, the PATH rail transit system, 6 tunnels and
bridges between New York and New Jersey, the Port Authority Bus
Terminal in Manhattan, and the World Trade Center. For more than 90
years, the Port Authority has worked to improve the quality of life for
the more than 18 million people who live and work in New York and New
Jersey metropolitan region.
I. It is important to keep the Authority up and running
The Authority operates a diverse groups of facilities that can have
both logistic and economic impacts that can reach across the globe if
the facilities were to be shut down by a cyber attack. These facilities
have implemented many different internet-based technologies to add
efficiencies to how they operate. However, it is these technologies
that make these facilities more vulnerable to cyber attacks.
II. The Authority relies of its supply chain to operate
The Authority relies on its supply chain in 2 States (New York and
New Jersey) in order to operate its facilities. Required resources are
provided by multiple suppliers. If fuel cannot be provided, or if
electricity is impacted in either State, the Authority cannot operate
at full capacity. It is critical that these supply chains are resilient
to cyber attacks and have resilient business continuity plans.
III. The Port Authority takes cybersecurity seriously and has an
evolving program
The Port Authority takes cybersecurity very seriously. In 2012, the
Authority conducted an audit of its cybersecurity posture, and as a
result, immediately started to build a cybersecurity program. Working
with a consultant to identify the requirements of our cybersecurity
program, the authority decided to use the NIST SP 800-53 guidelines as
a standard for organizing teams, and developing and implementing the
program. Leveraging this existing standard created by a joint task
force of NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology), the
Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security, the
intelligence community and the Committee on National Security systems
saved The Port Authority time and effort we otherwise would have had to
develop a framework implementing cybersecurity.
The first step the Authority took to advance the cybersecurity
program was to implement services from MS-ISAC (Multi-State Information
Sharing and Analysis Center). MS-ISAC analyzes all the logs generated
by our perimeter security tools and provides the authority visibility
into potential indicators of compromise.
The Authority built and staffs a 24x7 Cybersecurity Operations
Center (CSOC) that responds to all of the alarms generated by our
cybersecurity tools, and to alerts received from the agency partners
and cybersecurity services.
We created and manage a mandatory cybersecurity awareness and
training program for all staff who access the authority's computing
resources.
Through this process, Port Authority developed and maintains strong
partnerships with DHS, FBI, NYPD, NJSP, MS-ISAC (multi-State
information sharing and analysis centers), US-CERT, and ICS-CERT. We
continue to engage these agencies to perform vulnerability assessments
and to assist with incident response. We also strengthened internal
partnerships within the Port Authority between the Chief Security
Office, Office of Emergency Management, Office of Inspector General and
the Technology departments. Early on we recognized that no one team or
group would have the total solution.
From these efforts, the Port Authority has seen positive results,
but much work remains to protect critical assets. The technology we put
in place provides visibility into emerging threats and have shown
results, such as the ability to detect and automatically block 90% of
critical incidents. We continue to make improvements in our
cybersecurity operations. Last year, we reduced our critical incident
response time by one-third over the previous year.
However, just as the technology sector continuously innovates,
criminal organizations, nation-states, and hacktivists are also
innovating their methods for exploiting vulnerabilities presented by
new technologies, ``apps'', and new attack surfaces like the Internet
of Things.
IV. The Port Authority's Biggest Cybersecurity Concerns

Like many organizations, The Port Authority uses a large
number of ICS (Industrial Control Systems) to operate its
facilities, for example: tunnel ventilation systems, PATH Train
Control Systems and Airport Airfield Lighting Systems. Some of
these systems, if compromised, could cause loss of life. This
year, the Authority initiated a program to better understand
our vulnerabilities and properly patch and mitigate these
systems. But, it is an enormous task.

In order to properly respond to a massive cyber attack or
the breach of a partner organization, the PA must be in
communication with partner organizations in real time and have
specific remediation actions or practices to follow. Today's
ISACs while useful, do not provide such real-time breach
notification. According to Verizon's 2015 Data Breach
Investigations Report, 75% of attacks spread from the first
victim to the second victim within 24 hours, and 40% spread
from the first victim to the second in 1 hour.

In order to operate all these diverse facilities and
business functions, the Agency hires thousands of contractors.
These individuals have access to some of our most critical
systems. The Authority has recognized that insider threat is
potential attack vector.

The Authority invests in resources and money to implement
cybersecurity tools. We have learned from telecommunications
carriers and cybersecurity service providers that it is
possible for aggressive nation-states to obtain these tools
through third parties and to reverse engineer them to determine
how these detection and prevention tools may be circumvented.
V. How can the Federal Government help?

Education.--I think there is a clear role for the Federal
Government to play by launching a massive public education
campaign to practice ``Safe Computing''. The weakest link in
our cybersecurity chain is the end-user. Phishing scams, e-
mails with links to malevolent sites are often the first step
toward a breach. Two-thirds of cybersecurity incidents that fit
a pattern of cyber-espionage feature phishing scams. (DBIR,
2015). Raising our internal education & awareness level was a
crucial step in improving the security posture at the Port
Authority. I think PSAs (public service announcements) to
inform the public about how technology works, responsible
measures such as good passwords, ``Think before your click''
and other safe computing practices should be taught to the
American public, beginning in school.

Communication.--Events such as today's, not built around an
incident or a breach, but a conversation between technology and
policy makers to reach understanding go a long way to help both
technologists and our Government make better decisions.
Government and technology leaders need to work together to
create safe forums to discuss prevention strategies and de-
construct cybersecurity incidents. The Federal Government can
conduct in-depth reviews following an organizational breach,
similar to the investigations conducted following plane crashes
or what hospitals do after a medical mistake. These non-
punitive approaches have been very successful improving airline
safety and in reducing medical mistakes in the hospitals and
emergency rooms--I would think it could have a significant
impact improving cybersecurity. The name of the breached
organization could be withheld, and the Federal Government can
inform agencies of findings and recommendations after
completing the review. Case studies provide more than technical
remediation requirements; they inform industry how to prevent
problems over the long term.

Simulations.--The Federal Government can assist the PA and
related agencies by coordinating an exercise or drill
simulating a large-scale cybersecurity event. This drill would
allow the agencies to understand where our deficiencies lie,
and whether we have the right procedures and external
relationships in place to respond correctly. For example, the
operations of the Port Authority rely on several Federal
Agencies: The CBP (Customs & Border Protection), TSA, FAA. If
their systems were compromised, the impact on the Port
Authority would be substantial. if the TSA cannot perform pre-
screening, we cannot board passengers, if the CBP cannot review
manifests, we cannot transport cargo, if the FAA air traffic
controllers are impacted, our regional airports can be shut
down. The operational stability of these Federal entities has a
direct impact on the Port Authority's ability to provide
services to the region. Post-drill, the Fed can assist the
agencies to ensure that their comprehensive cybersecurity
programs and resilient business continuity plans are complete
and coordinate with related agencies.

Consider oversight of cybersecurity tool developers to
ensure their intellectual property is not compromised. The
Authority, like many public and private-sector organizations,
invests resources and money into their cybersecurity tools. If
aggressive nation-states obtained these same tools through
third parties and reverse-engineered them to determine how they
can be circumvented, the protection we seek from cybersecurity
tools would be lost. The tech industry and Federal Government
must work together to protect the intellectual capital that
represents the vanguard of our security apparatus for it to
operate effectively. The Federal Government may be able to
provide oversight of the developers of cybersecurity tools to
ensure that they are not sold to malicious third parties.

Consider stopping the Federal Government's participation in
``bug bounty'' programs which encourage grey hat hackers to
sell zero-day vulnerabilities to the highest bidder. The amount
governments are willing to pay for some vulnerabilities
inflates their value and creates a potentially lucrative
secondary market for trading vulnerabilities and may even
encourage programmers to `build in' vulnerabilities they can
later sell.
VI. Challenges related to planning for, and responding to,
cybersecurity
The first challenge of planning for cybersecurity is the wide
variety of threat scenarios an organization must plan for: Viruses,
ransomware, hacktivists, nation-states, simple human error, Point-of-
Sale intrusion, payment card skimmers, web app attacks, denial-of-
service attacks, and cyber espionage.
The second challenge is the size, configuration, and expanding
nature of the attack surface: Internet presence (websites), internal
network, desktops and servers, cloud-based software systems & file
storage, public WiFi infrastructure, portable storage devices, VOIP
systems, and the looming Internet of Things. This list includes the
traditional boundary of the organization. However, we are seeing a
common entry point into an organization being the subcontractors and
consultants who bring equipment onsite or connect their organization's
networks to provide services. The computing networks and infrastructure
of suppliers who provide critical support services to an organization
should be considered part of any organization's `attack surface' that
could be exploited by a malevolent entity.
Another challenge is the speed with which threats evolve and time
required to detect a breach before damage can be done. This is often
referred to the ``volume, velocity, and variation'' of malware. At a
high level, there are approximately 5 malware events globally every
second (170 million in 2015). Most of this is filtered out by an
organization's firewalls and other cybersecurity technology, but half
of all organizations discover malware during 35 or fewer days per year.
This seems to align with `releases' of malware during specific periods,
rather than all year long. As for variation, 70-90% of malware samples
in 2015 were unique to the organizations in which they were found. This
combination shows that adversaries are getting more sophisticated to
overcome defenses and more targeted in their approaches.

Mr. Donovan. Thank you, Mr. Galvin.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for questions. Since
each of us only has 5 minutes, I would like to give each of you
an opportunity to answer. I think I would like to just ask the
entire panel just one question and ask each of you to spend a
minute on a response.
States have constantly ranked their cyber capabilities the
lowest among their core capabilities, and it makes sense that
States would look towards the Federal Government for
assistance. Each of you, in 1 minute, can you tell me--and some
of you hit on it--declassification of information, training as
we do it, active-shooter demonstrations we should do with cyber
attacks. Could each of you just tell me what you think the No.
1 priority of the Federal Government should be for each of the
States to help them in securing their cyber terrorist
capabilities?
Mr. Ghilarducci. Mark Ghilarducci. Really, 2 areas: No. 1,
information sharing is really critical here so that we are all
on the same page with regards to the threat streams; and
dedicated funding to implement that collective footprint or
blueprint as we move forward working together to minimize the
threat. There is no dedicated funding for cybersecurity. It
needs to be raised on the priority scale.
Mr. Donovan. Lieutenant Colonel.
Mr. Cooney. In the post-9/11 environment, there was a
tremendous amount of effort and time put together to create a
structure and a network for counterterrorism, and that is, you
know, the National network of fusion centers. I compare the
cyber environment now to that environment then where, you know,
we should leverage this structure that took so long to build,
you know, to share this threat, this cyber threat information.
I think, as I mentioned in my testimony, I think that is
something that is there, we just need to take it a little
further, and I think--if I had to name one thing, that would be
my one topic.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
General.
Mr. Spano. Yeah, I would probably say the workforce is
probably the biggest challenge and where the Federal Government
can help. In that area, the States are really struggling, both
to compete with industry, and so when they do hire cyber
professionals, because, again, they are in such demand, it is
hard to compete with industry who also is requiring and
demanding and hiring of those cyber professionals.
So looking at the catalyst of how to start in K through 12
to get more interest in STEM, to look at the scholarship for
service and how perhaps we can broaden that into other areas of
not-for-profits and other businesses that surround critical
security controls and critical infrastructures would be a clear
role for the Federal Government to sort-of serve as a catalyst.
I would say very closely to that would be tighten in the
command and control in the apparatuses that link the State
governments through the fusion centers, through the ISAC, to
continue to strengthen the situational awareness that we
present from the ISAC to DHS, which informs many National and
international threats and actions and fusing that together and
presenting it for National action. So they would be my 2 areas.
Mr. Donovan. General, I suspect that one of your
frustrations is that all of you train people who then
eventually go onto industry.
Mr. Spano. Yeah.
Mr. Donovan. Yes. Mr. Raymond.
Mr. Raymond. Thank you. Two areas: No. 1 is, I think,
continuing to raise the recognition of cyber risks as equally
as critical as physical infrastructure risk to our critical
infrastructure. I think the second is to leverage--broader
leveraging of funding that is available to the States for a
variety of different directed programs; that if we could
leverage that more broadly to address the cyber risk across the
State, that would be tremendously beneficial to the States.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Galvin.
Mr. Galvin. Chairman, thank you. So I outlined 3 in my
opening remarks. If I had to narrow it down to--I could narrow
it down to 2, which I think is in the area of readiness. I
talked a little bit about coordinating cybersecurity simulation
incidents. My intent there is really not so much to exercise
the cybersecurity plans of each organization or agency, but to
look at the coordination between agencies and organizations.
For example, the Port Authority relies heavily on Customs and
Border Protection and the FAA. But there is no one organization
that is responsible for overseeing a coordinated response to a
coordinated attack, which is a very high concern for me.
The other I talked about is public education. So as a
technology practitioner professional who has been working in
the technical areas for 30 years, frankly, I don't know how
most normal individuals who have training in other areas deal
with the onslaught of technology that comes at them every day.
We have all been trained as technology professionals in
information access and security and control mechanisms and so
on and so forth.
Today, people buy WiFi devices, they come home, and they
set them up. They buy televisions that interconnect with their
WiFi networks and their cable systems. There are protections
that you can use and leverage, but without some kind of a
training plan, I don't know how people deal with it. I assume
that what happens is most of them, if they don't have someone
in their life that works in the technology sphere to come and
help them set up, I think they take it out of the box, they
plug it in, and if it works, they declare victory and they
leave it until it breaks and they buy another one.
So I think public education has a huge role in protecting
individuals' information as well as the information at risk in
organizations, because what we are seeing is social media being
leveraged by people who are posing a threat in order to gain
access to corporate and agency systems.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir. I thank you, all, for your
testimony and sharing your expertise with us.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne, for questions.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Just on Mr. Galvin's last question, I resemble some of
those remarks. I was the relative back in the 1980s that hooked
everyone's VCR up. So I went around to all my aunts and uncles
and that was my job for a while, so I understand what you are
saying in terms of that.
I will stay with you, Mr. Galvin. You know, like
California, we in New Jersey have established a State
cybersecurity and communications integration cell with the goal
of bringing together diverse stakeholders, promote State-wide
awareness and local cyber threats and wide-spread adoption of
cybersecurity best practices.
In your opinion, is New Jersey cybersecurity cell carrying
out its mission effectively? What is it doing well and what
should it be doing better?
Mr. Galvin. Great. Thank you.
One thing I want to make clear is that, you know, the work
of securing our information assets and ensuring the reliable
function of our systems is performed by a, in my organization,
a hardworking staff of technology and security professionals,
and also in our partners' agencies. I am truly fortunate to
work with such a talented and dedicated set of public servants.
I assume that other members of the panel have a similar
experience.
This is a team effort. You know, we recognized early on
putting our cybersecurity program together that there was no
one group or individual that was going to have the total
solution. So we have developed strong partnerships with New
Jersey CISC, New York CIG, New Jersey State Police, NYPD, FBI,
DHS, the MS-ISAC, US-CERT, and ICS-CERT, and we continue to
engage with those agencies to perform vulnerability assessments
and to assist with incident response.
Likewise, we also, in this process of putting our
cybersecurity program together, strengthen internal
partnerships between the chief security office, which the Port
Authority is responsible for the PAPD, the Office of Emergency
Management, the Office of Inspector General, and the technology
departments. So it's definitely a coordinated team approach
that--I think you said it very well, Mr. Ghilarducci, that it
is a team solution.
Mr. Payne. So you feel that you are breaking through the
silos of these different entities and working together to
better assess these threats?
Mr. Galvin. We do. We spent time--I assume this will
probably be a question--breaking down the NIST 853 framework,
and we did a RACI diagram--responsible, accountable, consulted,
and informed--to identify who was in the lead for each of the
different tasks. It was a very lengthy exercise, but it was
extremely valuable to us in helping put our plan together.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Ghilarducci, every year the National Preparedness
Report reveals that of the 32 core capabilities, States are
least confident in cybersecurity. At the same time, States
invest very little of their homeland security grant funds into
improving that cybersecurity capability. Why do you think that
is?
Mr. Ghilarducci. Well, I think that part of it is because
really the emphasis from DHS to States, to the State
administrative agents or to the HSAs that are doing the
investment justifications, are not necessarily clear.
The whole concern about cyber, as has been stated here,
really isn't fully yet understood. This is an evolving threat.
It is getting more complex. It is getting worse as the days go
on. I think that we, as DHS and the States, really we need to
catch up with the fact that this threat is not going away.
So once the DHS--and of course Congress--allocate funding
specifically targeted towards the cyber threat, I think that
then you will start to see States start to implement more of
that capability.
Now, I would say that just this year, I, as the SSA, went
into our investment justification and broadened the investment
justification to include cybersecurity and countering violent
extremism to be able to push down to local grant recipients at
other State agencies and local governments so that they could
utilize what funds they do have and repurpose those funds. But,
as you know, funds are pretty limited as they are, and it is
hard to sort-of move one thing to start working on the other.
So it is a constant prioritization and reprioritization issue.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I will yield back.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Ratcliffe, for questions.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Earlier, I guess the end of last year, we passed an
information-sharing bill in this Congress aimed at improving
our ability to timely share cyber threat indicators.
I want to start with you, General Spano. How would you
characterize the quality of the information flow that the MS-
ISAC has with the NCCIC?
Mr. Spano. I would say that the quality, I believe, as
representative and testified by FBI and other DHS of
information that we provided from monitoring State networks, is
very high quality, and it is fused. We have representatives
from the MS-ISAC that sit on the NCCIC floor as liaison, so
they are very integrated into that mission.
Mr. Ratcliffe. So is that how you give feedback in terms of
what information you are getting that is valuable?
Mr. Spano. The feedback of what we provide comes from our
analysis within the MS-ISAC from our monitoring mission. So,
for instance, 2015, we analyzed 3 trillion records and provided
56,000 alerts, sifting through all of those that were
actionable for the States, but we also fed into the NCCIC for
further analysis and fusing with other sources of intelligence.
We have supported FBI investigations with some of our
analysis of what we have seen at the State level. So the
conduit and the function and the command and control has been
working extremely well based upon the maturity of the ISAC
mission and its capabilities year over year.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. So I am pleased to hear that the
sharing is going extremely well.
Can you offer, would you offer anything to improve the
efficiency or effectiveness?
Mr. Spano. Again, what we provide is, I think, moving up in
its intelligence. The processes are lean and getting better as
we continue to strengthen that relationship. The challenges, I
think, are more downward into the State levels, as I talked
about with respect to some of the resources.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Yes. You talked about the workforce being a
challenge.
Mr. Spano. Right.
Mr. Ratcliffe. I think you characterized it as high-demand,
low-density.
So what can DHS do to create a workforce that is well-
trained and fully-equipped to respond to cyber threats?
Mr. Spano. I don't know that it is any one responsibility
or one responsibility of any single agency. I believe it is a
collaborative effort at all levels--public, private,
facilitated, encouraged by DHS. They have a number of programs
that the ISAC implements to try to encourage younger students.
We do a poster contest, and the CIS offers some summer camps to
try to encourage it. There is a scholarship for service under
the National Science Foundation, which is really important. We
believe that looking at that and examining whether we can
continue to do that.
It is not any silver bullet that is going to solve this
problem. It is a generational problem where if the pipeline at
the K through 12 is not satisfying the growing demand, you are
sort-of always chasing. Looking at it from a comprehensive
perspective of how to ignite that STEM capability at all levels
and then balancing the differences between the public and
private partnerships, I think will help create a stop-gap with
programs that are specific to workforce exercises, joint
exercises, to raise awareness.
Mr. Ratcliffe. All right. Thank you.
Let me turn to you, Mr. Raymond. Last month I held a field
hearing in my district where I got perspectives from fire
chiefs and local law enforcement officials on how they are
responding to cyber incidents. I want your perspective from the
State, the NASCIO perspective.
What is the greatest limitation out there right now for
States in terms of defending their cyber networks? I guess part
2 of that is, are there shared best practices that NASCIO is
using to coordinate between State CIOs and local first
responders and law enforcement?
Mr. Raymond. Thank you for that question.
I would say that the biggest challenge is the velocity of
the threat and the changing threat. So continued improvement on
providing information and actionable information as efficiently
as it can be provided almost to machine-to-machine level to
allow us to react will continue to allow the States to be able
to defend as best we can. It does help with the workforce issue
in many ways where we can have our machines responding on our
behalf.
In terms of working out with the field, NASCIO has put out
over 31 different publications that are responsible or
intending to work with both the education aspects, so making
sure that our leaders understand how important cyber, is all
the way to practitioners. We have over a 100-page cyber guide
and a set of information for State information security
officers on best practices that we have assembled across the
States to help them as they are new to these rules. We do have
turnover, that they can pick it up quickly and understand the
very diverse environment that we have across all States.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thanks very much.
I appreciate you all being here and your testimony.
My time has expired, so I will yield back.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island,
Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank our panel here today. Your testimony was
excellent, and I appreciate your work that you are doing in
this field.
Let me start, if I could, with Mr. Raymond and Mr. Galvin.
Let's say that the State of Connecticut or the Port Authority
has experienced what you, Mr. Raymond, in your testimony term a
cyber disruption event. Whom do you call first?
Mr. Raymond. For Connecticut, we actually have a cyber
working group. So the homeland security adviser, Deputy
Commissioner Bill Shea, and I work closely with this. Our first
call is to the fusion center and then to MS-ISAC in terms of
coordinating our events. We pull together a cyber response team
that includes both homeland security and my office in terms of
dealing with the response.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
Mr. Galvin. For our organization, we have a cybersecurity
operations center that would likely be the initial point of
contact or the discovery point for a potential incident. We
would assess as much as possible the depth of the breach before
reaching out. But we would certainly contact MS-ISAC. Usually
they find out the same time we do. If we identify that the
breach involves personally identifiable information or
something of that sort, we would initiate a call to the FBI.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Thank you.
As a follow-up, Colonel Cooney and Mr. Ghilarducci, as
individuals with emergency management roles, whom do you
recommend New Yorkers or Californians call in the event of a
disruption event?
Mr. Cooney. For us it depends on the nature, but, of
course, I would say the NCCIC, the fusion center being
collocated with the MS-ISAC, and then we would take it from
there depending on the nature of it.
Mr. Ghilarducci. As well, it depends on the nature. With
this new integration center we built, this will be the central
point where all information and reporting will flow into. If
there is a criminal predicate associated with the intrusion,
our State police that has a cyber crime investigation unit will
sort-of take the lead and be supported by the rest of the
entities that have come together in a collaborative way.
But that is the process. Because the center also includes
connections with DHS and FBI, they are right there with us, and
then we can move on as rapidly as possible.
Mr. Langevin. Do you all feel comfortable with knowing who
in particular who to call at the Federal level and who would
respond to you in the event of a cyber disruption event? I have
found that that is something that is unclear to many, whether
it is big businesses or even Government agencies. Are you all
clear on that, and who would you call?
Mr. Ghilarducci. Well, this is a question, I mean, we
typically would turn to the FBI, DHS as information sharing.
But the FBI would be working with us on the actual analysis of
the intrusion. But the Secret Service also plays a role in it.
So there is a little bit of a conflict there. But, typically,
our next step is to go to the FBI.
Mr. Langevin. Okay.
Mr. Galvin. I think your point is well taken, though, that
in the private sector I think there is less awareness of who to
call. You have got a panel of people who work in Government and
who spend time putting together cybersecurity program, so we
more than anybody are going to know the right individuals to
call.
But I think you are correct that depending on the nature of
the entity, particularly a privately-held organization, I am
not sure they would know who to reach out to.
Mr. Langevin. I think that is why we have to work at the
Federal level here to help get the word out more. One of the
first places to go, in addition to FBI, would also be the NCCIC
or US-CERT to request Federal assistance.
But, Mr. Raymond, if I could, in your testimony you mention
that NASCIO recommends that the States have a cyber disruption
response plan. I know you highlighted New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, and my home State of Rhode Island. I know what
we have been doing in Rhode Island, that our cyber disruption
team that we have created has visited all the stakeholders at
the table, emergency management people, State police. We have
our colleges and universities, as well as the private sector at
the table. It has really proven to be very effective at
bringing the stakeholders to the table to plan for a response
to a cyber disruption event.
Is there a way for the Federal Government that we can
encourage this type of approach?
Mr. Raymond. I believe as it related to education and
continuing to hold exercises, continuing to participate through
homeland security and having the States describe their
disruption plans, I think all of those encouragement points are
very helpful in organizing States' response to incidents like
that.
Participation. NGA is holding a cyber policy academy for
several States. Connecticut is one of those participating. That
helps brings best practices across the States. I know that DHS
is a good partner in that exercise as well.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you all.
I yield back.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognize the Vice Chairman of the
Subcommittee on Emergency Preparedness, Response, and
Communications, the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, panel, for being here and the professional
testimony. Very detailed, very important to us.
Mr. Raymond, I have a question here. Two-part question, so
I may break it up. How can the roles of information-sharing
organizations such as MS-ISAC and ISAC be more strongly defined
and effectively implemented?
Mr. Raymond. I know that we actively work with MS-ISAC, and
we find that it is fairly defined. I am not sure I understand
how more strongly----
Mr. Walker. Let me add a little more description. Should
their responsibilities be strengthened to increase information-
sharing efficiency? Is that fair?
Mr. Raymond. Yes. I believe the velocity of information
sharing specifically across all players can be improved.
Mr. Walker. Okay.
General Spano, what efforts does the MS-ISAC take to gauge
customer satisfaction with the States that they are engaging
with?
Mr. Spano. Sure. So we have an executive committee that is
comprised of several of the representatives from the CISO's
office and the security professionals. We have monthly calls
with all the members. We have over a thousand members, although
the 56 are the ones that we actively are pursuing monitoring
with. We have an annual conference that they attend. We provide
newsletters, efforts, the NCSR we manage on behalf of DHS to
get their self-assessments to work. So it is a very strong and
growing collaborative environment.
Mr. Walker. In your testimony, I believe you described the
value add of a State being a member of the MS-ISAC?
Mr. Spano. Correct.
Mr. Walker. What additional services or capabilities do you
see the MS-ISAC being able to provide taking up the next 5 to
10 years?
Mr. Spano. The next 5 to 10 years, I believe that as we
help solidify the basic hygiene of the security framework, such
as the controls, as the foundations at the State level, and
begin to help them evolve from the basics of just trying to
keep their systems patched and configured correctly, I think
the whole state or posture of cybersecurity will eventually
begin to increase at a much more rapid pace. That is one
specific area.
As technology evolves to the Internet of Things and into
the cloud environment, there may be a different dimension to
cybersecurity that has not yet fully matured or evolved or is
understood.
Mr. Walker. Sure.
Mr. Spano. So we have started to move out by offering those
hardened images within Amazon Web Services, and we are talking
to the other cloud providers like Microsoft to be able to
provide the same type of hardened machine images in their cloud
so that as the States begin to move toward cloud they can do it
much more securely than they are now, because there are
tremendous advantages and cost savings that could help fuel
resources to help in the cybersecurity area.
Mr. Walker. My next question was, what kind of steps do you
see there to effectively get us there? But I think you just
touched on some of that.
Let me take, if I could, please, going back to Mr. Raymond,
what do you currently see as the greatest limitation of the
States' ability to defend just against the general cyber
attacks? Can you speak to that for a second, talk about the
problems there?
Mr. Raymond. Different States are organized very
differently. We a critical infrastructure provider from State
data centers to State networks. I think if we look at sort-of
the complexity of the business that we serve, from schools,
libraries, in some instances hospitals, so the diversity of the
population that we serve and that sort of discreet nature of
how funding comes in, doesn't allow us to leverage things as
broadly as we would like. So I would say that that is one of
the primary challenges.
Mr. Walker. Can I open that up to anybody else on the
panel? I have got 57 seconds left. Anybody else want to touch
on the States, sort-of the obstacles there?
Mr. Spano. I think one of the bigger challenges that they
have that makes implementing cybersecurity tougher is a more
strategic problem in how software and applications are
developed. So many of the software products are coming out of
the box with inherent vulnerabilities, and I think they are
poorly crafted and require a lot of lift to continue to sustain
it.
That is not going to be solved in any sweeping legislation,
but it has to be addressed, because the competitive nature of
providing software and services and applications to get the
speed and agility that you need to compete means you are
getting beta versions and you are a little bit sloppier in the
production. The applications that you are building, even
internally, to do specific things are oftentimes poorly crafted
and have security vulnerabilities that tax your cyber
professionals.
Mr. Walker. My time has expired.
Mr. Ghilarducci, you looked like you were in agreement
there. Did you need to add anything to that?
Mr. Ghilarducci. I would just say that cyber, what I call
low-hanging fruit, just cyber hygiene training across the board
can go a long way in making sure that State employees and State
networks are as robust against attacks. That is one of the
things that there is really not a lot of consistent and
standardized training that is really made available, and I
think that more of that would help a great deal.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from New Jersey,
Mrs. Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning, gentlemen. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. Galvin, frequently the first person to decide what to
do in response to a cyber incident is not the CEO or even
senior leadership, it is the operational personnel level and
often physical security professionals who are vastly more
comfortable protecting against physical threats than threats to
a network.
My question is: What are the most important relationships
emergency responders should maintain with private-sector
employees at all organizational levels?
Mr. Galvin. It is a very good question, Congresswoman.
Thank you for it.
I think your observation is entirely accurate, that the
person who is sitting at the facility overseeing operations is
the person who is going to see the symptoms or the effects of a
cyber attack first and foremost. I think there are several
important relationships. One, within any organization, there
has to be training to make sure that the person who is
operating the facility is aware of what they should do in order
to pick up the phone and contact, in our case our help desk or
our CSOC, cyber security operations center.
Then from there it goes from a technical professional who
is going to field the call and take a look at the nature of the
threat and make a determination as to whether this is an
opportunistic thing that is just a latent incident that has
been there active for a while versus something that is
emergent. Then that person escalates it internally in our
organization, and I would suspect that a lot of organizations
are similar. There is a kind of a tiered operation that goes
on. It goes to a second- or a third-level person in order to
investigate and follow up further on.
So I think the relationships are first and foremost between
the operations personnel and the technical personnel, and then
second is the escalation in the partnerships that happen within
an organization as well as awareness as to where to escalate it
further if the threat cannot be contained.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. This is a question I would
like to start with you, Mr. Galvin, and then kind-of move on
down as quickly as we possibly can. This has to do with sort-of
just imagine a cyber Katrina.
So our question is, I mean, if we fail to develop,
implement, and train on doctrine to respond to a cyber event
with physical or collateral consequences because it is
something we have not seen before, then we will be inventing
the wheel as we try to drive the car when we have these
attacks. So my question is: From your perspective, what is the
most important action the Federal Government can take to ensure
that the communities can effectively respond to a cyber event
of this nature?
Mr. Galvin. Again, I think it relates to the readiness and
the preparedness. We haven't really talked about this yet, but
one of the things that keeps me awake at night, and I am sure
it keeps a lot of CIOs awake, is industrial control systems or
operational technology.
So we have talked a little bit about IT systems and the
fact that there is patching required. We are used to that as
technology professionals--oh, there is a fix that came out. You
know, Microsoft has patch Tuesday, and it has turned into cyber
threat Wednesday, right? Because they release the
vulnerability, people know about it, and they try to leverage
it.
But there is no analog to the operational technology world,
the things that control lighting systems or fire alarm systems
or ventilation systems or things of that nature, and those pose
a real threat for us.
I am sorry. I am getting lost in your question. But----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. What do you see the Federal
Government----
Mr. Galvin. Yeah. So, again, I think it has to do with the
preparedness, making sure that the plans are in place to
respond and that there is coordination between organizations,
not just within a single organization.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Is there anyone else who would like to respond to this
question?
Mr. Raymond.
Mr. Raymond. Thank you.
I think continuing to sponsor and participate in exercises
that allow the States to demonstrate their preparedness as
Internet of Things continues to grow, unmanned vehicle systems,
all of that will continue to get more complex. So being an
important sponsor to allow us to play and work through these
exercises in advance and think through them helps us really
prepare for real events when they do occur.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. Thank you.
One quick question, since we can't go down there. On a
scale of 1 to 10 being the very best, how well are we doing in
incorporating risk into emergency response plans and developing
contingency operations?
I should just probably give that to you, Mr. Ghilarducci.
Did I slay that name?
Mr. Ghilarducci. You did great. Thanks.
Well, I appreciate the question, Congresswoman. We don't
need to reinvent the wheel with regards to all-hazard planning.
I mean, we have a national construct, a National Incident
Management System, and having those capabilities in place to
respond to the consequences, the cascading consequences of a
cyber attack, should be reinforced and exercised and built
upon.
The delta or the challenge is that the traditional systems
that we depend upon for communications and situational
awareness may be actually impacted by a cyber attack. So we
need to make sure we have continuity of operations redundancies
put in place. This was an area where the Federal Government can
support States. You want to leverage that public-private
capability so that you are utilizing the most information you
can get to be able to make the right decisions.
So in your training and in your focus you need to also plan
for--you know, don't just always plan for the technology is
going to be operational. Start to do exercises and plans where
you lose all that. How are you going to continue to
communicate? How are you going to continue to get resources and
get situational awareness in a timely way to make sure you
protect lives and property?
So those are some of the things. But it has to start with
the construct of that all-hazards environment and our NIMS
construct.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I yield back my time, even though I am over it.
Mr. Donovan. The gentlewoman yields back the time that she
doesn't have.
We have a few more moments, and our panel travelled so far,
I would just like to offer a second round of quick questions
for my colleagues.
I just would like to start. We spoke about your challenges,
and each of you told us about the challenge of lack of
resources, competing, the competition for talent with industry,
the inability to share information because of its
classifications.
Would each of you just share with us what you think your
biggest achievement is or your biggest success, without
divulging trade secrets to our enemies, that maybe some of your
colleagues would be able to piggyback on and use in their
various environments?
Mr. Ghilarducci. I will start. I guess two areas. Again, it
continues to evolve for us, and we are working hard at it. But
that is the establishment of a public-private nongovernmental
academic cybersecurity task force to be able to share
information and best practices and recommendations and ideas to
help us as a State drive those ideas forward, and the
establishment of this integrated cybersecurity fusion center,
if you would, that collocates with our primary fusion center
and our critical infrastructure protection team, they can come
together and all be looking at similar threat streams together
with an effort to be able to mitigate prior to the event
actually having the greatest impact.
So I think those are two areas. Then spinoffs from those is
working with K through 12 and community colleges. We have
actually implemented a cyber warrior program in California that
has just taken off--I hate to use the word like wildfire,
because we have a lot of those--but has really taken off in
California. The cyber warrior program for high school students
and community college students has really been well-received,
and really we are trying to make that cyber warrior work for
us.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
Lieutenant Colonel.
Mr. Cooney. I think it would be the establishment of our
cyber analysis unit at our fusion center. I think we were
fortunate to find the right people and the right mix between
technical capability and the ability to do intelligence
analysis. It has worked well for us in an area that, as I
mentioned in my testimony, that when it comes to cyber
intrusion and the intel up front in the prevention realm, this
is still relatively new for us. We got into it in about 2014
and so far we have made some good progress. So I would say if
other States could emulate that, then they may find that
beneficial.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
General.
Mr. Spano. Yeah, I would say that the success of the ISAC
in terms of showing how public and private can come together to
address an issue of such National importance. Within the ISAC,
I probably would highlight our CERT function, which is probably
one of the best, certainly, in the Nation. I would like to say
that it is probably world-recognized in terms of its ability to
conduct forensics and analysis for a plethora of customers,
predominantly, of course, focused at the SLTT.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you. Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Raymond.
Mr. Raymond. Thank you. One of the things that I think we
are really proud of in Connecticut is that we have been sort-of
baking telecommunications and networking into our incident
response teams. So we have had several weather events over the
past few years and through that it has become really critical
that citizens rely on communication technology much more so
than they ever had before.
So we do have a response team associated with restoring
commercial networks and communication structures. Having those
relationships at the ready has allowed us to respond very
quickly when Superstorm Sandy came and to be able to restore
communications as much as possible.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Galvin.
Mr. Galvin. Thank you. At the Port Authority, the
technology, the policies, the procedures, and the personnel
that we have put in place, we have been able to detect and
automatically block 90 percent of the critical incidences that
we can see on our network, and we have been able to reduce our
critical incident response time by two-thirds in the past year.
So we are proud of these things, but there is a lot of work
that remains to protect our critical technology assets. As many
people on the panel have already talked about and I won't
repeat, the threat continues to evolve and the attack surface
continues to expand with mobile devices and the emerging
Internet of Things. So we are confident, but we are continuing
to work diligently.
Mr. Donovan. Thank you, sir.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Galvin, in your testimony you note that the Port
Authority has undertaken an effort to better understand cyber
vulnerabilities and address them. What is the biggest challenge
in carrying out this task? What has the Port Authority learned
in the process that might help other ports or critical
infrastructure owners conduct a similar assessment?
Mr. Galvin. Thank you very much.
So I think the size of the task is enormous. We have
approximately 690 applications to assess. I think the lesson
that I would give to other organizations is to start now. It
doesn't decrease in effort or size as time goes on, because
there are new techniques, new technologies that every day get
introduced into the organization whether or not you are aware
of them. They do require an assessment.
So it is a huge effort, and the limiting factor, I think,
is the size of the staff and the ability of our organization to
absorb what we learn.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Ghilarducci, you have observed that risk assessments
used by some States do not adequately address the top cyber
threats or systematic interdependencies. How can we help States
better assess their cyber vulnerabilities? Should FEMA be
improving the bureau guidance, or should the Federal Government
be providing separate guidance on how to conduct cyber
assessments more thoroughly?
Mr. Ghilarducci. Well, the guidance, I mean, really, the
standards for assessments that we are using really are the NIST
standards. I think that we would all agree that a little bit
more meat could be put on the bones around doing assessments
that speak a little bit more to the various aspects of the
emergency management or public safety spectrum.
I know we are looking at networks, but when you look at the
networks' vulnerabilities, we also need to think about in the
long term what would be the consequences should we lose certain
networks and sort-of play that out in a little longer bit way.
So FEMA would be a good entity to be able to provide some
additional guidance there.
The other thing is DHS, through their protective service
analysts that work with our critical infrastructure protection
folks, they do provide some additional support, and we
appreciate that. But we probably need to get some area
associated with the cyber networks, particularly when looking
at private sector, given that most of the infrastructure is
owned by the private sector.
We need to continue to work to link those together with
regards to the assessment process, because sometimes
information sharing is a little bit challenging, because of
proprietary and competitive kind of issues, but we need to find
a place that we continue to share information to strengthen our
capability as much as possible.
Mr. Payne. You also talked about States playing catch-up in
developing a whole-of-the-government approach to cybersecurity
and noted that even in California only 13 organizations have
participated in the cyber hygiene partnership.
Why do you think more agencies within the States are not
participating? What can the Federal Government do to encourage
improved buy-in for cybersecurity efforts among State and local
agencies or even in the private sector?
Mr. Ghilarducci. Well, I think maybe Mr. Raymond and others
may be a little bit more to talk about the challenges in State
government. I know for us it has been, I think, one, framing
and understanding of the threat. It means different things to
different people. We need to be more outgoing, external, like
we do with a lot of other preparedness programs.
This is where the Federal Government, through cyber hygiene
initiatives and other kind of training opportunities to build
that knowledge base as to what it means to sit at a device or
get onto the internet and what kind of challenges you could be
faced with with regards to threats. So training and education
is one thing.
The second piece is, I think because there is a lack of
knowledge, particularly at the Executive level in making
decisions on funding allocations for doing assessments, quite a
few times it is, you know, because you don't understand it, it
is not made as a priority as it should be.
Let's face it, we as a collective country, and it is just
across the board, are behind the power curve with regard to
this threat. We all are working very hard collectively, but we
do need to do more to step this up. You can't just say it is a
priority, we need to put resources behind it to really and
truly make it a priority. Just like we have done with other
kinds of threats, whether it is natural or human-caused
threats, we throw a lot of resources at that to make sure that
we are in front of it and are effectively all knowledgeable
about it.
Mr. Payne. Okay.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I just want to go back to something we had talked about in
terms of knowing who to call.
Mr. Ghilarducci, maybe I have a question for you. I just
wanted to follow up with a point that Mr. Galvin had made about
the private sector knowing who to call.
So just so I understand, so if PG&E has a cyber incident,
do you recommend that they contact you or DOE or DHS first? Are
you concerned about losing visibility if critical
infrastructure providers go Federal first?
Mr. Ghilarducci. We have the California Utilities Emergency
Association, it is an entity that is funded and supported by
all of the major utilities in California, embedding into your
cyber integration center. It gives them that one sort of belly
button, so to speak, to be able to make the call and open all
of the contacts in a one-call sort-of format.
It is challenging, I think, for them now because they do
have a lot of people that they need to be reporting to.
Inadvertently, what happens is that someone, some entity that
needs to know what is going on falls through those cracks.
The other thing is that, historically, there hasn't been a
lot of desire, I guess, so to speak, to let too many people
know what is going on because of demonstrating vulnerabilities
that an organization may have.
So by utilizing authorities and procedures that are being
put in place through this integrated approach, it gives the
utilities and the privates, the health industry similar kind of
thing, a single belly button to make the call. We are all
looking at it at the same time, and all of the required
notifications can be made at one point.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Thank you.
Yeah, I think that the point about being reluctant to
share, by the way, we have got to work at getting over that,
because, obviously, if one is vulnerable, everybody is
vulnerable, and that is what, hopefully, information sharing
will help to mitigate.
You know, we have been talking a lot about assessments this
morning, but equally important is not only knowing the
vulnerabilities that may exist in your assets, in your systems,
but also knowing the value of the data that you are holding.
So for Mr. Spano, Mr. Raymond, in Rhode Island, where I am
from, our Governor, Governor Raimondo, set up a cybersecurity
commission to examine the State cyber posture. One of the
biggest initial findings had to do with managers not
understanding the value of the data or systems and their
vulnerability to attack.
Incidentally, this is the same problem that the Federal
Government faced with the OPM attack, knowing that their
systems were vulnerable, but also not understanding the value
really of the data that they were responsible for protecting.
In your experience, how well do State agencies, particular
those that aren't focused on IT, understand their exposure and
also the value of their data?
Mr. Spano. The value question is hard to quantify other
than to say that the question of the scope and standards of
protection has been one that has been discussed and debated
since sort-of the evolution of the internet into the challenges
that we are facing today: What do I protect and how much
protection is enough?
We have got the full classification of systems. So I think
there is a clear understanding of Secret, Top Secret. It is
within that Unclassified regime of understanding personal
identifiable information, HIPAA information. I think, by and
large, there is a rudimentary understanding at sort-of the
basic masses of employees that deal in those environments and
with that information.
There are isolated and pockets of excellence where managers
are being trained in how to deal with HIPAA and identify PII,
but by and large it is a challenge with educating your existing
workforces against the basic cyber threats and the basic
protections that they can do, as well as sort-of the
identification of what that value is of information.
Mr. Langevin. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Raymond.
Mr. Raymond. I think that the States' response--it has been
my experience that there are sort-of 2 buckets, right? One is
for those who have regulated data, whether it is HIPAA,
protected medical information, FERPA data, IRS, those
organizations are very much aware of the value of the
information that they have.
I think for those that have nonregulated data but that may
be important to protect, I think that the reliability of--or
the awareness of what they have and the importance to protect
it may be a little bit less.
I know in Connecticut we have a data classification policy
that makes you look at what data you have and how valuable it
is in terms of treating it for data sharing or at least
protecting, and I think having that kind of approach for all
States can really raise that visibility level that you
describe.
Mr. Langevin. Very good.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Donovan. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognize the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Chair for his courtesies.
Let me acknowledge the Chair and Ranking Member sitting,
wearing many hats, Mr. Payne, to the full committee Chair and
the full committee Ranking Member. We have overlapping
committees, and I just came out of the Judiciary Committee, so
I thank you for your courtesies.
This is a very important hearing, which is one of the
reasons I did the mad dash, because I chaired this committee
when it was the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee,
which included all of the Nation's technological networks. I
remember visiting water and sewer plants and seeing the
openness and the expanse and wondering what potential terrorist
act or manipulation of the technology dealing with it. I just
came back from Silicon Valley, and they are pleading for
individuals who can code or to write code.
So I want to offer to you some thoughts. Obviously, you
have not looked at it, but I have a bill, H.R. 53,
Cybersecurity Education and Federal Workforce Enhancement,
which is to target in and focus in on building up the workforce
for the Federal Government, dealing with technology. Also H.R.
60--one is H.R. 53 dealing with education--H.R. 60, the
National Guard Act to develop a civilian force that can be
activated in the event of a major cyber attack or event.
Now, if we were domestic, we know that we have NORTHCOM
that would rise up and be part of dealing with any attack to
the United States in a very massive way. I pushed NORTHCOM to
be engaged on State and local. But this is technology, this is
a cyber attack.
So if you can answer the question, the importance of
building the workforce, and as well the importance of having
well-experienced individuals for a massive attack that deals
with infrastructure, such as water and sewer, such as our
electrical grid, and the one that I live with every day, the
petrochemical industry, which is highly automated at each stage
of the process through energy extraction, transportation,
processing, and distribution. As you well know, that is an arm
of the movement of the economy in this Nation.
So if you could answer those, I would appreciate it. I will
listen to you. Thank you. Is there someone who wants to take--
thank you.
Mr. Raymond. I think education and workforce are incredibly
important for us being able to respond. I would just add one
comment. Specifically around the Guard and Guard response, I
think that as it relates to us being able to have and retain
workforce, because many of these folks are highly trained
individuals and they can gain higher salaries in the private
sector, having that capability of applying that in the event it
happens at a State level is important.
We do work very closely. We have a monthly cyber meeting
where members of the Guard participate in that for awareness
capabilities. So it is one sort of creative way for the States
to be able to utilize that capability and bring those skills to
bear.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Galvin. I have a comment as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Mr. Galvin. I think there are several different skills that
are involved in doing incident response in cybersecurity. They
not all of them require coding skills. I think the ability to
think creatively, to think on your feet, to stay calm under
pressure, I think those are all important skills that don't
necessarily require coders.
On the other side, after an incident is detected and you
are trying to figure out how to protect yourself in the future
from similar attacks, because the nature of cybersecurity
events is you have something that is novel and that is unique,
and then you have multiple copies of it replicated with slight
variations. So if you can protect yourself against one, you can
kind of replicate the protection going forward. That is where
you need a coder, a skill, someone who can take apart the
threat or at least work with someone who can take it apart,
because these are getting increasingly more complex as time
goes on.
I think the other thing that you brought up was having a
well of individuals to respond in the event of an attack on the
grid or water systems or other such critical infrastructure is
extremely important. Frankly, I think you have to talk to the
operations people who would oversee the facilities to talk
about what kind of staff those people are. If it is an attack
on the grid, they are not IT people, because we don't function
when there is no electricity.
So the question is really back to your response plan, and
back in the day when a lot of us did initial kind of major
systems implementations, there was always the plan, like, what
happens if we are not going to go live and we have to go back
to the old system? That was an old product that was dusted off.
So we have to go back and start looking at having those
kinds of plans in place. Like, if the payroll system goes down,
you go back to writing checks and doing things like that. So we
need to start thinking about that in the face of these kinds of
very major attacks on electrical infrastructure, for example.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me pursue, if I could--thank you for
that. I think it is important to emphasize calmness,
creativity, and thinking on your feet. But this whole concept
of code, what I gleaned from Silicon Valley, they are looking
at it from one perspective, we don't have enough individuals
Nation-wide. Maybe you would comment. I want to be able to see
a far reach to be able to have those that can take apart a
threat, which I believe that we are susceptible to.
So anyone want to comment on building that code, coding and
coders, body of infrastructure in the human resource?
Mr. Spano. Yeah, we talked about that a little bit earlier
in terms of sort-of the urgency or the burning platform of it
is a challenge to look at this problem as we have and other
challenges where capacity could solve it. The challenges we
face in cyber are challenges of complexity. Capacity can't
solve a complexity issue, so we have to think about it in a
much different way.
The workforce is not a simple fix of just going out and
trying to figure out how you are going to compete with the
availability. It is how do you produce a pipeline where there
is zero unemployment?
That starts back from K through 12 and STEM and getting
much more interest in those areas at a much younger age,
encouraging colleges and universities to develop more
curriculum and more degrees. It is tied to loan forgiveness and
scholarship for service beyond that to encourage them to move
into those areas.
So it has to be comprehensive and looked at across a
broader spectrum of time.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ghilarducci. Thanks for the question. I think it is a
good one. I agree with everything that has been said.
I think it is important that we sort-of understand kind-of
talking about pre-event and post-event. Really the pre-event is
where you need that workforce multiplier, those folks that are
the coders, the folks that are going to interdict and mitigate
prior to the event actually taking place.
The consequences of power outages or a dam release or
something where there is infrastructure impact, our systems
that are in place currently for consequence management need to
be leveraged, and those are the ones that are going to be
responding to the consequences. Unless there is an on-going
series of cyber attacks, the attack itself may be done once and
then you have got now a resulting series of consequences that
you have to deal with.
The key thing, I think, is really in the pre-event phase,
is trying to have that workforce. You mentioned the National
Guard. I think the National Guard across the States is a model,
a good model, that could be utilized for building real-time
capabilities, where in the case of California there are a lot
of people that work in Silicon Valley, actually, or in the IT
industry, that are also guards men and women, and they bring
them in on State Active Duty and be able work on the cyber
topic. But they give you a workforce multiplier that you can
continue to build upon.
But that is not exclusive, mutually exclusive, to the need,
as the general was saying, in building out workforce from the
high school level moving forward.
So I think that it is important that we think about it from
the standpoint of, what do we have to prevent, interdict, and
mitigate to minimize the impact? Then our consequence managers,
the people who are going to respond, we need to train them with
an understanding that, unlike a wildfire or earthquake, you may
be operating in an environment with no IT, no situational
awareness through the computer network, and you may have to go
back to pen and paper to be able to get the job done. Those are
the things that I think are important to understand.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I want to thank the Chairman for his
indulgence. If I can just, as I close, I would cite the
petrochemical industry as one that argues for all that you
said.
Anybody just want to comment on that?
Just because these industries are dealing not only with
technology, but they are dealing with chemicals, it is just a
combination that you need this holistic viewpoint.
Mr. Spano. I think that is shared across finance, health
care, electricity, and other critical infrastructures equally
as well. Some are at varying levels of maturity in their
thought, strategy, and execution.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, let me say that I could listen to
the experts that are here quite more extensively, but let me
say that I am hoping to move these bills and also reviewing
something called COIN technology--you may not have heard of
it--or may have heard of it--that is supposed to be dealing
with the bigger picture that you all are looking at.
Being on this committee for so long, I will just say that
when we started, we knew that 80 percent of the infrastructure,
which includes all that you are speaking about, was in the
private sector. It may have gone up now, maybe 85 percent. So
we know what our work is, and we know what our work is going
forward, and this is a very important hearing for collaboration
between Government and the private sector.
I thank you to the Chairman and Ranking Member, and I yield
back.
Mr. Donovan. The gentlewoman yields back.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The Members of the subcommittees
may have some additional questions for the witnesses. We will
ask you to respond to these in writing. Pursuant to the
Committee Rule VII(E), the hearing record will be held open for
10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
