- A REVIEW OF ACCESS CONTROL MEASURES AT OUR NATION’S AIRPORTS

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

.               A REVIEW OF ACCESS CONTROL MEASURES AT
OUR NATION'S AIRPORTS

=======================================================================

HEARINGS

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 3, 2015 and APRIL 30, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-105 PDF             WASHINGTON : 2015

________________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Patrick Meehan, Pennsylvania*        Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi**     Filemon Vela, Texas
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Curt Clawson, Florida                Norma J. Torres, California
John Katko, New York
Will Hurd, Texas
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

John Katko, New York, Chairman
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia    William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Amanda Parikh, Subcommittee Staff Director
Dennis Terry, Subcommittee Clerk
Vacancy, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

* Honorable Patrick Meehan of Pennsylvania was elected to the
committee effective April 14, 2015.

** Honorable Steven M. Palazzo of Mississippi resigned from the
committee effective March 24, 2015.
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 2015

STATEMENTS

The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Kathleen M. Rice, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     8

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Mark Hatfield, Acting Deputy Administrator, Transportation
Security Administration, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. G. Doug Perdue, Deputy Assistant Director, Counterterrorism
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, U.S. Department of
Justice:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    17

Panel II

Mr. Miguel Southwell, General Manager, Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta
International Airport:
Oral Statement.................................................    43
Prepared Statement.............................................    45
Ms. Sharon L. Pinkerton, Senior Vice President, Legislative and
Regulatory Policy, Airlines for America:
Oral Statement.................................................    46
Prepared Statement.............................................    48

FOR THE RECORD

The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security:
Statement of Kevin M. Burke, President and CEO, Airports
Council International--North America.........................    39
Letter From the American Association of Airport Executives.....    42
The Honorable Kathleen M. Rice, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation Security:
Letter From L.P. Robert Williams, AFGE Local 554 TSA Georgia...    38

THURSDAY, APRIL 30, 2015

STATEMENTS

The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    59
Prepared Statement.............................................    60
The Honorable Kathleen M. Rice, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    67
Prepared Statement.............................................    68
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................    61

WITNESSES
Panel I

Mr. Melvin J. Carraway, Acting Administrator, Transportation
Security Administration, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    63
Prepared Statement.............................................    64

Panel II

Ms. Jeanne M. Olivier, A.A.E., Assistant Director, Aviation
Security and Technology, Security Operations and Programs
Department, The Port Authority of New York & New Jersey,
Testifying on Behalf of the American Association of Airport
Executives:
Oral Statement.................................................    79
Prepared Statement.............................................    81
Mr. Steven J. Grossman, Chief Executive Officer/Executive
Director, Jacksonville International Airport, Jacksonville
Aviation Authority, Testifying on Behalf of the Airports
Council International, North America:
Oral Statement.................................................    85
Prepared Statement.............................................    87

APPENDIX

Questions From Chairman John Katko for Melvin J. Carraway........   101
Questions From Chairman John Katko for Jeanne M. Olivier.........   103

A REVIEW OF ACCESS CONTROL MEASURES AT OUR NATION'S AIRPORTS

----------

Tuesday, February 3, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Transportation Security,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:33 p.m., in
Room 311 Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Katko
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Katko, Rogers, Carter, Walker,
Ratcliffe, McCaul, Rice, Payne, and Thompson.
Also present: Representative Johnson.
Mr. Katko. The Committee on Homeland Security Subcommittee
on Transportation Security will come to order.
The subcommittee is meeting today to hear testimony on the
access control measures and employee vetting at airports around
the country.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. I would
like to welcome everyone to the subcommittee's first hearing of
the 114th Congress. I am honored to be the new Chairman of this
important panel, which is charged with oversight of the
Transportation Security Administration, commonly referred to as
TSA. We are here about ensuring the security of our vast and
vital transportation network as well.
Today's hearing on airport access control measures stems
from a series of security breaches in which loaded weapons were
brought onto commercial airplanes unbeknownst to TSA and
airport officials. These alarming incidents could have had
devastating consequences if those involved had intended to
carry out the attacks.
The purpose of today's hearing is to examine current access
control measures and employee vetting procedures and begin to
identify short-term and long-term solutions to close any
security loopholes. TSA spends billions of dollars every year
to ensure every passenger is screened before boarding a
commercial flight. That is an important responsibility.
However, we must ask ourselves: What good is all the screening
at the front door if we are not paying attention enough at the
back door? The answer is common sense.
On December 23, 2014, for example, Federal agents arrested
Eugene Harvey, a Delta baggage handler at Hartsfield-Jackson
International Airport in Atlanta and charged him with
trafficking in firearms and violating security agreements--
requirements. Excuse me. Harvey allegedly work with a former
Delta employee and used his security identification display
area badge, commonly referred to as SIDA, to smuggle firearms,
some of them loaded, onto passenger planes bound for JFK
Airport in New York City.
The FBI called this a serious security breach and vowed to
work to prevent future breaches. On January 13, Port Authority
police in New York City arrested a Federal Aviation
Administration official at LaGuardia Airport after he flew with
a loaded firearm on a Delta flight from Atlanta to LaGuardia.
The inspector, who flew inside the cockpit as part of his
duties, had bypassed TSA screening in Atlanta by using his SIDA
badge. The inspector was reassigned to other tasks, and the FAA
has suspended its program that allows safety inspectors to
bypass screening.
Finally, on January 24 of this year, the FBI arrested
another Delta employee at Atlanta airport for boarding a flight
to Paris without first being screened. He used his SIDA badge
to gain entry to the sterile area of the airport. That
investigation is on-going.
It raises concerns that all of the most recent breaches
occurred at Atlanta, one of the world's busiest and largest
airports. Having said that, though, these incidents are just
some of the latest examples of breaches at our Nation's
airports. These problems are not unique to just one airport.
Every case presents unique challenges and opportunities for
TSA, the airports, the airlines, and other partners to
strengthen their security protocols. I am confident that we can
improve background checks, training, security, and other
measures, and I look forward to discussing these ideas today
with our witnesses.
I also look forward to reviewing the recommendations of the
Aviation Security Advisory Committee, otherwise known as ASAC,
in roughly 90 days, following the ASAC's in-depth review of
access control measures. Furthermore, I am planning to hold a
follow-up hearing with my colleagues here focusing on that
review, including how the ASAC's recommendations could be
implemented at airports Nation-wide.
The reality is that the threats we face today are not the
same threats we faced 2, 3, or even 4 years after 9/11. Nearly
14 years later, terrorists have adapted to our security
protocols in ways that require us to be agile and resourceful.
We cannot afford to be set in our ways and risk missing a
glaring vulnerability. I hope this hearing is the beginning of
a meaningful dialogue on the changes that need to be made at
our Nation's airports.
[The statement of Chairman Katko follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Katko
February 3, 2015
I would like to welcome everyone to the subcommittee's first
hearing of the 114th Congress. I am honored to be the new Chairman of
this important panel, which is charged with oversight of the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and ensuring the security
of our vast and vital transportation network.
Today's hearing on airport access control measures stems from a
series of security breaches in which loaded weapons were brought onto
commercial airplanes unbeknownst to TSA and airport officials. These
alarming incidents could have had devastating consequences if those
involved had intended to carry out an attack.
The purpose of today's hearing is to examine current access control
measures and employee vetting procedures, and begin to identify short-
term and long-term solutions to close any security loopholes.
TSA spends billions of dollars every year to ensure every passenger
is screened before boarding a commercial flight. That's an important
responsibility. However, we must ask ourselves: What good is all of
this screening at the front door if we are not paying enough attention
to the back door? The answer is common sense.
On December 23, for example, Federal agents arrested Eugene Harvey,
a Delta baggage handler at Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International
Airport and charged him with trafficking in firearms and violating
security requirements. Harvey allegedly worked with a former Delta
employee and used his Security Identification Display Area (SIDA) badge
to smuggle firearms, some of them loaded, onto passenger planes bound
for JFK. The FBI called this a ``serious security breach'' and vowed to
work to prevent future breaches.
On January 13, Port Authority police arrested a Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) Aviation Safety Inspector at LaGuardia airport
after he flew with a loaded firearm on a Delta flight from Atlanta to
LaGuardia. The inspector, who flew inside the cockpit as part of his
duties, had bypassed TSA screening at Atlanta airport by using his SIDA
badge. The inspector was reassigned to other tasks and the FAA has
suspended its program that allows safety inspectors to bypass
screening.
Finally, on January 24, the FBI arrested another Delta employee at
Atlanta airport for boarding a flight to Paris without being screened.
He used his SIDA badge to gain entry to the sterile area of the
airport. The investigation is on-going.
It raises concern that all of the most recent breaches occurred at
Atlanta, one of the world's largest and busiest airports. Having said
that, these incidents are just some of the latest examples of breaches
at our Nation's airports; these problems are not unique to just one
airport. Every case presents unique challenges and opportunities for
TSA, airports, airlines, and other partners to strengthen security
protocols.
I am confident that we can improve background checks, training,
screening, and other measures, and I look forward to discussing these
ideas today with our witnesses. I also look forward to reviewing the
recommendations of the Aviation Security Advisory Committee (ASAC) in
roughly 90 days, following the ASAC's in-depth review of access control
measures. Furthermore, I am planning to hold a follow-up hearing
focusing on that review, including how the ASAC's recommendations could
be implemented at airports Nation-wide.
The reality is that the threats we face today are not the same
threats we faced 2, 3, or even 4 years after 9/11. Nearly 14 years
later, terrorists have adapted to our security protocols in ways that
require us to be agile and resourceful. We cannot afford to be set in
our ways and risk missing a glaring vulnerability. I hope this hearing
is the beginning of a meaningful dialogue on the changes that need to
be made at our Nation's airports.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the subcommittee, the
gentlewoman from New York, Ms. Rice, for an opening statement.

Mr. Katko. The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Minority
Member of the subcommittee, the gentlelady and former fellow
prosecutor like me from New York, Miss Rice, for any statement
she may have.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I ask
unanimous consent that the gentleman from Georgia,
Representative Hank Johnson, be allowed to sit and question the
witnesses at today's hearing.
Mr. Katko. Without objection, so ordered.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I want to thank you for convening this hearing. I
want to express my eagerness to work with you and with all the
Members of this subcommittee to do absolutely everything we can
to maximize the security of our aviation sector.
The Transportation Security Administration's mission is to
protect the Nation's transportation systems to ensure freedom
of movement for people and commerce. The TSA stands on the
front lines in the effort to protect the traveling public, but
we know that they do not stand there alone. Aviation security
is a truly collaborative effort.
Airports, vendors, airlines, and the TSA work as a team to
prevent terrorists and criminals from harming the traveling
public on the ground and in the air. All members of that team
should be commended, as the aviation sector is stronger and
more secure today than it has ever been. However, all members
of that team must also be equally engaged in the effort to
identify and correct any deficiencies in our aviation security.
Recent incidents have revealed such deficiencies,
vulnerabilities that exist within our airports, and must be
swiftly addressed for the sake of our National security and for
the safety of the American people.
Last December, authorities in my home State of New York
uncovered a gun smuggling operation in which a former airline
employee brought weapons and ammunition, 153 firearms,
including an AK-47 assault rifle, aboard commercial flights in
carry-on luggage over a period of several months before he was
arrested selling weapons to undercover FBI agents on multiple
occasions.
Also, in my home State just a few weeks ago, a safety
inspector from the FAA was arrested at LaGuardia Airport after
authorities discovered a firearm in his carry-on luggage. This
individual flew from Atlanta to New York with a gun in his
carry-on and was even allowed access to the cockpit, as the
Chairman stated, while the plane was in the air.
It would be easy to point fingers at particular airports or
airlines involved in these incidents, but that would overlook
the most important lesson to be learned. Major deficiencies
exist right now within our airport security systems. If these
incidents can happen at one airport, they can happen at any
airport. That is the reality we face, and we are here today to
ensure that these deficiencies will be corrected as quickly and
completely as possible.
What links these two incidents is that in both cases, the
individuals exploited their SIDA credentials, their SIDA
badges, to bypass security and bring prohibited items into
secure areas. It is going to take a collaborative,
comprehensive effort to ensure that on the front end SIDA
badges are distributed only to individuals who have been
thoroughly vetted and deemed worthy of being trusted with them
and, secondly, to ensure that no one entrusted with a SIDA
badge is exploiting it.
Again, I want to reiterate that this is and must always be
a collaborative effort. It is my intent that, through open
dialogue between all of the entities here today, we can
successfully neutralize access control incidents and eliminate
a major deficiency in our Nation's aviation security system.
I thank all of the witnesses for coming here before us
today, and I yield back the balance of my time, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rice follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Kathleen M. Rice
February 3, 2015
First, I want to thank you for convening this hearing, and I want
to express my eagerness to work with you and with all the Members of
this subcommittee to do absolutely everything we can to maximize the
security of our aviation sector.
The Transportation Security Administration's mission is to
``protect the Nation's transportation systems to ensure freedom of
movement for people and commerce.'' The TSA stands on the front lines
in the effort to protect the traveling public, but we know they don't
stand there alone.
Aviation security is a truly collaborative effort. Airports,
vendors, airlines, and the TSA work as a team to prevent terrorists and
criminals from harming the traveling public on the ground and in the
air. All members of that team should be commended, as the aviation
sector is stronger and more secure today than it has ever been.
However, all members of that team must also be equally engaged in
the effort to identify and correct any deficiencies in our aviation
security. Recent incidents have revealed such deficiencies--
vulnerabilities that exist within our airports and must be swiftly
addressed for the sake of our National security and the safety of the
American people.
Last December, authorities in my home State of New York uncovered a
gun-smuggling operation in which a former airline employee brought
weapons and ammunition--153 firearms, including an AK-47 assault
rifle--aboard commercial flights in carry-on luggage over a period of
several months, before he was arrested selling weapons to undercover
Federal Bureau of Investigation agents on multiple occasions.
Also in my home State, just a few weeks ago, a safety inspector
from the Federal Aviation Administration was arrested at LaGuardia
Airport after authorities discovered a firearm in his carry-on luggage.
This individual flew from Atlanta to New York with a gun in his carry-
on, and was even allowed access to the cockpit while the plane was in
the air.
It would be easy to point fingers at particular airports or
airlines involved in these incidents. But that would overlook the most
important lesson to be learned. Major deficiencies exist right now
within our airport security systems, and if these incidents can happen
at one airport, they can happen at any airport.
That is the reality we face, and we're here today to ensure that
these deficiencies will be corrected as quickly and completely as
possible.
What links these two incidents is that in both cases, the
individuals exploited their Secure Identification Display Area
credentials--also known as SIDA badges--to bypass security and bring
prohibited items into secure areas.
It will take a collaborative, comprehensive effort to ensure that,
on the front end, SIDA badges are distributed only to individuals who
have been thoroughly vetted and deemed worthy of being trusted with
them . . . And secondly, to ensure that no one entrusted with an SIDA
badge is exploiting it.
I know that employee screening is a major component of the TSA's
multi-layered strategy for addressing security vulnerabilities within
the aviation sector. I look forward to hearing from Acting Deputy
Administrator Hatfield today about how the TSA can further enhance this
layer of security, and ensure that no unauthorized items make it into
secure areas of airports.
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Southwell, the aviation general
manager of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, about the
short, intermediate, and long-term solutions he plans to implement in
order to reform his airport's security system and neutralize the
insider threat.
Also with us today is Ms. Pinkerton, a member of the Aviation
Security Advisory Committee, an entity that was codified into law
through legislation offered by Ranking Member Thompson last Congress to
advise on a wide variety of aviation security issues. As Ms. Pinkerton
represents the perspective of multiple airports, I'm eager to hear her
advice about what we can do across all our Nation's airports to
eliminate this dangerous vulnerability.
Lastly, I look forward to Deputy Assistant Director Perdue shedding
light on the FBI's involvement in incidents such as those I've
mentioned, and to discuss the penalties associated with these breaches
and whether those penalties are adequate and effective.
Again, I want to reiterate that this is and must always be a
collaborative effort. It's my intent that through open dialogue between
all of the entities here today, we can successfully neutralize access-
control incidents and eliminate a major deficiency in our Nation's
aviation security system.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Miss Rice.
The Chairman now recognizes the Chairman of the full
committee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul, for any
statement he may have.
Mr. McCaul. I thank the Chairman.
I want to first congratulate you and Ranking Member Rice on
your new position on this committee and by starting out this
Congress with an important hearing that focuses on the
importance of, and timely topic of, access control and employee
screening at our Nation's airports.
It is vital that agencies responsible for protecting our
airports are doing all that they can to keep safe our aviation
sector. This responsibility does not end at the passenger
screening checkpoints. A robust system, the vetting employees
at airports is equally as important.
This hearing is an important opportunity to examine
security programs designed to mitigate potential insider
threats from airport employees, airline employees, TSA
personnel, and others who have access to sterile areas of
domestic airports.
In addition to the most recent access control breaches at
Atlanta airport that have been mentioned, there have been a
number of insider threats and employee issues at various other
airports in recent years. For example, in December 2013, the
FBI arrested an avionic technician at Wichita airport for
plotting a suicide attack using a vehicle-borne improvised
explosive device. The technician allegedly intended to use his
airport clearance to gain access to the tarmac and detonate the
vehicle near planes and the terminal during peak holiday travel
in order to maximize casualties. He was charged with attempted
use of a weapon of mass destruction and attempted to provide
material assistance to al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
Additionally, in September 2013, a TSA screener at Los
Angeles International Airport was arrested a few hours after
resigning his position for making threats against the airport
that cited the anniversary of 9/11 and for leaving a suspicious
package at the airport. His actions resulted in the evacuation
of several airport terminals.
Finally, in September 2014, a former airline employee at
Minneapolis airport died in Syria fighting alongside the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. Though the individual had left
employment with the airline several years prior to becoming a
foreign fighter of ISIS, he did have access to areas of the
airport during his employment, including the tarmac.
There are significant lessons to be drawn from these and
other incidents involving employees. The bottom line is that
our aviation network remains a prime target for terrorism. We
must be vigilant and constantly reevaluate our security posture
according to the threats that we face, and that includes
potential insider threats.
I am pleased that this subcommittee will hear testimony
from TSA and the FBI and airport and airlines representatives
on this important topic, and I look forward to examining what
additional measures should be taken to protect our airports and
the American people.
With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Chairman McCaul follows:]
Statement of Chairman Michael T. McCaul
February 3, 2015
I would like to commend Chairman Katko and Ranking Member Rice for
starting off the Congress with focusing on the important and timely
topic of access control and employee screening at our Nation's
airports.
It is vital that the agencies responsible for protecting our
airports are doing all that they can to keep our aviation sector safe.
This responsibility does not end at the passenger screening
checkpoints; a robust system of vetting employees at airports is
equally as important.
This hearing is an important opportunity to examine security
programs designed to mitigate potential insider threats from airport
employees, airline employees, TSA personnel, and others who have access
to sterile areas of domestic airports.
In addition to the most recent access control breaches at Atlanta
airport that have been mentioned, there have been a number of insider
threats and employee issues at various other airports in recent years.
For example, in December 2013, the FBI arrested an avionic
technician at Wichita Airport for plotting a suicide attack using a
vehicle-borne improvised explosive device. The technician allegedly
intended to use his airport clearance to gain access to the tarmac and
detonate the vehicle near planes and the terminal during peak holiday
travel, in order to maximize casualties. He was charged with attempted
use of a weapon of mass destruction and attempting to provide material
assistance to al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
Additionally, in September 2013, a TSA screener at Los Angeles
International Airport was arrested a few hours after resigning his
position for making threats against the airport that cited the
anniversary of 9/11, and for leaving a suspicious package at the
airport. His actions resulted in the evacuation of several airport
terminals.
Finally, in September 2014, a former airline employee at
Minneapolis Airport died in Syria fighting alongside the Islamic State
in Iraq and Syria (ISIS). Though the individual had left employment
with the airline several years prior to becoming a foreign fighter of
ISIS, he did have access to sterile areas of the airport during his
employment, including the tarmac.
There are significant lessons to be drawn from these and other
incidents involving employees. The bottom line is that our aviation
network remains a prime target for terrorism. We must be vigilant and
constantly reevaluate our security posture according to the threats we
face, and that includes potential insider threats.
I am pleased that the subcommittee will hear testimony from TSA,
the FBI, and airport and airline representatives on this important
topic and I look forward to examining what additional measures should
be taken to protect our airports and the American people.
I thank Chairman Katko for his leadership of the subcommittee and I
yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member of
the full committee, the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr.
Thompson, for any statement he may have.
Mr. Thompson. I thank the Chairman for holding today's
hearing. I also welcome both you and the Ranking Member of this
committee.
After the horrific attacks of September 11, 2001, multiple
layers of security were put in place to protect our aviation
system. Not only did screening procedures and the list of
prohibited items change, but the protocols for security of the
airports changed as well.
While Congress and Executive branch were making
considerations to keep the traveling public safe, they also
recognized that there are 450 airports in the United States,
each of which presents a unique set of security issues. For
instance, vendors and airline employees need access to various
areas of the airport. In an effort to maintain security and
provide a sense of practicality to airport and airline
employees, legislation was implemented to allow vetted
individuals to have unescorted access within the areas that lie
beyond airport secure screening checkpoints.
Airline and airport employees are vetted through a criminal
background check and biographical check. They are issued Secure
Identification Display Area badges, commonly referred to as
SIDA badges, to use to gain access to a sterile area of the
airport without having to go through physical screening.
While SIDA badge holders are vetted daily against a
terrorist watch list, the criminal background checks are not
conducted recurrently. Mr. Chairman, this is concerning. In
2011, the Office of Inspector General found that some of the
records provided by employees contain inaccuracies or omissions
and that TSA had limited oversight of the application process.
Moreover, recent events have me questioning whether TSA has
taken seriously the recommendations of the OIG. I still
question whether airports and TSA have the adequate internal
controls to address potential insider threats from SIDA badge
holders. Do employees retain badges upon termination? Are logs
kept on the number of lost or stolen badges? Are badges being
used to gain access only when an employee is on duty?
Unfortunately, in December 2014, we saw a deplorable
instance of SIDA badge misuse. Five men were charged in
connection with a plot to smuggle over 150 guns from Atlanta to
New York City. One of these men is alleged to have used his
credentials to get by physical screening and board flights to
New York City. Although the weapons were not intended to harm
passengers, and these men have not been charged with terrorism,
it is disheartening to think of a catastrophic consequence that
could have occurred had one of those firearms been used on the
airplane during the flight.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, the threat is evolving. As it
evolves, we cannot remain stagnant. It is my hope that through
our continued oversight and bipartisan legislative work, we can
make sure there are proper policies and procedures in place to
ensure that those that have access to a sterile area of the
airport cannot create such gross breaches of security. The
security of an airport is a shared concern, and all entities
should work together to ensure that the layers of security are
as strong as they can be.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I look forward to today's
testimony. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 3, 2015
After the horrific attacks of September 11, 2001, multiple layers
of security were put in place to protect our aviation system. Not only
did screening procedures and the list of prohibited items change, but
the protocols for security of the airports changed as well. While
Congress and the Executive branch were making considerations to keep
the traveling public safe, they also recognized there are 450 airports
in the United States, each of which presents a unique set of security
issues.
For instance, vendors and airline employees need access to various
areas of the airport. In an effort to maintain security and provide a
sense of practicality to airport and airline employees, legislation was
implemented to allow vetted individuals to have unescorted access
within the areas that lie beyond airports' secure screening
checkpoints. Airline and airport employees are vetted through a
criminal background check and biographical check. Then they are issued
Secure Identification Display Area (SIDA) Badges to use to gain access
to the sterile area of the airport without having to go through
physical screening. While SIDA badge holders are vetted daily against
the terrorist watch lists, the criminal background checks are not
conducted recurrently.
Mr. Chairman, this is concerning. In 2011, the Office of Inspector
General found that some of the records provided by employees contained
inaccuracies or omissions and that TSA had limited oversight of the
application process. Moreover, recent events have me questioning
whether TSA has taken the recommendations of the OIG seriously. I still
question whether the airports and TSA have the adequate internal
controls to address potential insider threats from SIDA badge holders.
Do employees return badges upon termination? Are logs kept on the
number of lost or stolen badges? Are badges being used to gain access
only when an employee is on duty?
Unfortunately, in December 2014, we saw a deplorable instance of
SIDA badge misuse. Five men were charged in connection with a plot to
smuggle over 150 guns from Atlanta to New York City. One of these men
is alleged to have used his credentials to get bypass physical
screening and board flights to New York City.
Although the weapons were not intended to harm passengers, and
these men have not been charged with terrorism, it is disheartening to
think of the catastrophic consequences that could have occurred had one
of those firearms been used on the airplane during the flight.
Mr. Chairman, as you know, the threat is evolving. As it evolves,
we cannot remain stagnant. It is my hope that through our continued
oversight and bipartisan legislative work, we can make sure there are
proper policies and procedures in place to ensure that those that have
access to the sterile area of the airport cannot create such gross
breaches of security. The security of an airport is a shared concern,
and all entities should work together to ensure that the layers of
security are as strong as can be.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Thompson.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
Now, we are pleased to have several distinguished witnesses
before us today on this important topic. Let me remind the
witnesses that their entire written statements will appear in
the record.
Our first witness, Mr. Hatfield, is the acting deputy
administrator at the TSA. Prior to his current role, Mr.
Hatfield served as a Federal security director for Newark
Liberty International Airport, where he managed a security
force over 1,200 employees. He has been with TSA since 2002,
has held a number of roles including assistant administrator of
strategic communications and public affairs.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Hatfield to testify.

STATEMENT OF MARK HATFIELD, ACTING DEPUTY ADMINISTRATOR,
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Hatfield. Thank you very much, sir.
Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice,
distinguished Members of the committee.
Chairman McCaul and Mr. Thompson, it is great to see you
all here as well. I am personally honored and thrilled for the
opportunity to have this conversation with you.
After I finish with the requisite reading of my prepared
statement, I am really looking forward to an energetic
conversation, and I hope that I can provide enlightening
answers to your questions.
As you know, last December an investigation revealed that a
Delta Airlines employee allegedly conspired to smuggle firearms
from Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport to John F.
Kennedy International Airport in New York, and a Federal
prosecution is now under way in this case. While I am currently
unable to comment in any detail on the specifics of these
allegations, I can assure you that TSA views with great concern
and focus any potential instance of security vulnerabilities.
We are fully engaged with our aviation industry partners, and
we look at all options to ensure the continued security of our
Nation's commercial aviation and other transportation networks.
In addition to coordinating efforts with industry
stakeholders, we are also working closely with our colleagues
at the Department of Homeland Security. In fact, Secretary
Johnson personally visited Atlanta to speak with our partners
at that airport. I can report to you that TSA has taken
immediate steps to increase mitigation efforts of the insider
threat. These steps include increasing operations that focus on
screening airport employees at employee entrances and direct
access points, such as secure doors and elevators and vehicle
gates. In partnership with airport authorities, TSA is further
examining circulation controls and reassessing employee access
points, both the number and design of those access points.
Many of our Nation's airports are open for business around
the clock, and numerous entities support air travel by
providing amenities such as food and shopping throughout the
airport. While the sterile area of an airport hosts passengers
and aircrews waiting for flights, it is also the workplace and
break space for vendors, mechanics, ground crew, and others.
Enforcing access control is a shared responsibility among
multiple partners. I appreciate your pointing that out in your
opening statement, Madam Rice. Every airport and airline has a
security plan that reflects this. Airport authorities and the
airlines are responsible for developing and executing these
security plans. TSA is responsible for approving them and using
our authority to perform inspections for compliance and
comportment with those rules. Each airport operator must allow
TSA at any time or place to make any inspection or test to
determine compliance with TSA's regulations and other policies.
TSA is currently conducting an insider threat analysis to
help better identify indicators of criminal acts or threats to
aviation. This is the type of critical thinking we use to
improve training, operations, and methods of screening.
Additionally, TSA Acting Administrator Carraway has asked the
Aviation Security Advisory Committee, the ASAC, to specifically
review access control and perimeter security issues and offer
their recommendations to address potential threats. I, in fact,
met with them yesterday. I met with the larger body and their
Chairman, and they are meeting again today. We are eager to see
their recommendations. They are reporting at 30-, 60-, and 90-
day threshold marks. That first report is due at the end of
this week. Mr. Chairman, thank you for recognizing the work
that they are doing.
TSA also conducts security background checks for airport
and airline employees. Airport workers are vetted before they
are granted unescorted access to the secure areas of the
airport, and TSA performs a security threat assessment on all
airport workers who require a credential. Once TSA has
completed the check, information is provided to the
individual's prospective employer with access either granted or
denied based on the results of the security threat assessment.
We also continuously check all SIDA holders against the
terrorist screening center's database to see if there are any
changes in their status. That is an on-going, daily, continual
check against that dynamic list.
In Atlanta and in airports across the country, TSA performs
physical screening of employees with SIDA badges and sterile
area access to entrances of these areas of the airport, places
like bus stops for employees, employee turnstiles, and airport
entry gates.
Following the revelation of the alleged smuggling operation
in Atlanta, it has been suggested by some that airports
institute 100 percent screening of all employees any time they
enter or re-enter a secure area. In 2008, TSA actually
conducted pilot programs comparing the screening effectiveness
of 100 percent airport employee screening versus a program that
includes continuous random and unpredictable employee screening
measures.
In that same year, the Homeland Security Institute, HSI,
independently assessed those pilot programs and concluded that
100 percent physical screening of all airport employees is both
cost-prohibitive and poses a wide range of operational
challenges without delivering demonstrably greater security. In
other words, HSI also determined that random screening,
properly done, is nearly as effective as 100 percent screening.
As a result of the TSA pilot and the HSI report, TSA made
recommendations to enhance access control security. They
include: The order to accelerate the installation of closed-
circuit television and perimeter intrusion detection systems,
phasing in the use of biometric access controls and identity
verification systems, increasing security awareness training
for airport workers, and increasing the Visible Intermodal
Prevention and Response teams known as our VIPR teams
operations.
Having recently served as TSA's Federal security director
in Miami, an airport that does conduct 100 percent employee
screening, I can tell you without question that such a practice
involves both a significant investment of resources and is
operationally challenging. That said, I have great respect for
my former partners in Miami and the extraordinary commitment
that they make as an airport, sometimes unilaterally, and
without the force of a Federal regulation or rule to
continually look at ways to make that airport safer.
TSA has an important role, in partnership with airport
operators and airlines, in securing access to our Nation's
airports, and we are committed to risk-based security solutions
that enhance our current posture.
I want to thank the committee for the opportunity to
testify today, and I do look forward to your questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Hatfield follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mark Hatfield
February 3, 2015
Good afternoon Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and
distinguished Members of the committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss the Transportation Security
Administration's (TSA) role in airport access control at our Nation's
airports.
The primary mission of TSA is to reduce security vulnerabilities
and to strengthen resilience against terrorist attacks in the Nation's
transportation systems, including aviation, mass transit, rail,
highway, and pipeline, to ensure freedom of movement for people and
commerce. To fulfill this vital mission, TSA employs a risk-based,
layered approach to security through a well-trained front-line
workforce, state-of-the-art technologies, intelligence analysis and
information sharing, explosives detection canine teams, Visible
Intermodal Prevention and Response teams, and our industry partners who
voluntarily adopt security improvements and comply with regulations.
This multi-layered approach helps to ensure that resources are applied
efficiently to have the greatest impact in reducing risk and enhancing
the security of the traveling public and the Nation's transportation
systems.
access control
Each day, TSA facilitates and secures the travel of nearly 2
million air passengers at nearly 450 airports Nation-wide. Numerous
entities are involved in supporting safe and secure travel as well as
providing amenities such as food, shopping, and other entertainment.
Controlling access to sterile, (post-security screening checkpoint)
airport areas is a critical part of airport operations. While the
sterile area hosts passengers and air crews waiting for flights, it is
also the workplace for vendors, mechanics, ground crew, and others
employed by the airlines and the airports. Access control is a shared
responsibility among many partners, and every airport and airline has a
security plan of which access control is an important and necessary
element. Airport authorities and the airlines are responsible for
developing and executing security plans; TSA is responsible for
approving security plans and inspecting for compliance.
TSA's inspections include credentialing, perimeter security, and
testing of access control systems and processes at airports. Every
commercial airport receives an annual security inspection to include an
assessment of perimeter and access controls. TSA analyzes the results
of these inspections and assessments to develop mitigation strategies
to enhance airport security.
Transportation Security Officers and Inspectors are also deployed
on a random and unpredictable basis to screen airport and airline
workers as they enter for work within the secure and sterile areas. The
screening protocols vary by time, location, and method to enhance
unpredictability. This includes ID verifications, and searches of
individuals and/or their property, using various technologies and
methods in order to detect and deter the introduction of prohibited
items. Additionally, airport operators are required to conduct random
inspections of employees entering sterile areas, to include ID
verification and checks for prohibited items. If employees fail to
follow proper procedures in accessing secure areas, they may be
restricted from future access, disciplined by their employer, or
subject to criminal charges and civil penalties.
TSA has wide-ranging authority to pursue inspections of airport
security plans. Each airport operator is required to allow TSA, at any
time or place, to make any inspections or tests, to determine
compliance of an airport operator, aircraft operator, foreign air
carrier, indirect air carrier, or other airport tenants with TSA's
regulations, security programs, security directives, and other
policies. Inspections and audits are conducted by our Compliance
Division and, in situations of possible non-compliance, investigations
are undertaken by Transportation Security Inspectors. Enforcement
Investigation Reports that yield evidence of non-compliance are jointly
overseen by the airport's Federal Security Director and by the Office
of Security Operation's Compliance Division.
vetting and badging process
In addition to our regulatory role, TSA also conducts security
background checks for airport and airline employees through the Secure
Identification Display Area (SIDA) badging process. Airport workers are
vetted before they are granted unescorted access to the secure area of
the airport. TSA performs a Security Threat Assessment (STA) on those
who require access to the secure/sterile area of the airport or
unescorted access to cargo. When individuals apply for employment with
the airport or airline, they submit STA information which is passed
through one of several vendors to TSA for adjudication. This includes a
check against the Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB). In partnership
with the FBI and Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the individual
also undergoes a Criminal History Background Check and immigration
status check. Once TSA has completed the check, the information is
provided to the individual's prospective employer with access either
granted or denied based on the results of the STA. TSA also
continuously checks all SIDA holders against the TSDB in case there are
any changes to their status.
With TSA's Risk-Based Security model, similar to what we do with
trusted travelers in TSA Pre

TM
or Known Crew Member,
airport workers are vetted before they are granted unescorted access to
the secure area of the airport. With the STA, we weed out potential bad
actors, which is particularly important given the sensitive areas where
many of these individuals work. However, we must balance the importance
of conducting checks on employees with the need to facilitate air
travel, and so have designed a system of background checks,
inspections, and random checks as a risk-based approach to access
control.
studies and recommendations
In 2011, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) assessed TSA's
efforts to identify and track access control at airports, specifically
whether TSA had an effective mechanism to identify measures that could
be used to improve security Nation-wide. The OIG found that without an
effective mechanism to gather information about all security breaches,
TSA was unable to monitor trends or make general improvements to
security. The OIG made recommendations to use one comprehensive
definition of a security breach as well as to develop a comprehensive
program to ensure accurate reporting and corrective actions in breach
incidents. As a result, TSA developed a single definition of ``Security
Breach,'' and enhanced its oversight system with respect to airport
security breaches. TSA now leverages the Performance and Results
Information System (PARIS) to accurately report, track, and analyze
access control trends. Further, TSA updated airport performance metrics
to track security breaches and airport checkpoint closures at the
National, regional, and local levels.
In 2008, TSA conducted a study to compare two approaches to
physically screening airport employees: Screening 100 percent of
airport employees or conducting random screening measures. Three
airports tested the 100 percent screening model and another four
screened employees on a random basis. The Homeland Security Institute
(HSI) independently assessed the pilot programs using three factors:
Screening effectiveness, effect on airport operations, and cost
considerations. HSI concluded that 100 percent physical screening of
all airport employees is cost-prohibitive and poses a wide range of
operational challenges. For instance, many employees wear steel-toed
shoes for safety at work; however this poses a unique challenge and
delay in screening through a magnetometer. Additionally, airports
conducting 100 percent screening reported delays, ranging from minor at
smaller airports to major at larger ones.
HSI also determined that random is nearly as effective as 100%
screening, stating that they ``did not see a clear distinction between
the number of items confiscated at 100% versus random screening
airports.'' Given the HSI and TSA pilot results, TSA made the following
recommendations for airports to enhance access control security:

Accelerate the installation of closed-circuit television and
perimeter intrusion detection systems;

Raise physical screening levels for airport employees (TSA
and airport operators);

Phase in the use of biometric access controls and identity
verification systems;

Focus on locally-driven security solutions (Community
Policing and Airport Watch);

Increase security awareness training for airport workers;

Increase Visible Intermodal Prevention and Response teams
and surge operations (random and threat-based); and

Promote behavior-based threat detection programs.
In 2009, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) addressed the
issue of insider threats in a review of TSA's efforts to secure
commercial airport perimeters and access controls. Using data from the
2008 tests referenced above, GAO reported that physically screening 100
percent of employees would range from $5.7 billion to $14.9 billion for
the first year, while the costs of enhancing random worker screening
would range from $1.8 billion to $6.6 billion. This audit, entitled A
National Strategy and Other Actions Would Strengthen TSA's Efforts to
Secure Commercial Airport Perimeters and Access Controls, provided five
recommendations to further TSA's efforts to enhance the security of the
Nation's airports through a unifying National strategy that identifies
key elements, such as goals, priorities, performance measures, and
required resources. TSA concurred with and implemented the
recommendations of this audit.
insider threat mitigation
In December 2014, an investigation revealed that a Delta airlines
employee allegedly conspired to smuggle firearms from Hartsfield-
Jackson Atlanta International Airport (ATL) to John F. Kennedy
International Airport (JFK) in New York, and a Federal prosecution is
under way in this case.
To reduce risks exposed by this criminal conspiracy, TSA has
implemented a variety of measures and is examining how this case can
inform airport security more broadly. As described above, TSA
administers Security Threat Assessments for all airport and airline
employees prior to the issuance of SIDA badges granting unescorted
access privileges. TSA also vets these individuals on a recurring basis
against the Terrorist Screening Database. At ATL and Nation-wide, TSA
requires the airport authority to randomly perform physical screening
of employees with SIDA badges at a variety of unpredictable locations
such as Secure Area access points, employee bus stops, employee
turnstiles, and airport entry gates. In calendar year 2014, TSA
performed 7,234 hours of such screening at ATL and 257,979 hours
Nationally.
TSA has taken immediate steps at ATL to mitigate the insider
threat. Under the leadership of TSA officials, a working group was
created with representation from various airport authorities, law
enforcement, and stakeholders to further develop plans for improving
security. TSA has increased operations to focus on screening airport
employees at employee entrances and direct access points, such as
turnstiles, Secure Area doors and elevators, and vehicle gates. Air
carriers at ATL have also implemented additional security measures to
address the issue. In partnership with airport authorities, TSA is
further examining circulation controls and reassessing employee access
points. We look forward to a continued partnership with key
stakeholders to determine best practices and risk-based security
solutions that could be replicated in other airports.
On a broader level, TSA is examining the potential vulnerabilities
exposed by this incident and other trends to determine if additional
risk-based security measures, resource reallocations, new investments,
or policy changes may be necessary. TSA is conducting an insider threat
analysis to identify potential indicators of criminality or threats to
aviation that could provide insight into new training, operations, or
methods of screening and vetting employees. TSA is examining its legal
authorities to assess if additional measures may be required or imposed
to enhance security. Finally, TSA Acting Administrator Carraway has
asked the Aviation Security Advisory Committee (ASAC) to specifically
review access control and perimeter security issues to offer solutions
to potential threats.
conclusion
TSA plays an important role in partnership with airports and
airlines in securing access to our Nation's airports, and is committed
to fielding responsive, risk-based solutions that can enhance our
current security posture. I want to thank the committee for your
interest in this important issue and your support as we consider
recommendations and future changes to improve aviation and airport
security Nation-wide. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, I
look forward to your questions.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Hatfield, for your testimony. We
appreciate you being here today. I appreciate and I look
forward to the dialogue that is forthcoming.
Our second witness is Mr. Gary Perdue, who currently serves
as deputy administrative director of the counterterrorism
division at the FBI. Mr. Perdue has over 30 years of U.S.
Federal Government service--he beats me--specializing in
military intelligence, foreign counterintelligence, drug
trafficking, international terrorism, weapons of mass
destruction, and counterproliferation. Prior to his current
position, Mr. Perdue was the special agent in charge of the
FBI's Pittsburgh division.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Perdue to testify. Thank
you, sir.

STATEMENT OF G. DOUG PERDUE, DEPUTY ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,
COUNTERTERRORISM DIVISION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

Mr. Perdue. Thank you. Good afternoon, Chairman Katko,
Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
and for your continued support of the men and women of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.
I am particularly pleased to be here today with Mark
Hatfield, the acting deputy administrator of the Transportation
Security Administration, to discuss our role in access control
measures at our Nation's airports.
Today's FBI is a threat-focused, intelligence-driven
organization. Every professional understands--excuse me--every
FBI professional understands that preventing the key threats
facing our Nation means constantly striving to be more
efficient and more effective.
Just as our adversaries continue to evolve, so too must the
FBI. We live in a time of acute and persistent terrorist and
criminal threats to our National security, our economy, and to
our communities. These diverse threats illustrate the
complexity and breadth of the FBI's mission, and make clear the
importance of its partnerships, especially with the TSA, in
reducing security vulnerabilities in our Nation's
transportation system.
In fact, our National headquarters and local field offices
have built partnerships with just about every Federal, State,
local, Tribal, and territorial law enforcement agency in the
Nation. Our agents, analysts, and professional staff work
closely with law enforcement, intelligence, and security
services to include representatives at our Nation's airports
and airlines to mitigate the threat posed to our Nation's
transportation infrastructure and internal aviation security
processes and systems. By combining our resources and
leveraging our collective expertise, we are able to investigate
National security threats that cross both geographical and
jurisdictional boundaries.
Our civil aviation security program: In conjunction with
our partners, the FBI's counterterrorism division's Civil
Aviation Security Program, also known as CASP, is extensively
involved in efforts to undercover and prevent terrorist
operations to attack or exploit civil aviation in the United
States. The FBI has special agents and task force officers
assigned as airport liaison agents at each of the Nation's TSA-
regulated airports in order to respond to aviation-related
incidents and threats, participate in joint FBI-TSA airport
vulnerability assessments, and interact with interagency and
private-sector stakeholders at airports around the country on
exercises, threat mitigation, and other issues to protect the
traveling public.
The FBI's CASP and ALA program were created in 1990 to
formalize the Bureau's investigative intelligence and liaison
activities at the Nation's airports. CASP is located in the
FBI's National Joint Terrorism Task Force, with a focus on
supporting and enhancing efforts to prevent, disrupt, and
defeat acts of terrorism directed toward civil aviation and to
provide counterterrorism preparedness leadership and assistance
to Federal, State, and local agencies responsible for civil
aviation security.
One of CASP's primary responsibilities is to provide
program management and support to the FBI's airport liaison
agencies. In addition, CASP represents the FBI on aviation
security policy matters, provides guidance and training to the
field, and supports National aviation security initiatives and
mandates.
I would like to go over briefly CASP efforts to mitigate
the insider threat at America's airports. Our intelligence
production. Since 2009, CASP has produced numerous intelligence
products that are shared with the U.S. intelligence community.
A couple of the Unclassified products titles include:
``Aviation-related Suspicious Activities: An FBI Assessment''
on 3 June 2005. ``Terrorist Training Document Reveals Travel
Guidance and Tactics'' on 13 October 2009.
To further mitigate threats to aviation, CASP produces and
distributes a comprehensive daily aviation-centric intelligence
summary for all airport liaison agents and various FBI
programs. This summary includes the latest threats to:
Aviation, suspicious activity reporting within the air domain,
current intelligence reporting, and updates on active aviation
cases of importance.
In addition, CASP intelligence analysts produce threat
intelligence reports yearly in support of Congressionally-
mandated FBI-TSA joint airport vulnerability assessments, also
known as JAVAs, and coordinate on-sight preparation,
representation at JAVA events.
Our liaison: CASP has conducted three FBI air carrier
security director forums since 2011, with a 3-day forum planned
for August of this year. CASP has published nine aviation-
centric Operation Tripwires since 2003, with a 2010 Operation
Tripwire that addressed the insider threats specifically. For
those of you not familiar with the FBI's Operation Tripwire, it
began in 2003 as a counterterrorism division initiative
designed to improve the FBI's intelligence and information
base.
The program's vision is to develop FBI partnerships that
help to identify U.S.-based terrorist sleeper cells through
collecting and assessing specific information related to
potential counterterrorism threats. The program's goal is to
leverage outreach programs focused on aiding industry and local
officials in recognizing suspicious activity and providing them
a point of contact for reporting that activity, as well as to
provide actionable items for the Joint Terrorism Task Force.
CASP proactively develops curriculum on aviation security
issues and providing training to ALAs, other Government
agencies, the private sector, and foreign governments.
Our operational support: CASP provides operational support
to the FBI's ALAs and substantive units on active
investigations and provides strategic intelligence products on
terrorist tactics, techniques, and procedures. CASP responds to
official requests for information request for assistance,
requests related to investigations of laser pointer
illuminations of aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicle incidents,
Government Accountability Office inquiries, National
Transportation Safety Board aircraft accident investigation
assistance, aviation-related exercises, and hijacking response
plans involving ALA and FBI equities.
CASP developed a series of ALA best practices that
leverages division-specific initiatives for broad participation
by all FBI divisions and ALAs. These initiatives include:
Documents and guidance on conducting vulnerability assessments
at general aviation airports under the general aviation
assessments initiative, issuing Federal misdemeanors for non-
felonious criminal acts at airports under the Federal
misdemeanor violations best practice, conducting recurring
criminal record checks through the FBI's National Crime
Information Center on airport employee under the air domain
computer information comparison initiative, and providing
checklist and guidance for handling a major aviation crisis
such as a commercial airline crash under the aviation crisis
response checklist best practice initiative.
CASP also has access to the Federal Aviation
Administration-managed domestic events network, allowing for
enhanced response and situational awareness during real-time
aviation incidents.
Our training: One of CASP's major focus areas is conducting
training for the FBI's ALAs, other Government agencies, and
private-sector stakeholders. CASP has led the way with
innovative cost-saving training initiatives that include: A
2011 CASP-conducted joint FBI-NTSB-ALA regional training,
instructing attendees on how to handle issues surrounding a
major aviation crisis within their area of responsibility,
conducted three FBI ACSD forums since 2011. CASP launched a
mandatory ALA-specific virtual academy training course for FBI
employees entitled Airport Liaison Agent Fundamentals in 2012.
CASP recently worked with ALA coordinators for in-depth
training at Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles,
California on 10 through 11 September 2014. CASP represents the
FBI's equities on various interagency and industry committees
working groups such as: The Air Domain Awareness Working Group,
Man Portable Air Defense Systems Analysis Working Group,
Secondary Barrier Working Group, Civil Aviation Threat Working
Group, Aviation Information-Sharing Working Group, the Air
Domain Intelligence Integration and Analysis Center Working
Group, Unmanned Aircraft Systems Event Reporting Working Group,
and International General Aviations Working Group.
In conclusion, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, thank
you again for this opportunity to testify concerning access
control measures at our Nation's airports. The FBI's efforts
and successes would not be possible without the continued
positive working relationship with our partners and with your
support. I would be happy to answer any questions that you
might have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Perdue follows:]
Prepared Statement of G. Doug Perdue
February 3, 2015
introduction
Good afternoon Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of
the subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today and for your continued support of the men and women of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). I am particularly pleased to be
here today with Mark Hatfield, the acting deputy administrator of the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) to discuss our role in
access control measures at our Nation's airports.
Today's FBI is a threat-focused, intelligence-driven organization.
Every FBI professional understands that preventing the key threats
facing our Nation means constantly striving to be more efficient and
more effective.
Just as our adversaries continue to evolve, so, too, must the FBI.
We live in a time of acute and persistent terrorist and criminal
threats to our National security, our economy, and to our communities.
These diverse threats illustrate the complexity and breadth of the
FBI's mission and make clear the importance of its partnerships,
especially with the Transportation Security Administration, in reducing
security vulnerabilities in our Nation's transportation system.
In fact, our National headquarters and local field offices have
built partnerships with just about every Federal, State, local, Tribal,
and territorial law enforcement agency in the Nation. Our agents,
analysts, and professional staff work closely with law enforcement,
intelligence, and security services--to include representatives at our
Nation's airports and airlines to mitigate the threat posed to our
Nation's transportation infrastructure and internal aviation security
processes and systems. By combining our resources and leveraging our
collective expertise, we are able to investigate National security
threats that cross both geographical and jurisdictional boundaries.
civil aviation security program
In conjunction with our partners, the FBI's Counterterrorism
Division's (CTD) Civil Aviation Security Program (CASP) is extensively
involved in efforts to uncover and prevent terrorist operations to
attack or exploit civil aviation in the United States. The FBI has
Special Agents and Task Force Officers assigned as Airport Liaison
Agents (ALAs) at each of the Nation's TSA-regulated airports in order
to respond to aviation-related incidents and threats, participate in
joint FBI-TSA airport vulnerability assessments, and interact with
interagency and private-sector stakeholders at airports around the
country on exercises, threat mitigation, and other issues to protect
the travelling public.
The FBI's CASP and ALA Program were created in 1990 to formalize
the Bureau's investigative, intelligence, and liaison activities at the
Nation's airports. CASP is located in the FBI's National Joint
Terrorism Task Force with a focus on supporting and enhancing efforts
to prevent, disrupt, and defeat acts of terrorism directed toward civil
aviation, and to provide counterterrorism preparedness leadership and
assistance to Federal, State, and local agencies responsible for civil
aviation security. One of CASP's primary responsibilities is to provide
program management and support to the FBI's ALAs. In addition, CASP
represents the FBI on aviation security policy matters, provides
guidance and training to the field, and supports National aviation
security initiatives and mandates. I would like to go over briefly
CASP's efforts to mitigate the insider threat at America's airports.
intelligence production
Since 2009, CASP has produced numerous intelligence products that
are shared with the U.S. intelligence community. A couple of the
Unclassified product titles include:

Aviation-Related Suspicious Activities: An FBI Assessment (3
June 2005)

Terrorist Training Document Reveals Travel Guidance and
Tactics (13 October 2009)
To further mitigate threats to aviation, CASP produces and
distributes a comprehensive daily aviation-centric intelligence summary
for all ALAs and various FBI programs. This summary includes the latest
threats to aviation, suspicious activity reporting within the Air
Domain, current intelligence reporting, and updates on active aviation
cases of importance. In addition, CASP intelligence analysts produce
threat intelligence reports yearly in support of Congressionally-
mandated FBI-TSA Joint Airport Vulnerability Assessments (JAVAs) and
coordinate on-site FBI representation at JAVA events.
liaison
CASP has conducted three FBI Air Carrier Security Directors (ACSD)
Forums since 2011, with a 3-day forum planned for August of this year.
CASP has published nine aviation-centric Operation Tripwires since
2003, with a 2010 Operation Tripwire that addressed the insider threat
specifically. For those of you not familiar with the FBI's Operation
Tripwire, it began in 2003 as a CTD initiative designed to improve the
FBI's intelligence and information base. The program's vision is to
develop FBI partnerships that help to identify U.S.-based terrorist
sleeper cells through collecting and assessing specific information
related to potential counterterrorism threats. The program's goal is to
leverage outreach programs focused on aiding industry and local
officials in recognizing suspicious activity and providing them a point
of contact for reporting that activity, as well as to provide
actionable items for the Joint Terrorism Task Forces (JTTF).
CASP proactively develops curriculum on aviation security issues
and provides training to ALAs, other Government agencies, the private
sector, and foreign governments.
operational support
CASP provides operational support to the FBI's ALAs and substantive
units on active investigations, and provides strategic intelligence
products on terrorists' tactics, techniques, and procedures. CASP
responds to:

Official Requests for Information and Requests for
Assistance

Requests related to investigations of laser pointer
illuminations of aircraft

Unmanned Aerial Vehicle incidents

Government Accountability Office inquiries

National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) aircraft
accident investigation assistance

Aviation-related exercises and Hijacking Response Plans
involving ALA and FBI equities.
CASP developed a series of ALA best practices that leverages
division-specific initiatives for broad participation by all FBI
divisions and ALAs. These initiatives include documents and guidance on
conducting vulnerability assessments at General Aviation airports under
the ``General Aviation Assessments Initiative''; issuing Federal
misdemeanors for non-felonious criminal acts at airports under the
``Federal Misdemeanor Violations'' best practice; conducting recurring
criminal record checks through the FBI's National Crime Information
Center on airport employees under the ``Air Domain Computer Information
Comparison'' initiative; and providing checklists and guidance for
handling a major aviation crisis, such as a commercial airliner crash,
under the ``Aviation Crisis Response Checklist'' best practice
initiative.
CASP also has access to the Federal Aviation Administration-managed
Domestic Events Network allowing for enhanced response and situational
awareness during ``real-time'' aviation incidents.
training
One of CASP's major focus areas is conducting training for the
FBI's ALAs, other Government agencies, and private-sector stakeholders.
CASP has led the way with innovative, cost savings training initiatives
that include:

In 2011, CASP conducted joint FBI-NTSB ALA Regional
Training, instructing attendees on how to handle issues
surrounding a major aviation crisis within their area of
responsibility. Conducted three FBI ACSD Forums since 2011, and
CASP launched a mandatory ALA-specific Virtual Academy Training
Course for FBI employees entitled, ``Airport Liaison Agent
Fundamentals,'' in 2012.

CASP recently worked with ALA Coordinators for in-depth
training at Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, CA,
on 10-11 September 2014.
working groups and policy meetings
CASP represents the FBI's equities on various interagency and
industry committees/working groups, such as:

Air Domain Awareness Working Group

Man Portable Air Defense System Analyst Working Group

Secondary Barrier Working Group

Civil Aviation Threat Working Group

Aviation Information Sharing Working Group

Air Domain Intelligence-Integration and Analysis Center
Working Group

Unmanned Aircraft Systems Event Reporting Working Group

International General Aviation Working Group
insider threat cases
Several recent high-profile cases underscore the threat from
``insiders,'' which are rogue employees that exploit their credentials,
access, and knowledge of security protocols. The FBI and our
interagency partners cooperated on the following arrests:

The arrest of Wichita-based Terry Lee Loewen on December 13,
2013 by the FBI Wichita JTTF. Loewen was charged with attempted
use of a weapon of mass destruction, maliciously attempting to
damage and destroy by explosive, and attempting to provide
material assistance to al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula.
Loewen, an avionics technician with Secure Identification
Display Area badge access to Wichita Mid-Continent Airport, was
taken into custody after he allegedly armed what he believed to
be an explosive device and attempted to open a security access
gate. During the investigation, Loewen allegedly engaged in,
among other things, pre-operational surveillance, photographing
gate access points, researching flight schedules, and assisting
in the acquisition of vehicle-borne improvised explosive device
components and construction of an explosive device.

In December 2014, Eugene Harvey, a baggage handler at
Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, was arrested on a
Federal complaint charging him with trafficking in firearms and
entering the secure areas of the airport in violation of
security requirements. The complaint alleges that Harvey
repeatedly evaded airport security with bags of firearms, some
of which were loaded. He then allegedly passed the guns off to
an accomplice who transported them as carry-on luggage to New
York, where they were illegally sold. On at least five
occasions in 2014, Harvey, a baggage handler for Delta Air
Lines, worked with another former Delta employee to allegedly
smuggle firearms through airport-controlled security
checkpoints for Delta employees, and thus he was not required
to go through the screening performed for passengers by TSA.
Once through the airport-controlled security checkpoints, the
firearms were allegedly carried in carry-on baggage into the
passenger cabins of aircraft. Each time, Harvey's accomplice
flew to New York with the guns, where they were allegedly
illegally sold.
conclusion
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, thank you again for this
opportunity to testify concerning access control measures at our
Nation's airports. The FBI's efforts and successes would not be
possible without the continued positive working relationship with our
partners and your support. I would be happy to answer any questions you
might have.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Perdue, for your testimony.
We appreciate you both being here.
We--I know your time is valuable. I now recognize myself
for 5 minutes to ask questions, and I will start with Mr.
Perdue.
Mr. Perdue, in your written statements to the committee you
included two examples of the insider threats that the FBI was
intimately involved with during the past few years. The first
one was the arrest of Wichita-based Terry Lee Loewen on
December 13 by the FBI, an act of potential terrorism. The
second was the Eugene Harvey case, the baggage handler in the
Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport in Atlanta, who was
involved in the gun-smuggling case. You are familiar with both
those cases; is that correct?
Mr. Perdue. Yes, sir. They are on-going investigations.
Mr. Katko. Is it fair to say that both these cases point
out that there are serious concerns with respect to employee
access at airports?
Mr. Perdue. I think we would concur with that, sir. Yes.
Mr. Katko. Could you turn your microphone on?
Mr. Perdue. Yes, sir. We would concur with that.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much.
Mr. Perdue. Apologies.
Mr. Katko. Now, based on these cases and the other cases
that the FBI has been involved in with respect to employee
access at airports, has the FBI developed any sort-of level of
concern about this issue or do they consider it to be a major
issue with serious threat or is it not a big deal to them?
Mr. Perdue. No. It is a big deal for us. I think one of the
things that we continue to do is to work with TSA and to
collaborate and to come up with other programs that we think
that we can help each other with the security matters.
Mr. Katko. Okay. So you have been making suggestions to the
TSA as to certain ways you can enhance the security?
Mr. Perdue. Yes, we have. Over the last actually several
months, we have had a couple of pilot projects that were
literally at the ground level that we think that we can
significantly enhance both of our capabilities for security at
the airports.
Mr. Katko. Could you briefly summarize some of those pilot
projects for us?
Mr. Perdue. Well, one of them without an acronym, I think
it is being done at 20 different----
Mr. Katko. Everything is done with acronyms in the
Government by now.
Mr. Perdue. Exactly. So there is a project that we have
been working on, it is at 20 different airports now, that we
believe that we will be able to, as opposed to doing the checks
just once where we could do on-going recurring, you know,
checks back with our criminal justice investigative service. So
it is an on-going project. It is still nascent. That we are
going to be working with TSA this year to see if we can't get
that implemented at more than just 20 of the airports.
Mr. Katko. Is there any other raw projects that you are
suggesting?
Mr. Perdue. That is the main one right now, sir.
Mr. Katko. Now, when you are talking about doing the
background check, is it fair to say that once an employee
survives an initial background check and is given a SIDA badge,
which gives him access to the airport, that they go back and do
screening, but they don't go back and check criminal history;
is that correct?
Mr. Perdue. That is correct from my knowledge, sir.
Mr. Katko. So just to pose a scenario to you. If someone
gets arrested after being employed at the airport, you may not
know about that; is that correct?
Mr. Perdue. That is correct right now based on the
situation. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. That is something that needs to be addressed?
Mr. Perdue. Indeed. That is--the prod sys that I was making
reference to, I think, will greatly enhance that this coming
year.
Mr. Katko. I am used to asking questions for hours, so this
is difficult to ask it all in 5 minutes. So forgive me.
But quickly switching gears, with respect to the gun case--
the Harvey gun case in Atlanta, I know that the FBI wasn't in
on that case from the beginning. Could you tell me when the FBI
first found out that local authorities in New York City were
investigating this matter?
Mr. Perdue. I don't know the exact time, and it is an on-
going investigation. We can get back to you on that, sir. We
would be happy to do that.
Mr. Katko. One of the things I would like to know is when
you first found out about it and when you think you should have
found out about it. Because one of the things I think we should
consider here is when Federal authorities should be notified of
aviation cases when local offices are doing them.
Mr. Perdue. We would be happy to get back to you on that.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, sir.
Switching gears here briefly, if I may. Mr. Hatfield, thank
you for your testimony today, and I appreciate it. The ASAC--
you mentioned that the ASAC committee has--you have met with
them recently and they have given you some preliminary
recommendations. Are you at liberty to share any of those with
us at this time?
Mr. Hatfield. Sir, I did in fact meet with them yesterday,
first one-on-one with their Chairman, and then with the entire
group. The working group is a subset of that group. We are
expecting, I believe it is the end of this week, that first set
of--I don't believe that they will be recommendations. But the
way they described it, they will give us the, you know, who,
what, when, and how, you know, where they are and where they
are headed with this work.
Then at 60 days, a month from the end of this week, they
will report again. Then their recommendations we expect at the
90-day mark, which would be 2 months from this Friday.
Mr. Katko. All right. You will share those results with the
committee?
Mr. Hatfield. Absolutely, sir.
Mr. Katko. All right. Thank you.
Mr. Hatfield. In fact, I am as eager to get them as you
are.
Mr. Katko. Now, when we are talking about what goes on in
Miami, you worked in Miami's airport. Is that correct?
Mr. Hatfield. Negative, sir. I was the Federal security
director for TSA at Miami for nearly 7 years.
Mr. Katko. At Miami's airport. Okay. Right.
Now, when you were there, did you get any understanding of
how they were able to afford it and handle doing that at such a
large airport, doing full security checks for all employees?
Mr. Hatfield. Well, they are on record as describing the
price tag as just over $3 million a year. The tough thing in
this answer, sir, is defining the word ``it.'' How they did it.
So they were doing screening. They do it today. But
``screening'' is a word that has a broad range of meaning. So I
can just tell you in short terms that what they do in terms of
their screening protocols at the four employee checkpoints and
at the seven elevators that have access to the secure area is a
very different type of screening than what we do at the very
visible checkpoints in the lobby. It is different from the type
of screening we do in our random unpredictable mobile screening
at employee access points.
Mr. Katko. I would ask you how so, but I am already over
the limit. So I presume if someone else could follow up with
that. But last----
Mr. Hatfield. I will talk fast.
Mr. Katko. I am good at that, too.
The last thing I will ask you is with respect to the GAO
numbers you referred to about the cost in having full screening
of all employees, that was in 2008, I believe it was; is that
correct? In 2009?
Mr. Hatfield. The HSI, the Homeland Security Institute
study, which puts in price tags--a range of price tag on that
subject.
Mr. Katko. That was before GSA had their PreCheck program.
Is that correct?
Mr. Hatfield. It was--that definitely preceded TSA's
PreCheck.
Mr. Katko. Do you think it would be prudent, when we are
considering everything in the total mix of measures--remedial
measures to take that we take into consideration perhaps a new
study from GAO or somebody to see what the updated numbers
might look like?
Mr. Hatfield. I think by virtue of the fact that that is
now a 7-year-old study, if we are going to really drill into
this, I would not object, nor would I dissuade a new study to
really look at it and try to squeeze some hard cost estimates
out of it.
Again, the toughest challenge in doing that study is going
to be establishing a set of definitions. Because screening--
there is screening, and there is screening, and there is
screening. We can't just lump it altogether as though it is
sort of a universal practice.
Mr. Katko. Yes. That is perfectly understood, and I
couldn't agree with you more. Thank you very much both you
gentlemen.
I am now going to recognize the Ranking Minority Member of
the subcommittee, the gentlelady from New York, Miss Rice, for
any questions she may have.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I am going to start with you, Mr. Perdue. I want to
thank you both for coming here because this is not--this
hearing is not about us asking gotcha questions at all. If we
are going to get to the bottom of how we can keep American
travelers safe at the 450 airports we have in this country, we
have to be able to have an open and frank discussion.
I have to say that, you know, obviously Mr. Chairman and I
have significant prosecutorial experience in our backgrounds. I
was working--you might have been, too, Mr. Chairman--but on 9/
11 for the Federal Government. One of the things that came out
in the aftermath of 9/11 was the lack of communication between
the various agencies in the Federal Government. They were not
sharing information that, had they been, some things might have
been able to be addressed earlier.
So my question to you, Mr. Perdue, is: What protocols are
put into place, if any, that the FBI has with not just the
Atlanta airport, but any airport in this country in order to
information share, whether that is investigations that are on-
going that you are doing to an airport employee that you need
to inform local authorities about or the reverse?
Mr. Perdue. Yes, ma'am. That is hopefully an easy question.
Since 9/11, of course, we focus on our Joint Terrorism Task
Forces. So every one of our 56 field offices has, at least, one
Joint Terrorism Task Force. Each of these Joint Terrorism Task
Forces have at least one airport liaison agent assigned to each
of the airports.
So we have roughly about 100--excuse me--about 450, give or
take, you know, agents or task force officers that work for
FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Forces that are at the airports
every day. So collaboration, information sharing is key to
everything that we do.
So I don't mean to be so short or succinct, but that is a
part of what we do. We preach it, we talk about it, and we do
not tolerate the lack of sharing. So----
Miss Rice. Well, it just begs the question as to why there
maybe wasn't that kind of information sharing in the case that
we are talking about in Atlanta?
Mr. Perdue. Yeah. I do not have the details on that. I will
say that that was a criminal investigation, and it is not that
our criminal program is not as tight as our counterterrorism
program. I would not suggest that. But I would say it is two
different, you know, sets of work, even though that we do work
collectively together at the airports.
So we can get back to you on that, ma'am, on the details of
that investigation. I don't know what actually fell apart at
the time.
Miss Rice. So there is no legal prohibition from the
sharing of information. Correct?
Mr. Perdue. There is not.
Miss Rice. Confidentiality or----
Mr. Perdue. No, ma'am.
Miss Rice. Okay. So I don't think there is any question
that we need to do more robust criminal background checks.
Is there anything preventing, from a logistics standpoint,
going back ad infinitum? Forget about the 10-year barrier.
Doing a lifetime criminal background check, going back to
whenever the person may have first had contact with the
criminal justice system. Is there anything preventing that from
being the way we conduct criminal background checks?
Mr. Perdue. I don't know the details. I don't know how
cost-prohibitive it is. I know the TSA has some details on
that.
I would say, though, that the pilot project that we are
working toward hopefully we will get access 24/7 to the
Criminal Justice Information Center, CJIS, at Clarksville for
TSA and that information.
So I think we have this pilot, and we will be looking at
other pilots this year, where we can make our information
readily available to them and in a system that would not be
cost-prohibitive.
Miss Rice. All right. Do you know what the rationale is for
only going back 10 years?
Mr. Perdue. I do not, ma'am.
Miss Rice. So you do do recurrent criminal background
checks now? Is that true?
Mr. Perdue. No. There is a--I think at 20 of the airports
right now, we have a pilot project that we are working on. So
the goal this year is to enhance that.
Miss Rice. Now, it is--correct me if I am wrong, but it
doesn't require anything other than just looking, I guess,
refreshing the review of a set of fingerprints to any number of
databases. Correct?
Mr. Perdue. The fingerprints would be one and, of course,
just setting up a system where the information could be, you
know, passed readily. So, again, that is something we will be
working with TSA on this year.
Miss Rice. So is there any way that you can set up a system
of information sharing whereby an airport employee gets
arrested, does not share that information with their employer,
but a law enforcement agency can share that with the airline or
the TSA?
Mr. Perdue. Yeah. That would be at the heart of this pilot
project. So----
Miss Rice. That is the heart of it.
Mr. Perdue. So that would literally be at the heart of it.
Miss Rice. What is--what obstacles are in the way? I mean,
do you see that as do-able?
Mr. Perdue. I think--I think so. It is do-able. We have had
discussions about this over the last couple of days, and we
will be pursuing it, and we will look forward to testifying
about it later.
Miss Rice. Okay. So, Mr. Hatfield, I have a couple of
questions for you. So when you are driving to work in the
morning and you are looking at the day ahead of you, answer
this question for me: The top three things that are going to
frustrate me today in terms of enabling me to get my job done
are?
Mr. Hatfield. Well, that has to start with the word
bureaucracy. Let me answer that, if I can, quickly in three
ways. Inside: Our business is a people business. We have 60,000
employees, and 43,000, in round numbers, are in uniform. We do
what we do with technology, but the heart of our efforts are
the people. So hiring those people, retaining those people,
teaching, training, and cultivating those people can sometimes
be a challenge with the personnel rules that we have to deal
with. Getting rid of the bad people, the ones who don't belong
there, is probably the most frustrating process that we go
through. It can be very lengthy in the Federal system.
That said, I have been here for about a week and a half at
headquarters in from Miami. In my new role, I am very
encouraged by the briefing that I just had by our human capital
director, who is taking real aggressive steps towards
streamlining, hiring, toward making the process, the Federal
personnel processes easier for our field leaders, our Federal
security directors to follow.
Outside, you know, in the big picture, I see the faces
almost every day in intelligence briefings of the suspects, the
known individuals who are plotting, planning, or suspected of
planning terrorist acts.
I can tell you, I have been for almost 13 years in this
agency, my sense of urgency, my commitment, my belief in the
reality of that threat is more real today than it was when I
started in 2002. Making sure that everyone else has that
urgency, it can be frustrating. You know, the longer we go from
any major domestic event, the shorter people's memory retention
and the thinner it gets. We have a lot of stakeholders, we have
a lot of customers, we have a lot of employees. Making sure
that everybody shares that sense of urgency or, at least, that
recognition of how real the threat is. They don't have to all
be as urgent as we are at the center of the storm, but let's
make sure we don't dismiss this threat as something that went
away, because it did not.
Miss Rice. Mr. Chairman, if I could just be indulged for
one more brief second.
You talked about the difficulty in terms of defining
screening. You are well aware of the program that Miami has in
place. You have actually lauded it and said it is, you know,
basically like a blue ribbon system.
Regardless of how you define screening, in your opinion is
there any amount of money that is too much to ensure the safety
of Americans traveling on our airlines?
Mr. Hatfield. You know----
Miss Rice. Is there a logistical impossibility? You have to
keep it very brief. But is there a logistical impossibility to
implementing them at various degrees depending on threat
assessments that are made at each individual airport so that
the cost can be contained and the actual threat can be
addressed?
Mr. Hatfield. I am going to take that in three parts and
try and be as quick and responsive as possible.
No. 1, the Miami system, absolutely laudable. Blue ribbon
in the initiative that it represents and the willingness to
take on unilateral cost, expense, and activity that the airport
has demonstrated now for many years. It is a good system for
airport crime fighting, theft, smuggling, the kind of things
that it was designed to do. It has collateral benefit for
counterterrorism work. But that is not its primary design, nor
is that a primary, you know, part of the whole mix there.
On the cost piece of it, that is a tough discussion to ever
get into. I will answer it this way: I want to be better every
day. Better does not always mean more, more money, more time,
more resources. Better means better. Better means looking at
your vulnerabilities that are highlighted through public
disclosures, through your own self-analysis towards your own
assessment--by your own assessments, and demanding better of
yourself and your people every day.
Miss Rice. Thank you.
Mr. Hatfield. There was a third point, and I apologize----
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Hatfield. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much.
Now, in accordance with our committee rules and practice, I
plan to recognize Members who were present at the start of the
hearing by seniority on this subcommittee, alternating back and
forth between my right and my left.
So the next person up is the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Rogers. I give you 5 minutes. I will note, Mr. Rogers and the
others on the committee, we have been a little lax on the time,
but we are going to have to enforce it a little more strictly
going forward.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Perdue, the Ranking Member was asking you about the
data collection and the background reviews. You mentioned
fingerprints.
Are there some other points of data that could be collected
that aren't currently that you think would be helpful in that
10-year or whatever number of years review?
Mr. Perdue. Well, the Criminal Justice Information System
out at Clarksville, of course, it has the biometrics, so there
is fingerprints, there is other biometrics, and there is just
literally all of the thousands and thousands of points of
information that we collect in our intelligence programs.
So, with the speed of computers, all we would need to do is
obviously, you know, access that and to run checks against it.
So other than----
Mr. Rogers. The data being collected is adequate. You
just----
Mr. Perdue. I believe so. The whole idea, I think, is to
create a functional system where we can exchange it, you know,
freely and openly in a timely manner.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you.
Mr. Hatfield, to follow up on the Chairman's questions. In
Miami, you kind of left it. You said you will talk faster. But
tell me more about how the Miami system works. I think you said
there is four points of entry for the employees?
Mr. Hatfield. Gladly. The basic story to be told here is
that back in 1999, to face a rash of theft issues and
smuggling, they looked at how they could tighten up controls,
access controls with employees.
The first thing they did is something that every airport in
the country can do today, that many have done over the years
because it is a dynamic, evolving industry, and that is how
many access points are there? Pedestrian, vehicle, or
combination.
If you reduce that number of access points, you reduce the
opportunity. You are also able to better focus and better train
your resources on securing those points of access and egress.
So the screening itself, the most robust part of it, is at four
choke points. I think that at one point they had nearly 40
access points. They have a fraction of that now, both for
vehicles and for people.
They have a traditional set-up with a magnetometer, walk
through a metal detector, and an X-ray machine to screen both
people and their bags for metallic objects, metallic threat
items. So this is a guns and knives, the kind of classic items.
But the--you know, there is a whole range of dynamic
differences between that and the screening upstairs.
Again, I can't say enough good things about what they have
done in Miami. In the years that I spent down there, they were
absolutely engaged partners, as were every other member of that
airport community. I didn't get a chance in the beginning, but
Mr. Perdue's folks at each airport I have worked at, Newark,
Kennedy, and Miami, have been very strong partners for us. He
certainly is a representative of the kind of quality individual
that the FBI joins and partners with TSA day in and day out
across the country.
Mr. Rogers. So this does not sound like an overly
burdensome process at those four checkpoints for the employees
in Miami. But yet you seem to indicate that you didn't think
that would be a system that would work at other airports. Did I
misinterpret?
Mr. Hatfield. No, sir. I didn't venture a speculation on
that. I think that what was replicable--what is replicable at
other airports is that first step that they took when they
started this initiative many years ago, and that is look at how
many access points there are for both people and vehicles, and
what can you do to continue running the airport, maintain
operations and efficiency, but reduce the number of
opportunities.
Mr. Rogers. Assuming that each airport did that, would you
not agree that it would not be overly burdensome to require
employees every time they reenter a workplace to go through a
magnetometer?
Mr. Hatfield. It goes to a more fundamental question, sir.
That is we look at the screening of the employee base in this
context. It is a known and trusted population. So through the
vetting, through the credentialing----
Mr. Rogers. There was that fellow in Atlanta that brought
the guns back and forth----
Mr. Hatfield. Right. It doesn't end with vetting and
credentialing. It has to include a physical screening
component.
Mr. Rogers. So the answer is, yes, that is not an overly
burdensome requirement to require every employee that comes
back into the workplace to go through a magnetometer?
Mr. Hatfield. It is not an overly burdensome requirement
because it happens today. TSA does most of it. But airlines and
airports also do physical screening in addition to Miami. Now,
they are the example of 100 percent, and I believe Orlando has
been mentioned as well.
Mr. Rogers. Well, my point is requiring 100 percent of the
employees would not be an overly burdensome requirement, just
to go through a magnetometer.
Mr. Hatfield. I think that for the best answer to that, I
would wait for the report back from the ASAC, the security
advisory group, because they are really doing a deep dive into
this, and they have got the representation of all of the key
stakeholders and players, as well as TSA participation in that
group effort.
Mr. Rogers. Well, I don't need to wait for the report. I
know what the answer should be.
With that, my time has expired. I will yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much, Mr. Rogers.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Following along Mr. Rogers' line of questioning, Mr.
Hatfield, who is tasked with the responsibility for this
committee's information once a person is credentialed? Who is
responsible for making sure that that person is who they are as
it relates to going to work every day?
Mr. Hatfield. I apologize, sir. I didn't quite hear the
middle part of that question.
Who is responsible----
Mr. Thompson. Well, once a person receives a SIDA badge----
Mr. Hatfield. Yes.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. And goes to work, is that the
airport's responsibility for guaranteeing that that person is
who they are, or is it TSA overseeing the process that the
airport does?
Mr. Hatfield. It ultimately falls on both. It starts with
the airport because the airport is the entity that collects the
information necessary to submit to TSA for the criminal history
record check and for the security threat assessment. That
information includes fingerprints and personal identifiers. For
the airport's purpose, they may or may not collect Social
Security. But they do then send that to TSA. We do the check
and send back the results.
As far as maintaining--you know, that was one that was a
recent study not long ago.
Mr. Thompson. So--so--I understand. I am trying to get----
Mr. Hatfield. Sure. Go ahead.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Everything down. So once that
person has the badge----
Mr. Hatfield. Yes.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. For 10 years, there is no
review, or what is the review?
Mr. Hatfield. The review is on a continuous basis on the
TSA security threat assessment side because what happens is
that name--those identifiers go into a database that is
continually checked against the Terrorist Screening Center's
database. The question at hand----
Mr. Thompson. But not the criminal.
Mr. Hatfield. No, sir. That is the question that is before
the ASAC.
Mr. Thompson. Not criminal, but terrorist. The burden is on
the airport to guarantee that that person is who they are?
Mr. Hatfield. Yes. It is. When they collect their
information, they have a process to----
Mr. Thompson. How about going to work every day? When that
person goes to work every day?
Mr. Hatfield. In terms of matching the ID with the face,
many people are involved in that, sir. Most airports have
challenge programs; if you see somebody on the ramp who is not
showing an ID, if you see somebody on the ramp and use testers
who wear a woman's ID or----
Mr. Thompson. But who is ultimately in charge of the
program? Is it the airport?
Mr. Hatfield. Of the program of verifying identity on a
daily basis? Everybody in that airport community is responsible
for it.
Mr. Thompson. I understand, but I am--I am a ramp worker--
--
Mr. Hatfield. Okay.
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Going with my SIDA badge. If
something happens, is it the airport, or are you saying it is
everybody working together has to figure out who is there?
Mr. Hatfield. You are getting to your job on the ramp, and
it is in a secure area. You use that badge and you swipe
through a reader or you present it to a guard, or, in some
cases, you go through a screening area, but in fact that----
Mr. Thompson. I am trying to narrow the area of
responsibility so that we kind of understand, because I am
trying to get to the other part of the question.
Who pays for that? Is it the airport that pays for the
screening of those individuals, or is it who?
Mr. Hatfield. Sir, that is a complex question with a
complex answer. So the easy part of that is who pays for the
screening? Well, if they go through my checkpoint at Miami, I
am going to screen them and TSA pays for it. If they go through
Miami's checkpoint, the airport pays for it. If you go to
Atlanta, they also pass through the TSA checkpoint which I
guess the cost is then borne by TSA, but they go through--they
go through a Delta screening contractor when they get on an
employee bus.
Mr. Thompson. So there is no one entity.
Mr. Hatfield. There is a combination, sir.
Mr. Thompson. So there is no one entity in charge?
Mr. Hatfield. There are--well, leadership is shared and
command is shared.
Mr. Thompson. I understand. The individual with a SIDA
badge, who is responsible for keeping up with the badges?
Mr. Hatfield. The airport security office is responsible
for the issuance and the retrieval of those badges----
Mr. Thompson. All the badges.
Mr. Hatfield. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. So do you require a monitoring of that
process?
Mr. Hatfield. Absolutely, and, in fact, we have responded
to a recent Government study that said there needed to be
tighter constraints on that, and I was not here at headquarters
when that took place and was delivered, but I was in the field,
and I can tell you it manifested itself at the Miami security
office in terms of how they audited, managed, retained
records----
Mr. Thompson. So are any of those SIDA badges, to your
knowledge, biometric?
Mr. Hatfield. I am sorry, sir.
Mr. Thompson. Are any of them biometric?
Mr. Hatfield. In Miami, they are not. Biometrics are the--
up to the discretion of the airport in terms of selecting,
purchasing, deploying biometric reading equipment.
Mr. Thompson. To your knowledge, do you know any airports
that use biometrics?
Mr. Hatfield. I know that some do, and I can't--I can get
you names of them. We will poll them.
Mr. Thompson. Please get us.
Mr. Hatfield. Okay. You want it for biometrics for----
Mr. Thompson. Your indulgence, please.
Mr. Perdue, are you aware, in line with the Ranking Member
of the committee's questioning, aware of any written protocols
for the sharing of information with either airport police--and
I am trying to get to the Atlanta situation. Would the Atlanta
airport police department have been involved in a situation
like that, or would that investigation have been conducted
outside that airport?
Mr. Perdue. I am not for sure I understand the question,
sir, but----
Mr. Thompson. Well, you have New York and Atlanta involved.
I am trying to see at what point are there written protocols
that would bring the Atlanta airport authorities, police or
whomever, into this investigation since it went on so long.
Would it have been at the beginning, in the interim, or at the
end?
Mr. Perdue. If the FBI had been in charge of it, sir,
hopefully what we would have done would, and what we do with
all our other investigations, we share, we collaborate and we
do our best to make sure all of our partners know what is going
on, and so on the particular issue, the question was is that am
I aware of a written protocol that oversees local police
officers sharing information? I am not, sir.
Mr. Thompson. Not local. Federal sharing information with
locals. The other way.
Mr. Perdue. Inside the FBI, I am aware of the FBI's, you
know, guidelines, our policies, and that they are all about
sharing and collaborating, sir.
Mr. Katko. The Chairman recognizes Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hatfield, not to be redundant, and forgive me if I am,
but I just want to make sure I understand this and I have got a
clear understanding of it is that the SIDA cards that are
issued at one airport are not--are not valid in other airports.
Mr. Hatfield. Right.
Mr. Carter. Okay. At a certain airport, such as Atlanta, at
Hartsfield, that the list is maintained by the airport
authority of those people who have the SIDA badges.
Mr. Hatfield. The list of SIDAs, yes.
Mr. Carter. SIDAs, okay. Is it ever--do they ever review it
and just randomly check them? I know that you mentioned that
they check them against the terrorism threats and such, but do
they just have random checks from time to time?
Mr. Hatfield. Some airports do, sir. I know, in fact,
coming back to Miami, Miami does that. The Miami Police
Department--Miami Dade County Police Department will go into
the security office on a periodic basis, and it is pretty
frequent, and they will take a chunk, a representative sample,
and they will go back and they will run a recurrent criminal
history record check against it, but, again, that is their
initiative. It is not a requirement.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Why isn't it a requirement? Why don't we
have more consistency among the airports?
Mr. Hatfield. It is a good question in terms of why isn't
it a requirement. The part of the work that we are doing
collaboratively with the FBI right now is to come up with a
means to do it. So we have got a mechanism, and it is a fairly
new mechanism that allows us to do recurrent vetting against
the terrorist database to do terrorist database screening. It
is not just something that is existing that can plug and play,
which is why we are developing it, and I think we are fairly on
the record, if we are not, I guess I am on the record now, we
are looking for that. We want to be able to do constant
recurrent criminal history records checks.
Mr. Carter. Okay.
Mr. Hatfield. We can go to the Ranking Member's question of
the duration how far back we look, that is a separate issue,
but in terms of do we want a mechanism that can allow us to do
the same thing with criminal history records that we do with
the terrorist database? Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. Okay. Let me ask you this: What did we learn in
Atlanta?
Mr. Hatfield. We were reminded in Atlanta of the fact that
our airports are open and to a degree knowingly porous
facilities. They--that is part of being an airport, that there
are vulnerabilities. That it is our responsibility to identify
and address those vulnerabilities, but just as important as
identifying and addressing the vulnerabilities is understanding
the threat and what the two of those things together go to
create a risk.
So the demonstration that that gun-running operation did
was it was--it was a glaring vulnerability in that case. I
wouldn't say that it was in and of itself a brand new
revelation. We know that crime takes place in airports like it
takes place in cities. They are just--they are smaller cities,
and so we need to--you know, that is part of our partnership
with the FBI and with local and Federal law enforcement is
there is crime fighting that is going on in airports across the
country, and there is counterterrorism work. We do overlap. We
each benefit from each other's work, but they are separate
disciplines, and so in that combined effort, we need to
maintain focus on both of those challenges, and, again, what
did we learn? I think we learned what I said earlier. We can do
better. I think we can challenge ourselves to do better. Is
that answer 100 percent employee screening? I don't know that
it is. Again, I am eager to hear the council--ASAC's
recommendations, but I do think that today now, even before
those recommendations come in, we have taken steps that are
helping us do better increasing employee screening.
Mr. Carter. Okay. I know that there are a number of
agencies, as you have alluded to, that have a part in this, but
I want to concentrate primarily on airlines. What is their
responsibility, and if they fail at that responsibility, is
there any kind of disciplinary action or anything?
Mr. Hatfield. I will be honest with you. The requirement
for them to do employee screening is open to interpretation. It
is fairly broad. So in some cases, you will find airlines--
Delta is included in Atlanta, by the way--where they are paying
a third-party contractor, a security force provider, to screen
their employees at points prior to entry into the secure area.
They are footing the bill and executing that security measure
on their own dime. That takes place in airports around the
country by various airlines. So there is a commitment out
there. There are demonstrable examples of it, but it is not a--
there is not a cut-and-dry standard or a threshold, a
percentage, a number that they have to adhere to.
Mr. Carter. Do you feel like there should be?
Mr. Hatfield. The difficulty in doing that is, as Mr.
Thompson said, there are 450 airports out there. We have got 80
Federal security directors who, through a system of hub and
spokes and stand-alone airports, work to create a tailor-made
custom security plan for each of those airports. They demand
that. So we might be able to get more specific. I think that is
one of the things that we are looking at with the ASAC in terms
of setting those screening goals for what the airport or the
airlines are responsible for, but I am not going to pre-empt
their recommendations in that.
It is a cookie-cutter standard, a target number, a 10
percent or 1,000 or any of those I think would be impractical,
but we are good at working on these custom solutions. We have
got Federal standards, and we know how to apply them in 450
different areas. So this could be one of those things that we
learn how to change our behavior with.
Mr. Carter. Thank you very much.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Carter.
The Chairman now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Payne.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this
committee hearing.
Also to the Ranking Member of the full committee and the
Ranking Member of the sub. It is an honor for me to have joined
this committee.
Mr. Hatfield, being from the 10th Congressional District in
the State of New Jersey, Newark Airport is 5 minutes from my
home. You know, you stated in your testimony that through the
security threat assessment, you know, bad actors are weeded
out.
What is your response to media reports that an individual
that had been issued a SIDA credential in the past was found to
be fighting overseas with ISIS?
Mr. Hatfield. I actually think that is a good example of
the system that we do have the constant recurring vetting on. I
believe the case you are referring to involves an individual
who was identified, but he--it was after his employment in the
airport that his association with ISIL had begun, and so the
idea of having--look, we don't have an enemy that fosters and
cultivates cradle-to-battlefront operatives. They are out there
recruiting adults and, you know, people who have lived lives
and, you know, can become influenced by the rhetoric and the
recruiting. So you may have somebody who has had a fairly
uneventful life with no criminal record, with no terrorist
contact or suspicion, who suddenly becomes activated or
inspired, as the magazine's title intends it to do. So that is
why we believe very strongly in maintaining that constant
terrorist database vetting and why that proves a good model.
Frankly, I think that there is, in this case, even higher
value in that work that we are already doing, but it certainty
supports our search and our work with the FBI in coming up with
a constant criminal revetting system.
Mr. Payne. Well, let me ask you, then, once, you know, a
security breach occurs, following the Ranking Member's
questioning, who is responsible for reporting the breach to the
TSA, and are the breaches collected into a database?
Mr. Hatfield. Yes. They are collected into a database, and
we have--it kind of depends on the nature of the breach, where
it occurred, who was on site, but there is very demanding
reporting requirements. You know, in a typical situation, it is
TSA and the local PD of jurisdiction who are the first to get
it. On our side, it will typically be our regulatory folks. It
can be the screening folks or our law enforcement arm, but the
local police, then, and if it rises to the level of a Federal
investigation, the FBI is brought in and so forth and so on,
but your typical sort-of first reporting points for an airport
security incident, TSA and the local police department.
Mr. Payne. Mr. Perdue, you know, if a SIDA badge holder is
convicted or found to be guilty of one of the 28 disqualifying
crimes, are they expected to self-report the criminal activity,
or is there a system in place to collect this data as well? Can
you describe this process?
Mr. Perdue. The process in place right now, again, is just
when the entry-level employee's name trace and then the name
checks come by through the Criminal Justice Information Center.
So, other than what I have already provided testimony on today
with this pilot project, those are the two things that we are
working on.
Mr. Payne. So it is identified, or are they obligated to
self-report?
Mr. Perdue. It is not--I have no information that they are
obligated to self-report, and so that would be a TSA question,
sir.
Mr. Payne. Okay. You know, what penalties exist for those
who misuse their SIDA credentials to enter a secure area of an
airport?
Mr. Perdue. I am not familiar with the exact exposure or
what the crime actually would be. I defer to TSA or that too,
sir.
Mr. Payne. Mr. Hatfield.
Mr. Hatfield. If it is a case of misuse where there is a
regulatory or a rule violation, they can face suspension or
revocation of that badge, which in many or most cases means
their inability to work. So there is as high price there. If it
moves into a criminal act or there is criminal elements to the
case, then, of course, local PD and/or the FBI or the law
enforcement agencies would--and that would be a case for the
court systems, depending on if prosecution resulted from it.
There also is the potential for civil penalties. Again, if
it is a regulatory infraction, TSA can issue a civil penalty to
an individual.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Hatfield. You are welcome, sir.
Mr. Payne. Mr. Chairman, I am going to show restraint and
yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Ratcliffe of Texas.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Hatfield and Mr. Perdue, for being here
today and for providing your insights and clarity on airport
security measures.
I do want to follow up on the line of questioning from the
gentleman from New Jersey about security breaches a moment ago,
and I will direct this to you, Mr. Hatfield.
According to a DHS OIG report that was released back in May
2012, TSA is supposed to document all security breaches locally
at each specific airport, and that is supposed to be done
through TSA's tracking system, the PARIS system, the
Performance and Results Information System. That IG report,
though, found that more than half of the breaches weren't
actually being reported into the PARIS system, and of those
that were reported, only half of those was any corrective
measures taken. So can you comment on that and, in so doing,
hopefully talk to us about what reforms TSA has made to those
policies and procedures to ensure that everything is being
accurately reported.
Mr. Hatfield. I can, sir. The fundamental problem at that
point in time--and I will talk to the remedy since then--the
fundamental problem was in the definition of ``breach.'' You
could go talk to 80 different Federal security directors or
their staffs. Sometimes the most insignificant incidences were
being called a breach, and other times more appropriate
incidents were being called breaches. So we set out after that
report and in concert with the IG, who I believe validated the
response that we made, and that is to set a more defined set of
parameters for what constitutes a breach.
I was in the field during that time, and I know that, you
know, we worked very hard to discern between a security event--
and that is sort-of--that is what we are left on the other side
of the ledger, security events. They happen every day. But a
breach is a pretty distinct event in itself and requires a
threshold to be met. So once we got the definition down, I
think our reporting through PARIS has gotten much better.
When you talk about the absence or the lack of consequences
in a large number, again, you had things being called breaches
that either didn't draw or demand a punitive action or were
such fleeting events that there really weren't even
perpetratorial players to identify in it going back. So I think
that we are pretty aggressive in terms of using the regulatory
weight, if you will, of the civil penalty. Of course, in most
cases--and I think any good regulator follows this philosophy--
corrective action and remedy to the bad behavior or the
omission is the first goal rather than just, you know,
collecting money for the Treasury, but if there is a repeat
offense or an unwillingness to remedy and correct the problem,
we absolutely will not hesitate to level civil penalties. We
absolutely will not hesitate to bring in law enforcement if
there is any indication of criminal activity.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Hatfield.
So I know there is not a subsequent IG report, but you
referenced their sort-of follow-up with you in terms of
recognizing with a new definition, if you will, of what
constitutes a breach.
Can you put a percentage on the number of breaches that are
now recorded in this system or give me an estimate of that?
Mr. Hatfield. I don't have that visibility on the overall
system, sir, but I will get back to you. I want to validate
what I represent in terms of our remedy and the IG's reaction
to it. I want to make sure that I have got that right. This
is--at this level, sort-of an enterprise level of these
activities, I am fairly new on the scene, but I have certainly
seen it from the field perspective and have been part and
parcel to the old practice and the new practice, and be more
than happy to get you some feedback on that.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Very good.
Mr. Perdue, I don't want you to feel left out, so I have
got a math question for you too. This relates to joint
vulnerability assessments. So data that I have seen from the
GAO indicated that from 2004 to 2011, JVAs had only been
conducted at about 17 percent of TSA-regulated airports. Now, I
am not math major, but does that mean that 83 percent during
that period of time weren't being assessed?
Mr. Perdue. I do not track that or monitor that. That would
be a TSA question. We participate, you know, in this and we--
jointly we do these assessments, but as far as the numbers, I
wouldn't have the answer to that, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. But so maybe you can answer this
question: Can you relate, since you do work with TSA with
respect to that, and how do TSA and FBI decide which airports
are going to be assessed or undergo a JVA?
Mr. Perdue. Again, what we do is that we participate in 100
percent of them. TSA decides which ones they are going to go to
and then we make sure that we have representatives there to
provide appropriate threat assessments.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Can you expound on that, Mr.----
Mr. Hatfield. Certainly. I would be happy to. The
identification of those airports, I can give you the actual
numbers in closed session, but let's say, by number, it is a
small amount; by volume a percentage of daily passenger
traffic, it is a huge amount. So 450 airports, if you look at
our smallest airports, it is nearly 300 of them, represent just
a fraction of the daily passenger traffic. So we are really
focused on a critical number of highly important high-traffic
airports. That said--and the cycle for that is one-third of
them every year. So, in a 3-year cycle, we will get back to the
first set of them.
However, every single year every single airport goes
through a TSA regulatory assessment. So our folks are out there
looking at vulnerabilities, looking at compliance, looking at
all of the aspects of the airport security plan for every
single airport. That is an annual requirement, and it is a very
large part of what our regulatory group does.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thanks, gentlemen.
I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Ratcliffe.
The Chairman recognizes Mr. Johnson, the gentleman from
Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Chairman Katko and Ranking Member
Rice. I want to thank you for allowing me to be here today.
I sent a letter to the full committee and the
Transportation Security subcommittee at the beginning of this
Congress requesting that this committee hold a hearing on this
very topic, and I thank you for listening to my call.
This is an important issue for National security and for my
hometown of Atlanta. I made a pledge to the people of Georgia
that I would focus on this issue, and it is in that spirit that
I appear here today.
I look forward to working with all Members of this
committee, which has important jurisdiction to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the public who transport
themselves on the airlines, and this is critical work.
I want to congratulate you both for ascending to these
important positions on this important subcommittee, and I look
forward to working with you in the future.
As we all know, in December, at Hartsfield-Jackson Airport
in my home State of Georgia, the busiest airport in the world,
an employee and his co-conspirator, a former airport employee,
were arrested for smuggling guns onto airplanes. If this is
happening at one of--at the world's largest most prominent
airport where passenger security is at the forefront, then I am
afraid to think of what may be happening at other airports.
The incidents at Hartsfield-Jackson should be a wake-up
call to this committee and to airports and airlines. We must
ensure that airport and airline employees who enjoy unique
access to airplanes undergo rigorous security screenings in
order to prevent such a more serious incident from occurring,
and that is not the first incident of that nature to occur at
Hartsfield-Jackson over the years.
Mr. Hatfield, I heard you say before I left that random
screening of employees is just as effective as 100 percent
screening of employees. Is that correct?
Mr. Hatfield. Sir, I--those were not my words. I was
quoting a study, actually. It is not my conclusion. I mean, I
did say that quoting the Homeland Security Institute's study,
and I also qualify that by saying that even in their own
footnotes, they acknowledge that they had a small sampling, and
to the Member's question earlier, would it be a good idea to
revisit that study, after 7 years, probably so.
Mr. Johnson. If the premise or the conclusion of that
study, as you have stated, is that random screening is just as
effective as 100 percent screening of employees, then would you
not think that that same general rule would apply to airline
passengers? In other words, if we don't screen 100 percent
airline passengers and we just do a random screening process
for them, you would not agree that we should do that. Is that
true?
Mr. Hatfield. Sir, I would not subscribe to that notion,
but I will also tell you that in the 12\1/2\ years TSA has been
doing this, we have evolved on the passenger side as well, and
now we actually segment the population of passengers and people
on the plane, including flight crew and aircraft crew. In some
cases, the known crew member, we are doing primarily identity
screening. So it is a different type of screening. It is not
the physical screening at the checkpoint although they are
subject to that on a random basis.
So, no, I would not, again, subscribe to the idea that we
change our paradigm because I think we are pretty satisfied
with it.
Mr. Johnson. But you would be reluctant to be change in
terms of going to a 100 percent screening of airline employees?
Mr. Hatfield. Again, ``screening'' is a big word and it has
a lot of meanings. Right now we do 100 percent screening of
airline employees in that we screen them against a terrorist
database every day. We screen physically----
Mr. Johnson. Physical screening.
Mr. Hatfield. Physical screening? Right now we physically
screen about 100,000 employees a day through various means.
Mr. Johnson. You have got how many employees in Atlanta?
About--what--40,000 if I recall?
Mr. Hatfield. In the total airport population?
Mr. Johnson. Yes.
Mr. Hatfield. I have heard it is around 40-plus thousand.
Mr. Johnson. That is a lot of individuals coming through,
some of whom are not screened at all. But statistically you
would support the notion that it would be unnecessary to ramp
up screening. Is that what you are arguing?
Mr. Hatfield. No, sir. My position is this. We have a very
qualified and dedicated group who is looking at this from a
very analytical point of view with broad representation of all
the players in the airport community.
As an aside, I spoke with the Federal security director in
Atlanta yesterday, Mary Leftridge Byrd, who is not only a
colleague of mine but a friend, and talked to her about this
subject. They have taken moves to ramp up the number, the
percentage of physical screenings that they do as a sort-of a
surge posture during this analysis while we look at what the
long-range posture will be. But, again, as we bring in all the
members of this community, airlines, airport operators, the
TSA, law enforcement at both the Federal and local level, it is
a question that demands discussion and that we are looking at.
I am not prepared, sir, today to preempt the ASAC's
recommendations nor to make conclusions at this point. But I
will grant you this, yeah, we need to look at this. You know,
is it going all the way to 100? Is it going to an incremental
increase and the percentage that we physically screen today? I
think the answer is somewhere in there.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Johnson for your questions.
I want to thank the gentlemen, Mr. Hatfield and Mr. Perdue.
It is obvious that you are fine public servants and that you
are highly competent and qualified to answer these questions.
We definitely had the right people here today with respect to
you two. So thank you very much for your time, and I wish you
well and look forward speaking to you in the future.
Members of the committee may have some additional questions
for the both of you. I will ask that you respond to these
questions in writing in a timely manner. The hearing record
will be held open for 10 days with respect these two witnesses.
We will take a very brief recess so that the next--the
second panel can get prepared to testify.
Thank you, gentlemen.
Mr. Hatfield. Thank you, sir.
[Recess.]
Mr. Katko. Good afternoon. Before we get into introductions
here, I want to make a couple of technical notes for the
record. First from Miss Rice.
Miss Rice. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that this
letter from President Williams of AFGE Local 554 in Georgia
regarding his concern over the firearm smuggling incident at
Atlanta Jackson-Hartsfield Airport be entered into the record.
Mr. Katko. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Letter From L.P. Robert Williams, AFGE Local 554 TSA Georgia
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security.

Dear Congressman Thompson: I am writing to express my deep concern over
the recent public revelations of current and former Delta employees
smuggling 131 firearms and ammunition aboard Delta flights between May
1 and December 10th 2014. This information was not surprising to the
TSA Officers who work at Atlanta Jackson Hartsfield Airport.
I represent all the TSA officers in the State of Georgia and this
huge glitch has been repeatedly pointed out to local supervision and
management over the last three years. TSA'S Local management's would
refer me back to our collective bargaining agreement that prohibits any
discussion dealing with security policies, procedures and deployment of
security personal. The officers who commit to protecting our homeland
are discouraged and prohibited from pointing out areas where the
airport is vulnerable. Developing innovative countermeasures are
frowned upon when officers suggest possible fixes to the insider threat
problem.
Many officers work in an environment where they believe their
safety and the flying public's safety is put at risk by sequestration
and staffing shortages. Atlanta's has a number of employee entrances
that would benefit from increased TSA staffing who have the ability to
search all airline personal more frequently. If and when that mandate
is authorized TSA does not currently have the staffing to accomplish
that mission.
Since the discovery of this problem in late December the PLAYBOOK
team has increased it's screening of employees that enter the airport
which is commendable, however it does repair the root cause of the
problem. Without securing the North and South CIDA badge access doors
where any current or former airline employee with nefarious intentions
can enter, the insider threat has not been stopped. The only
significant change is the airport vendor employees have had their
ability to enter those doors taken away by the airport authority.
Airline employees still have the same CIDA access.
AFGE believes the officers who are tasked with securing a port of
entry to our nation should be at the table during these conversations
on how best to secure the homeland. We would like Congress to encourage
our inclusion in these meetings. AFGE would also like Congress to know
that the taxpayers have invested millions of dollars in equipment that
sits unused because TSA has not hired anyone to fill the many vacancies
we have at the Atlanta airport. In closing we believe there are many
opportunities to improve the security to our homeland, eliminate
staffing shortages, and improve internal communication at the world's
busiest airport. AFGE LOCAL 554 stands ready to serve when called upon.
Respectfully Submitted,
L.P. Robert Williams,
AFGE Local 554 TSA Georgia.

Mr. Katko. I also ask unanimous consent to insert in the
record a statement from Airports Council International--North
America, as well as a letter from the American Association of
Airport Executives.
Without objection, that is so ordered as well.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Kevin M. Burke, President and CEO, Airports Council
International--North America
February 3, 2015
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the views of
airport operators on access control measures. As the president and CEO
of Airports Council International--North America (ACI-NA), I am
submitting this testimony today on behalf of the local, regional, and
State governing bodies that own and operate commercial service airports
in the United States and Canada. ACI-NA member airports enplane more
than 95 percent of the domestic and virtually all the international
airline passenger and cargo traffic in North America. More than 380
aviation-related businesses are also members of ACI-NA.
Mr. Chairman, each day, airports, operating in today's dynamic
threat environment, implement a variety of measures to provide for the
security of their passengers, employees, and facilities. To this end,
airports partner with the Transportation Security Administration (TSA),
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), the Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI), other Federal, State, and local law enforcement
agencies, and airlines to develop and maintain a comprehensive, multi-
layered, risk-based aviation security system. In our testimony, we have
included several recommendations to enhance airport access control.
layers of security
Airport access control systems rely on multiple risk-based layers
of security implemented in partnership with airports, airlines, and the
TSA. Although there is no perfect security system, the multiple
layers--which are routinely enhanced--provide for the security of
passengers, employees, and facilities. A clear strength of this type of
system is the unpredictable nature of the individual layers of security
and the fact that many airports go above and beyond the baseline
security requirements, implementing additional processes, procedures,
and technologies that take account of and are adapted to their unique
geographic locations and facility designs.
This system--in combination with TSA's employee-focused security
initiatives--is more effective than a rigid, fixed-point 100 percent
employee screening regime that would be extraordinarily costly,
minimally reduce risk and significantly disrupt airport operations. In
accordance with the current system, employees are subject to search,
inspection, or screening at any point, not just when they enter through
an access control point. Therefore, the current system more effectively
mitigates risk through employees' expectation of being screened at any
point and by accounting for employees found to be in possession of
items--necessary in the performance of their assigned duties--that
would otherwise be considered prohibited.
employee background screening
An essential layer of security is the multi-faceted employee
background screening process which is initiated prior to an employee
being granted access to the secured area of an airport. In advance of
issuing a Security Identification Display Area (SIDA) badge, which
provides unescorted access to secure areas, airport operators conduct
extensive vetting of employee backgrounds. There are two critical
facets of the employee background screening regime that all employees
who work in secured areas must successfully pass: A fingerprint-based
Criminal History Records Check (CHRC), and a Security Threat Assessment
(STA). Upon receiving an application from an employee seeking
unescorted access to a secured area, airport operators validate the
identity of the individual, collect and transmit their fingerprints and
the associated biographic information to the TSA. The biometric
fingerprint data is routed by TSA to the FBI for a CHRC. Through the
STA process, TSA conducts a threat assessment against terrorism and
other Government databases.
If the STA reveals derogatory information about the individual, TSA
informs the airport operator that they must not issue a SIDA badge
granting unescorted access. If at any point thereafter recurrent STA
vetting reveals derogatory information about an employee with
unescorted access, TSA will notify the airport operator to immediately
revoke their SIDA badge. Similarly, in accordance with existing
regulations, when an airport operator discovers, during a review of
CHRC results, that an applicant has been convicted of a disqualifying
criminal offense within the previous 10 years from the date of
application (``look-back period''), they refuse to issue the individual
a SIDA badge. A distinct security feature is the ability for airport
operators to review each and every applicant's criminal record to make
a determination about their suitability for being granted unescorted
access privileges.
Furthermore, CBP regulations stipulate that only those employees
with a CBP seal on their airport-issued SIDA badge may have unescorted
access to the ``Customs security area,'' commonly known as the Federal
Inspection Services (FIS) area, as well as to locations where
international flights deplane. In order to obtain a CBP seal,
applicants must submit to a background check, which typically involves
either a review of the CHRC results obtained by the airport operator in
accordance with TSA regulations or through a completely separate
submittal of the applicant's fingerprints and associated information
for a Criminal History Investigation, as required by the CBP port
director. Notably, CBP regulations contain a more extensive list of
disqualifying offenses, and a requirement for denial of a CBP seal if
there is ``evidence of a pending or past investigation establishing
probable cause to believe that the applicant has engaged in any conduct
which relates to, or which could lead to a conviction for, a
disqualifying offense.'' Given the disparity between the two lists of
disqualifying offenses (TSA and CBP), there are cases in which
employees have been--in accordance with regulations--granted unescorted
access to the SIDA but denied a CBP seal.
Although some airports go above and beyond the baseline measures in
current TSA regulations and have implemented longer ``look-back
periods'' and an expanded list of disqualifying criminal offenses,
others are unable to do so due to restrictive State laws. While some
airport operators re-submit a portion of the population of SIDA-badged
employees for a CHRC, it only provides a snapshot of their criminal
record as of the date of submission.
employee training
Provided an applicant for unescorted access privileges has a clean
background, but prior to being issued a SIDA badge, they must
successfully complete an initial training program. This mandatory
training, specifically tailored to the airport, includes information
about the layers of security at the airport, the specific
responsibilities of individuals who have been granted unescorted access
privileges, and their obligation to support and uphold airport security
requirements. In order to maintain their unescorted access privileges,
employees must also participate in recurrent training.
access control systems
Access control systems involve multiple layers of integrated
processes, procedures, and technologies to detect and mitigate
breaches. Although perimeter fencing and controlled access gates are
the most outwardly visible features, numerous other systems, both
conspicuous and inconspicuous, are in place at airports to bolster
access control security. Vehicles and equipment seeking access to these
areas are inspected by local law enforcement or specially-trained
public safety personnel. In addition to routine patrols in secured and
other airport areas, airport operators conduct random checks of
employees at various access points.
Access control systems have been in place for many years at
airports and vary in their level of sophistication from passive to
fully automated systems utilizing active technology. Many access
control systems are enhanced through the use of closed-circuit
television which allows critical areas or access points to be remotely
monitored. In the event of a potential breach, active systems
immediately identify the location, allowing operations center
representatives to assess the situation and dispatch law enforcement or
other resources to protect employees, aircraft, and facilities.
The National Safe Skies Alliance, in partnership with airports, and
funded through the Airport Improvement Program (AIP), conducts testing
and operational evaluations of security technologies designed to
further enhance access control. Many airports have deployed the systems
tested and evaluated by the National Safe Skies Alliance. The reports,
which are available to all airports, provide specific details about the
application and functionality of technologies tested under the program
and contain incredibly valuable information for airports as they make
decisions on which technologies may work best at their facility.
ACI-NA member airports are committed to ensuring effective security
and continue to implement measures that further augment access control.
Airport operators, in coordination with the FBI, Federal, State, and
local law enforcement representatives, and TSA routinely conduct risk
and vulnerability assessments to identify potential weaknesses and
guide the application of resources to further enhance access control
procedures and technology.
random and unpredictable screening
Another important layer of security, The Aviation Direct Access
Screening Program (ADASP), a TSA initiative that utilizes roving teams
of TSA Transportation Security Officers (TSOs), Behavior Detection
Officers (BDOs) and Transportation Security Inspectors (TSIs) to
conduct random and unpredictable physical screening of employees
working in or accessing secured areas, has proven to be very effective
in mitigating risk. Some airports work in close partnership with TSA in
support of ADASP operations to close certain access points and funnel
employees through the screening locations. Others have taken the
initiative to revoke the SIDA badge of any employee who refuses to be
screened during ADASP operations. The ADASP program also effectively
mitigates the risk of prohibited items introduced at the perimeter,
which would go undetected under a fixed-point employee screening
system. In addition to introducing a high level of deterrence, this
type of random and unpredictable screening program represents another
formidable layer of security.
recommended security enhancements
Security Awareness Training and Incentive Programs
So that airports operators are able to more effectively educate
employees and tenants, and in order to leverage the benefits of
enhanced airport employee awareness, TSA and the FBI should provide
airport operators with the key indicators of suspicious activity,
elements of which could be drawn from BDO training. With this
information, airport operators could incorporate more precisely-focused
security awareness training into existing SIDA initial, recurrent, and
other training programs. This would ensure that all employees and
tenants are more effectively trained in security awareness. In addition
to providing information on identifying suspicious activity, a key
element of the training would focus on reporting. Building on the
success of ``community policing'' initiatives such as The Rewards for
Justice Program and Crime Stoppers USA, a Nationally-managed incentive
program should be established to further encourage the reporting of any
potential suspicious or criminal activity at airports.
Enhanced Background Checks
In order to further strengthen the layer of security involving
background checks, consideration should be given to expanding the list
of disqualifying criminal offenses beyond those contained in current
TSA regulations. The Aviation Security Advisory Committee (ASAC) should
be tasked to reevaluate the current list and develop an expanded list
of pertinent disqualifying criminal offenses. Furthermore, the ASAC
should evaluate whether permanently disqualifying criminal offenses
would enhance the integrity of the aviation security system.
We recommend that steps be taken to immediately implement the FBI's
Rap Back program so that real-time recurrent CHRCs are conducted on
SIDA badge holders. In accordance with existing regulations, ``Each
individual with unescorted access authority who has a disqualifying
criminal offense must report the offense to the airport operator and
surrender the SIDA access medium to the issuer within 24 hours of the
conviction or the finding of not guilty by reason of insanity.''
Essentially, employees who, as a result of having been subjected to a
stringent background check process, have been granted unescorted access
privileges are on the ``honor system'' to report subsequent convictions
for disqualifying criminal offenses. Unlike the STA process, through
which TSA conducts perpetual vetting of employees who have been granted
unescorted access privileges, the CHRC is currently a one-time snapshot
of the applicants' criminal history. According to the FBI, Rap Back
provides ``the ability to receive on-going status notifications of any
criminal history reported on individuals holding positions of trust.''
When implemented, this program will provide airports (and airlines)
much better and needed visibility into employees' criminal records,
allow them to make informed determinations as to the suitability of
existing employees and greatly assist in making determinations about
whether employees should be allowed to retain their unescorted SIDA
access privileges.
Given the transitory nature of aviation workers, a National
database--maintained by TSA but available to all airport operators--of
employees who have had their SIDA badges revoked would provide yet
another security enhancement. Such a database would eliminate the
potential for an employee whose unescorted access privileges were
revoked at one airport from transferring to another airport and being
granted unescorted access privileges.
Expanded Employee Screening Operations
As a means to enhance an important layer of security, TSA should
expand the Aviation Direct Access Screening Program (ADASP) so that
every employee entering or working in a secured area of an airport has
the expectation that they will be subject to screening. Airport
operators can support expanded ADASP operations by selectively closing
access portals in order to route employees through the screening
locations.
conclusion
ACI-NA and its member airports are committed to working with
Congress, TSA, FBI, CBP, and other law enforcement agencies and
aviation stakeholders to enhance airport security through the
application of risk-based measures. The current multi-layered, risk-
based aviation security system continues to be effective, particularly
as airport operators--in partnership with TSA--routinely review
security procedures to ensure they are applicable and mitigate new and
emerging threats.
We encourage the subcommittee to make it a priority to move forward
with the implementation of the recommended initiatives to enhance
airport security. Through continued collaboration to enhance security
programs and related security initiatives, we can better achieve our
mutual goals of enhancing security and efficiency while minimizing
unnecessary operational impacts.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this written testimony.
______

Letter From the American Association of Airport Executives
February 2, 2015.
The Honorable John Katko,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation Security, Committee on
Homeland Security, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington,
DC 20515.
The Honorable Kathleen Rice,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Transportation Security, Committee on
Homeland Security, U.S. House of Representatives, Washington,
DC 20515.

Dear Chairman Katko and Ranking Member Rice: On behalf of the
American Association of Airport Executives (AAAE) and the thousands of
men and women across the country who manage and operate our Nation's
airports, we appreciate your interest in undertaking ``A Review of
Access Control Measures at Our Nation's Airports'' as part of this
week's hearing. A key component of an intelligence driven risk-based
approach to aviation security is the constant evaluation of existing
security measures to ensure any potential vulnerabilities are addressed
and mitigated with appropriate and up-to-date policies, procedures and
best practices at the federal and local levels.
As employees of local, public entities, airport executives work in
constant collaboration with the Transportation Security Administration
to enhance the layers of security that exist to identify and address
potential threats in the airport environment, including extensive
background checks for aviation workers, random physical screening of
workers at airports, surveillance, law enforcement patrols, robust
security training, and the institution of challenge procedures among
airport workers.
In particular, airport access control is an important security
function that local airport operators have held for decades in
compliance with robust federal requirements. The existing local/federal
partnership approach ensures a critical level of local involvement with
the management of credentialing and access control in accordance with
strict federal standards, requirements, and oversight as part of a
multi-layered security apparatus. It includes extensive efforts to
identify ``bad'' people before they are ever given access to security
sensitive areas of airports, which is absolutely essential to providing
the highest levels of security.
In our view, the best approach to enhancing access control at the
nation's airports lies with continuing to focus on robust background
checks, maintaining our multi-layered security approach, and preserving
and protecting the critical local layer of security that airports
provide with credentialing, access control, and other local functions.
Inherently local security functions should remain local with federal
oversight and backed by federal resources when appropriate.
While some have argued for comprehensive physical screening of all
persons entering an airport, including employees, it is critical from a
security and resource perspective that risk mitigation efforts remain
intelligence driven, balanced and effective. Detailed studies by both
government and industry have shown that physical screening of all
employees at airports around the country would cost upwards of $15
billion annually with very little security benefit. In a world of
limited resources, we are concerned that placing so much emphasis on
one approach--in this case physical screening--could divert significant
funding from other critical security functions that are currently
producing significant benefits. We would welcome the opportunity to
have a more thorough conversation with you on this topic to outline our
significant reservations in more detail.
AAAE staff and several of our airport members, including the Chair
of our Transportation Security Services Committee Jeanne Olivier,
A.A.E., Director of Aviation Security at the Port Authority of New York
and New Jersey; are serving on the ad hoc working group formed by the
Aviation Security Advisory Committee (ASAC) at the request of TSA to
evaluate the aviation industry's current approach to airport employee
screening. The Working Group has been tasked with developing a report
to TSA on current and innovative methods for the vetting and physical
screening of individuals entering the secure area of an airport. It is
expected that the report will outline potential security gaps or
vulnerabilities and include recommendations for proposed appropriate
mitigation measures and notional methods for implementation, address
the advantages and disadvantages of such measures, and the potential
cost of each measure.
Access control at airports is unique among other transportation
facilities and has operated successfully for decades. That is not to
say that improvements to the current system cannot be made. Airport
operators take their direct responsibility for credentialing and access
control very seriously and are committed to continuing to provide the
robust layer of security and operational expertise that exists at the
local level. We look forward to working through the ASAC ad hoc working
group and with the TSA and the Subcommittee on identifying and
implementing any risk-based options related to improving airport access
control, including policy and procedures, industry best practices,
technology, and employee training.
Thank you for your time and attention to this important element of
security at our nation's airports. We look forward to working with the
Subcommittee as you continue to undertake efforts to enhance
transportation security across the country.
Sincerely,
Joel D. Bacon,
Executive Vice President, Government and Public Affairs,
American Association of Airport Executives.

Mr. Katko. The Chairman now recognizes a second panel.
I thank both Ms. Pinkerton and Mr. Southwell for being here
today. We are pleased to have this panel of distinguished
witnesses, of course.
Let me remind the witness that their entire written
statements will appear in the record.
Our first witness, Mr. Miguel Southwell, is general manager
at Hartswell-Jackson--excuse me--Hartsfield-Jackson
International Airport in Atlanta. Mr. Southwell has been the
aviation general manager at Atlanta since May 2014 and has
served as senior airport leadership at both Atlanta and Miami
International Airports throughout his career.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Southwell to testify.

STATEMENT OF MIGUEL SOUTHWELL, GENERAL MANAGER, HARTSFIELD-
JACKSON ATLANTA INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

Mr. Southwell. Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Thompson,
Ranking Member Rice, Members of the subcommittee, and visiting
Congressman Johnson, I thank you for holding this hearing, and
I thank you for including Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta
International Airport, the world's busiest passenger airport.
I want to begin my remarks with the following statement:
The safety and security of airport users is our top priority. I
am reassured by the remarks offered by the witnesses on the
first panel. I agree that ensuring the safety and security of
our passengers and employees is a crucial and collective goal
for all of us.
Further, I am pleased to know that a number of the
committee Members have backgrounds as prosecutors, evidencing a
lifetime commitment to the safety of our Nation.
At Hartsfield-Jackson, we have had some recent incidents in
the area of security which should give us all concern. There is
no mistaking that fact. As the general manager for the
Department of Aviation, it is my job to provide leadership to
ensure that working with the Transportation Security
Administration, airlines, and stakeholders, security gaps are
closed, and the passengers and employees at the airport are
safe. Each year we have more than 94 million passengers who
pass through Atlanta. In addition, we have more than 63,000
employees on campus. Ensuring their safety and security is a
big job, but I know that our partners, particularly the TSA and
the airlines, are equally committed to this task.
As you know, every airport is different. Each is unique in
its configuration, and each is unique in terms of its risk
profile. As such, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to
airport security. As with every airport in the country, we work
tirelessly with our security partners and operate on the TSA-
approved security plan. This multi-layered system of security
measures is based upon the determined risk at a particular
airport. However, we recognize that air transportation is a
system, and any system is only as strong as its weakest link.
Approximately 64 million of the 94 million passengers who
pass through Atlanta annually are connecting from another
airport. Therefore, we believe that some minimum standard of
employee screening or inspection should be adopted across the
entire system and should incorporate the input of all of our
U.S. airports as well as our airline partners.
As noted earlier, at our airport, we need to do more.
Hence, in the last 6 weeks, the Aviation Department has held
many meetings almost daily with TSA, Customs and Border
Protection, the FAA, airlines, and other key stakeholders to
develop an improved
short-, medium-, and long-term safety and security plan for
Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport.
In our early assessments, we have identified security
enhancements that can be made now while we continue to develop
other security options that will take some time. I have
instructed our team that we will not wait to take action. We
have and will implement immediately what can be done now while
we continue to improve our plan.
At Hartsfield-Jackson, one action that we can implement
immediately is the reprogramming of Security Identification
Display Area badges, known as SIDA badges. These are the badges
which currently allow employees access to the sterile areas of
the airport. This reprogramming will be based on employee job
function and work location, and will effectively reduce the
number of access portals through which an employee can enter
the airport's secure areas.
We recognize that 100 percent screening of airport
employees has operational and cost challenges, and is neither
practical nor sustainable, but the unmistakable fact, as recent
events suggest, is that we need to be consistently vigilant in
our efforts, and the kind of enhancements that we are
considering will require a significant investment.
Therefore, in the medium to long term, Atlanta will work
closely with TSA, the airlines, and other key stakeholders to
screen airport employees who access the SIDA. The few
exceptions will include law enforcement, emergency personnel,
other first responders, and those employees approved under the
Federal regulation such as the TSA's Known Crew Member Program.
Even with those exceptions, we have begun processes whereby all
employees at Hartsfield-Jackson will have an expectation that
they will be screened or inspected.
Additionally, we are focusing on improvements to employee
background checks and screening. We will focus on smarter
access control as noted. We are likewise focusing on the
security and safety of goods brought onto the airport property.
While we attempt with our partners in the security and
intelligence fields to prevent individuals with ill will from
working at the airport, we are also focusing on eliminating
illicit materials from ever entering the airport campus.
In closing, the conversation is bigger than Hartsfield-
Jackson. Passengers will not fly if they cannot take their
safety for granted. Therefore, a safe and secure air
transportation system also means an economically healthy system
and directly impacts the entire U.S. economy. In order to
achieve these security enhancements, we will need the
cooperation of our partners at the airport and, in particular,
the financial support and resources of the TSA. Our commitment
to ensuring the safety and security of everyone at Hartsfield-
Jackson is unwavering. We are up to the task, and I am
confident that our partners are as well.
Thank you very much, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Southwell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Miguel Southwell
February 3, 2015
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, Chairman Katko, Ranking
Member Rice, and Members of the subcommittee, I thank you for holding
this hearing, and I thank you for including Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta
International Airport, the world's busiest passenger airport.
I want to begin my remarks with the following statement: The safety
and security of airport users is our top priority. I am reassured by
the remarks offered by the witnesses on the first panel, and I agree
that ensuring the safety and security of our passengers and employees
is a crucial and collective goal for all of us. Further, I am pleased
to know that a number of committee Members have backgrounds as
prosecutors, evidencing a lifetime commitment to the safety of our
Nation.
At Hartsfield-Jackson, we have had some recent incidents in the
area of security, which should give us all concern. There is no
mistaking that fact. As the general manager for the Department of
Aviation, it is my job to provide leadership to ensure that--working
with the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), airlines, and
other stakeholders--security gaps are closed, and the passengers and
employees at the airport are safe. Each year, we have more than 94
million passengers who pass through Atlanta; in addition, we have more
than 63,000 employees on campus. Ensuring their safety and security is
a big job, but I know that our partners, particularly TSA and the
airlines, are equally committed to this task.
As you know, every airport is different. Each is unique in its
configuration, and each is unique in terms of its risk profile. As
such, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to airport security. As
with every airport in the country, we work tirelessly with our security
partners and operate under a TSA-approved security plan. This multi-
layered system of security measures is based upon the determined risk
at a particular airport. However, we recognize that air transportation
is a system, and any system is only as strong as its weakest link.
Approximately 64 million of the more than 94 million passengers who
pass through Atlanta annually are connecting from another airport.
Therefore, we believe that some minimum standard of employee screening
or inspection should be adopted across the entire system and should
incorporate the input of all U.S. airports.
As noted earlier, at our airport, we need to do more. Hence, in the
last 6 weeks, the Aviation Department has held meetings almost daily,
with TSA, Customs and Border Protection, the FAA, airlines and other
key stakeholders, to develop an improved short-, medium-, and long-term
safety and security plan for Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International
Airport.
In our early assessment, we have identified security enhancements
that can be made now, while we continue to develop other security
options that will take some time. I have instructed our team that we
will not wait to take action. We will implement immediately what can be
done now while we continue to improve our plan. At Hartsfield-Jackson,
one action that we can implement immediately is the reprogramming of
Security Identification Display Area badges, known as SIDA badges.
These are the badges which currently allow employees access to the
sterile areas of the airport. This reprogramming will be based on
employee job function and work location, and will effectively reduce
the number of access portals through which an employee can enter the
airport's secured areas.
We recognize that 100% screening of airport employees has
operational and cost challenges, and is neither practical nor
sustainable. But the unmistakable fact, as recent events suggest, is
that we need to be consistently vigilant in our efforts, and the kind
of enhancements that we are considering will require a significant
investment.
Therefore, in the medium- to long-term, Atlanta will work closely
with TSA, the airlines and other key stakeholders, to screen airport
employees who access the SIDA. The few exceptions will include law
enforcement, emergency personnel, other first responders and those
employees approved under Federal regulations such as the TSA's Known
Crew Member program. Even with those exceptions, we have begun
processes whereby all employees at Hartsfield-Jackson have an
expectation that they will be screened or inspected.
Additionally, we are focusing on improvements to employee
background checks and screening. We will focus on smarter access
control as noted. We are likewise focusing on the security and safety
of goods brought onto airport property. While we attempt, with our
partners in the security and intelligence fields, to prevent
individuals with ill will from working at the airport, we are also
focusing on eliminating illicit materials from ever entering the
airport campus.
In closing, this conversation is bigger than Hartsfield-Jackson. A
safe and secure air transportation system also means an economically
healthy system and directly impacts the entire U.S. economy. In order
to achieve these security enhancements, we will need the cooperation of
our partners at the airport, and in particular, the financial support
and resources of the TSA. Our commitment to ensuring the safety and
security of everyone at Hartsfield-Jackson is unwavering. We are up to
the task, and I am confident our partners are as well.
Thank you.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Southwell. I appreciate it, and I
appreciate you meeting with our office yesterday as well in
advance of this hearing today.
Our second witness, Ms. Sharon Pinkerton, currently serves
as a senior vice president for legislative and regulatory
policy at Airlines for America.
Airlines for America is a trade organization of the
principal U.S. airlines representing the collective interest of
airlines and their affiliates who transport more than 90
percent of U.S. airline passenger and cargo traffic.
The Chairman now recognizes Ms. Pinkerton to testify. Thank
you.

STATEMENT OF SHARON L. PINKERTON, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY POLICY, AIRLINES FOR AMERICA

Ms. Pinkerton. Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for holding this
hearing. The subcommittee's focus on this issue is both timely
and beneficial. There is nothing more important to the airline
industry than the safety and security of our passengers,
employees, planes, and cargo. Our job, when it comes to safety
and security, is never done. We work every day to ensure that
we are as secure as we can be.
The airline industry regards recent breaches of the civil
aviation security system as unacceptable. Such breaches need to
be carefully examined, root causes identified, and appropriate
corrective actions formulated and then implemented. Our members
have started to do that, and I am going to highlight several
possible initiatives concerning employee background checks and
airport access practices that we believe should be considered.
The safety and security of commercial aviation is a shared
responsibility, and as such, consideration should be
collaborative, involving not only Government in its regulatory
role but also considering the perspective of airline, airport,
vendors, and employee representatives.
Despite the recent well-publicized issues, the U.S.
aviation system--security system is strong and getting
stronger. It is a sophisticated system that anticipates
emerging threats. Its success can be attributed in large
measure to the methodical application of a risk-based approach
to security. It is based on the realization that one size does
not fit all.
Risk-based security ranks risk factors along a quantitative
scale. Once risk levels are determined, security resources are
then apply in proportion to the assessed risk. It is simple and
intuitive. Issues or people that exhibit higher risk and have
higher risk factors receive greater scrutiny. This approach is
working.
The TSA screens almost 2 million passengers daily using
risk-based procedures that have greatly facilitated its multi-
layered security system.
One such layer is the employee background checks of
employees who have unescorted access to secured areas of U.S.
airports. Access is only approved if the employee does not have
a disqualifying criminal history. There is a basic record check
requirement and separate background check requirements that the
U.S. Customs and the Postal Service also impose. My written
testimony provides more detail on those checks.
In addition to the criminal history record check programs
TSA regulations require that airlines conduct daily watch list
vetting for all their employees. This is an internal and
automated process that matches names against the Federal watch
list.
Additionally, TSA conducts random searches of employees who
have access to secured areas of the airport. Moreover, it
conducts a security threat assessment of those whose have
airport-approved or airport-issued IDs. The assessment includes
checks against criminal history records, watch lists, and
immigration databases. As a partner in safety and security, we
believe that the Aviation Security Advisory Committee, the
ASAC, is the right venue to conduct an evaluation of where we
are today and potential next steps. ASAC's mission has been to
examine areas of civil aviation security with the aim of
developing recommendations for improvement.
I provided more suggestions in my written testimony, but
will call to your attention a few issues we believe the ASAC
should look at carefully. On employee screening, we suggest
expanding random screening of employees to include, for
example, different airport access control entrances and company
employee parking lots. In the area of background checks, ASAC
should consider expanding the category of disqualifying crimes
and modifying eligibility requirements for employment.
Second, we think they should consider Federal
standardization of disqualifying crimes.
Third, having Federal Government-specified permanent
disqualifying crimes.
Fourth, lengthening the look-back period for criminal
history record checks. To that last point, the FBI's initial
criminal arrest history record check, as you heard on the first
panel, is based on a fingerprint, but it is only conducted at
the time of employment. It has a 10-year look-back.
Furthermore, there is no on-going vetting after the initial
review and no current system to inform employers should an
employee be charged with a crime after the criminal history
record check. We believe this warrants improvement.
In closing, we have the safest and most secure commercial
aviation system in the world, and we are making--we are working
to make it better every day. We have gotten to this point by
focusing our time and resources on our greatest risks. We also
do not believe that increased security and smoothly moving
passengers and employees through screening are mutually
exclusive. Two of the greater wins for passengers and customers
are the Known Crewmember and PreCheck programs. These programs
recognize those who present a lower risk, free up space in
lines, improve passenger and employee throughput, all while
enhancing security. That is a win for everyone and an idea we
should build on.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Pinkerton follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sharon L. Pinkerton
February 3, 2015
Airlines for America appreciates the opportunity to express its
views about the security measures for employees who are authorized
access to secured areas of U.S. airports.
As we discuss more fully below, our members have examined this
matter in detail and have identified airport security and employee
background check improvements that they believe should be considered.
Those include tighter controls over employee access to airport Secured
Identification Areas; better communication among law enforcement
agencies about investigations of employees who have access to the
airport; expansion and harmonization among Federal agencies of the
crimes that disqualify a person from unescorted access at airports;
enhanced risk-based screening of employees; and strengthened employee
criminal history record checks.
We believe that the Transportation Security Administration's
Aviation Security Advisory Committee is the appropriate venue in which
to examine these matters--and any others that may be raised. The ASAC
has representatives from a broad spectrum of aviation stakeholders and
is the traditional site in which to develop collaboratively proposals
to submit for improvements in civil aviation security.
overview
The subcommittee's focus on this issue is both timely and
beneficial.
The airline industry regards any breach of civil aviation security
as unacceptable. Such breaches need to be carefully examined, root
causes identified, and appropriate corrective actions formulated and
implemented.
Our members have taken a fresh look at airport security. Below we
highlight several possible initiatives concerning employee background
checks and airport access practices that we believe should be
considered. As noted above, that consideration should be undertaken
collaboratively--involving not only the Government in its regulatory
role but also taking into account the perspectives of airline, airport,
vendor, and employee representatives.
It is important to provide context to this hearing. The recent
security breaches are absolutely unacceptable. That does not change the
underlying fact that the aviation security system in our Nation is more
robust than ever. It is a sophisticated, threat-based system that
continues to advance in anticipation of existing and emerging threats.
Its success can be attributed in large measure to the methodical
application of a risk-based approach to security.
The risk-based security system under which airlines and airports
operate has markedly improved security. It is based on the fundamental
recognition that sound security policy need not apply the same measures
to every individual or item. In other words, one size does not fit all.
That recognition is founded on the understanding that not every
individual or item poses the same threat to aviation security.
Risk-based security ranks an array of risk factors along a
quantitative scale. Once risk levels are determined, security resources
are applied in proportion to the assessed risk. In operation, this
means that the aviation security system deploys its resources based on
individualized assessments of risk of persons (and items) that are
subject to the system. Those persons determined to exhibit higher-risk
factors receive greater scrutiny. This approach enables us to put
resources where they are most needed.
Risk-based security in aviation has been a reality for some time.
We thus have considerable, everyday experience with it. For example,
the Transportation Security Administration screens about 1.8 million
passengers daily using risk-based procedures. We understand risk-based
security and we know its effectiveness. We consequently strongly
support it. Whatever new measures may emerge concerning airport
security, we firmly believe that the commitment of the Government and
industry to risk-based security must remain undiminished.
Moreover, risk-based security has greatly facilitated TSA's multi-
layered security system. As TSA has stated, each layer serves as a
protection measure. In combination, these layers create a much
stronger, better-protected transportation system. That, as experience
demonstrates, is the optimum way to confront ever-evolving threats to
aviation.
federal background check requirements for airline employees
Background checks of employees who have unescorted access to
secured areas of U.S. airports have been required since 1985. Approval
for access to those areas is authorized only if the results of the
check indicate that the employee does not have a disqualifying criminal
history. There is a basic record-check requirement and separate
background check requirements that U.S. Customs and Border Protection
and the U.S. Postal Service impose. These distinct requirements are
summarized below.
Criminal History Records Check
To ensure that certain designated areas of the airport have
controlled access, Secured Identification Areas (SIDA) were
established. These are areas on an airport in which only employees who
are approved and who have received an airport-issued badge are
permitted unescorted access.
A Criminal History Records Check (CHRC) is conducted to determine
if an employee should be issued a SIDA badge. The employee seeking such
SIDA access must be fingerprinted. Fingerprints are sent to the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, which processes them.
The CHRC regulation includes a list of disqualifying crimes that
originated in Federal legislation. If an employee has a conviction for
any of the disqualifying crimes within the last 10 years, he or she
will not be approved. If no disqualifying crimes are found in the FBI
check, the airport operator notifies the authorizing employer or
airline (or other sponsor) that the employee is eligible for a SIDA
badge. The employee then goes to a SIDA class to learn the requirements
and limitations of access to the SIDA and, upon successfully completing
the class, receives an airport-issued ID badge.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection Checks
Employees working at airports where there is international service
who need unescorted access to a U.S. Customs and Border Protection-
designated security area must receive a CBP-issued seal for her or his
identification media. To receive the seal, the employee must meet the
qualifications for approval under the CHRC program and not have been
convicted of any of 10 additional disqualifying crimes. In addition,
CBP may deny an individual a seal if it deems her or him a risk to the
public health, interest, or safety; National security; or aviation
safety. Issuance of a seal also requires a certification by the
employer that a ``meaningful'' background investigation has been
conducted and that it has a need for this employee to access the CBP
security area.
U.S. Postal Service Checks
Employees who have access to U.S. mail must be approved by a third
and separate process. This process is not set forth by law or Federal
regulation but, rather, through the contractual obligation that the
USPS includes in the agreements it has with air carriers to transport
mail. The employee must be fingerprinted and the fingerprints are sent
to the USPS for review and approval or denial. Virtually any felony
conviction within the past 10 years will result in a denial of access
to U.S. mail. In addition, the Postal Service's requirements also
include a negative drug test, a separate criminal history check, and
legal documentation that the individual has the right to work in the
United States.
Airline Vetting
In addition to these criminal history record check programs, TSA
regulations require airlines to conduct daily watch list (terrorist
database) vetting for all their employees. This is an internal
automated process that matches names against the Federal watch list
that is provided daily.
Additional TSA Actions
Beyond the above-mentioned records checks and vetting, TSA conducts
random searches of employees who have access to secured areas of the
airport. Moreover, it conducts a Security Threat Assessment of persons
who have airport-approved or airport-issued personnel identification
media. The assessment includes checks against criminal history records,
terrorist watch lists, and immigration status.
additional security measures to consider
We believe that the Aviation Security Advisory Committee should
evaluate any new airport security measures. ASAC's mission is to
examine areas of civil aviation security with the aim of developing
recommendations for the improvement of civil aviation security methods,
equipment, and procedures. The consideration of the additional measures
that we suggest would fit without difficulty within the ASAC charter.
Moreover, the members of are well-equipped to perform this examination
and represent a cross-section of the airport community. After the ASAC
completes its examination, it would forward any recommendations that it
developed to the TSA for its action.
These are the areas that we have concluded that the ASAC should
examine:
Airports
1. Consider tighter controls over SIDA access control areas based
on duty/higher-risk times.
2. Consider requiring that local law enforcement agencies notify
Federal law enforcement agencies, i.e. the FBI and DHS, of any
on-going criminal investigation of an airport employee.
Security Threat Assessments
1. Consider expanding the category of disqualifying crimes and
modifying eligibility requirements for employment.
2. Consider expanding current databases that TSA searches.
3. Consider Federal standardization of disqualifying crimes.
4. Consider having the Federal Government specify ``permanent
disqualifying crimes.'' Such crimes, regardless of when they
were committed, would prohibit a person from obtaining an
airport SIDA badge or aviation employment in a position where
he or she would have access to a sensitive security work area.
Employee Screening
1. Consider expanding random screening of employees to include, for
example, airport access control entrances and company employee
parking lots.
2. Consider developing a program to identify high- and low-risk
airport community employees.
a. Those employees identified as low-risk would be subjected to a
risk-based screening approach.
b. Higher-risk employees would undergo random screening more
frequently, based on risk and location.
Criminal History Records Checks
The FBI's initial criminal history records check/fingerprint check
is only conducted at the time of employment. It has a 10-year ``look-
back''. There is no on-going vetting after the initial review. The
industry is unable under the existing system to perform updated or
random checks without again collecting fingerprints from the employee
and performing a new CHRC. In view of this situation, we suggest that:
1. Consideration be given to enabling airports and airlines to
perform random/specific CHRC without recollecting fingerprints
in the event that suspicious activities are observed.
2. Consideration be given to lengthening the ``look-back'' period
for criminal history checks--e.g., 18-20 years.
Furthermore, there is no current system to inform employers should
an employee be charged with a crime after the criminal history records
check.
1. For example, if an employee hired in Virginia is arrested in
Nevada, the employer would only know of the arrest if the
employee self-disclosed the arrest.
2. Consideration should be given to having the FBI conduct
recurrent criminal history record checks and notification be
provided to the airport/airline and/or other law-enforcement
agency for follow up.
Airlines
As mentioned above, TSA requires airlines to conduct daily watch
list (terrorist database) vetting of all employees. That process can be
made more efficient.
1. Consideration should be given to the TSA creating a web portal
whereby employers can examine new-hire employees.
a. Employers could populate the web site with complete employee
lists for perpetual vetting against the watch list.
b. Watch list vetting of employees would then shifted from the
industry to TSA responsibility, which would be a more
sensible allocation of this responsibility.
This is not an exhaustive list. Other possible initiatives can be
added to it.
______

We believe that the foregoing response would be the most
advantageous way to examine potential changes to criminal history
record check, vetting, and airport access measures. It would assure
broad-based stakeholder input by using the long-standing ASAC. Any
recommendations that were forthcoming should be mindful of the risk-
based framework of current aviation security. TSA, of course, would
have the ultimate authority to dispose of the recommendations.

Mr. Katko. Well, thank you, Mr. Southwell, and, Ms.
Pinkerton, both for your opening statements. They are very
helpful.
Ms. Pinkerton, I want to tell you that the written
submission you made was very helpful because it listed a bunch
of practical solutions, some of which we will touch on during
the course of my questioning here for the next 5 minutes.
In fact, a technical matter, I will recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning.
I want to start with Mr. Southwell for a moment, please,
first of all to respond to one of your comments. When you said
that the conversation is bigger than Atlanta, I think you are
absolutely right. I don't want you to think that we are
singling out Atlanta as the sole reason we are here. Atlanta
simply is--happens to be in an unfortunate position of having
the most recent case, but by all means, it is not an exclusive
list. I think everyone here acknowledges that.
With respect to the Harvey case, which has been discussed,
quick question for you, when did you first learn of it, when
the investigation was under way?
Mr. Southwell. I believe it was December 15, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Okay. So they worked with you. When did--did you
have any knowledge about when the local authorities were first
aware of it?
Mr. Southwell. Well, actually, correction. We heard--I
became aware of it and the airport became aware of it in terms
of its specific nature on December 19. On December 15, we did
receive a call, our security office, which it often does,
asking for particular movements of the employee. The exact
nature or context of the inquiry on December 15 was not shared.
The context was shared December 19, I believe, when the
employee was arrested, 19 or 20.
Mr. Katko. Do you have any idea when the investigation by
the local authorities in New York commenced?
Mr. Southwell. No. I do not, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Is it fair to say that you would like to
have known if it was going on for a while that--what was going
on in your airport?
Mr. Southwell. We certainly would have. We understand that
the investigators have a certain amount of discretion in terms
of widening the number of people with knowledge, but it
certainly would have been helpful.
Mr. Katko. One of the proposals that has been propounded by
others is that we have some sort of a Federal requirement under
the law that local authorities that are involved in aviation-
related investigations, criminal investigations, must notify
the FBI office immediately. Would you support such a measure?
Mr. Southwell. Absolutely, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Thank you.
Now, I want to switch gears for a second here to Ms.
Pinkerton. As I said, your list was wonderful, and it was very
helpful and very thought-provoking going forward, and I
appreciate that. Just a couple of quick questions. I won't go
through things that we already have, but one question--one
thing I didn't notice on here, it was maybe implicit in here
was reducing the number of entry points at airports for
employees.
Would you support that as part of the overall enhancement
of security measures for employee access?
Ms. Pinkerton. I am sure that that is something the ASAC is
going to be looking at, and it does make a lot of sense.
Mr. Katko. Okay. That was easy. All right. Thanks.
Now, with respect to the employee screening, and, again
this, this is just one of many things to consider and to put on
the table, but the Miami model, for lack of better term, and
the Orlando model, is that all employees are screened. Now, my
idea of screening is not simply walking through a metal
detector. Whatever screening measures that people take into
account I think are--for the local airports is fine, but
basically screening all employees when they come through the
door, would you support that or would you think that is fraught
with problems?
Ms. Pinkerton. Well, yeah, I think that since 9/11, Mr.
Chairman, we have learned a lot as we have created this multi-
layered system, and really what we have learned is that one
size doesn't fit all. What we have learned is the importance of
conducting risk assessments and threat assessments, and I think
that is, you know, how Miami developed their system and how
Orlando has developed their system, but I don't necessarily
think that that one size fits all 450 airports. So I think we
need to look carefully to continue to work with our partners,
airports, airlines, TSA, and the FBI working together to craft
solutions that make sense on an airport-by-airport basis with
some general standard guidelines, of course.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Thank you.
Last question for you and then I have got a couple more for
Mr. Southwell.
Would you consider expanding the disqualifying crimes for
individuals that are going to get access to SIDA badges?
Ms. Pinkerton. Absolutely. That is on our list. It is
something that we think that the ASAC should look carefully at,
and as you know, CBP has a broader list of disqualifying
crimes, and that is probably a good place to start, and then we
should think about having CBP, the Post Office, and TSA perhaps
all having the same list of disqualifying crimes.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Pinkerton.
Mr. Southwell, just for a moment, have you participated in
the ASAC review that is going on Nation-wide? Have they come to
you and interviewed you yet or talked to you about what is
going on in Atlanta?
Mr. Southwell. They have not.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Do you intend to make contact with that
committee?
Mr. Southwell. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Okay. I would ask that you do so and make sure
you share your thoughts with them. I think you have a wealth of
experience. Speaking of which, prior to coming to Atlanta, you
were in Miami. Is that correct?
Mr. Southwell. Yes, Mr. Chairman, for 12 years.
Mr. Katko. Miami, as we now well know has taken it upon
themselves to have a more rigorous review based on a serious
security breach that happened even prior to 9/11. Is that
correct?
Mr. Southwell. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Now, what if any of those aspects of the Miami
model would you contemplate using in the Atlanta airport going
forward?
Mr. Southwell. In advance of the, of course, advisory
committee's work, Hartsfield, Atlanta, is moving towards that
model in terms of what we are currently thinking and
recommending.
The model that we are creating with the random inspections
and not having full screening or inspection by employees
speaks, really, to an employee who just wants to have gainful
employment but who may be involved in various types of
smuggling activities, et cetera.
With what we have seen in the last 6 months and the
evolution of course of the insider threat where you have
Americans being recruited, certainly greater thought has to be
given to not just giving employees the expectation that they
will be screened, which is what the current system does, but
giving the employee a perception of certainty that they will
screened, which is what the Miami and Orlando models do, and we
are certainly contemplating doing that.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Of course, no decision has been made, but
that is something that is in the mix for you.
Mr. Southwell. Absolutely.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Again, you are the world's largest
airport, and you understand the task that would be at hand if
you undertook such a model.
Mr. Southwell. It is as great task, but it also is a
great--something that we have to contemplate because of the
high profile of Atlanta as the world's busiest passenger
airport and as a threat.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now so I can enforce my own rule of not
going over too far, I am going to pass the microphone over to
Miss Rice. Thank you.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Pinkerton, I am struck by--I mean, I think that there
are some flaws that we have all spoken about and you have
certainly pointed out in terms of what can be done in the
initial process, in terms of doing all the checks, background
checks, and I don't know if there is anyone who can answer the
question as to why someone doesn't have to provide a Social
Security number. That still boggles my mind why we don't ask
for that information.
But the other area of concern is, what happens in the
interim between hiring and separation? If you could just
expound on ways that you think the TSA, airports, the FBI can
be more effective at monitoring behavior of once-hired
employees while they are in the employ of--while they are
working because we know we can't count on self-reporting if say
someone were to be arrested or and be convicted of a crime.
Ms. Pinkerton. Right. I was very pleased to hear the
discussion on the first panel. That was the first time that I
had heard the FBI and the TSA actually talking about what
sounded like a perpetual recurring vetting with the criminal
history record check. That is absolutely something that--
especially if it is available, as the first panel seemed to
indicate, we should definitely be relying on an automated
system as opposed to self-reporting. I think that would be a
huge step forward.
Miss Rice. In your capacity, what is your biggest
frustration, what are the airlines' biggest frustration in
terms of the day-to-day--their ability to operate in an
efficient, safe way?
Ms. Pinkerton. Well, I would describe our relationship with
TSA and our airport partners as being a positive and productive
one. You know, I do think sometimes the media focus and
attention on the latest incident sometimes clouds our ability
to analyze different options thoughtfully, and that is why I am
really pleased, frankly, that Congress and the administration
are giving the ASAC committee, you know, 30, 60, and 90 days to
come up with some really well-thought-out recommendations.
Miss Rice. So, Mr. Southwell, I don't know if you can--I
hope you can answer this question. I would imagine that there
was a level of upset and frustration that you personally felt
and professionally at being informed at such a late date of
what was going on in your own airport.
Going forward, how do we avoid that? How do we--because, to
me, information is power. Right? The more information every
partner has along the way, the more powerful we can be at
preventing things like this from happening. So you are in a
very unique position, and I am not asking you to throw anyone
under the bus, because that is not what this is about. But, you
know, if I were you, I would have been really angry. So what
was your first reaction, and how do we avoid that from
happening, because you should have been, in my opinion, a part
of everything that was going on pre-arrest?
Mr. Southwell. Well, we are working, Madam Congresswoman
with the TSA as well as with the FBI, the local FBI
authorities. The Atlanta police department, of course, is the
one who is usually notified in those instances. We are looking
to increase, for example, just historically the Atlanta Police
Department is notified towards the time of apprehension. If
they are not, in the instances where they are not, the Atlanta
police has to sign a nondisclosure agreement. Most of the
times, they don't have the particular clearance to receive the
information, which is something we are working with the TSA as
well as the FBI at this time.
Miss Rice. What level of--if there--obviously, we need to
figure out a better screening process, whether that is--whether
it goes to 100 percent screening for employees in a separate
area, how--and you would really be the airport that would
probably bear the brunt of this the most out of any airport in
this country. Is it even feasible? I mean, the things that were
are talking, about Ms. Pinkerton's suggestions, things that we
are asking questions about, is it feasible?
Mr. Southwell. We believe it is feasible, to the extent you
talk about full screening. That is, there will be some
exceptions. There is no such thing as 100 percent screening, as
I stated. There is just, from a practical point of view, if
someone is having a heart attack, you can't stop the EMS folks
from attending to those passengers.
It is feasible. I worked in Miami for 12 years, and I have
seen it work. So I know it is feasible. There is a disparity,
even as we speak, regarding the passenger screening and the
employee screening that we talked about earlier. The industry
as a whole is looking for ways to contain costs. In the risk-
based analysis, for example, that we are using with passengers
where as a passenger you submit your yourself to this extra
background check to qualify as a trusted traveler. Once you
pass that screening, you are rewarded with not no screening,
but you are rewarded by having limited screening. You don't
have to take off your jacket. You don't have to take off your
shoes our take out your computer out of your carry-on, but you
are screened.
The employees at Atlanta's airport go through the similar
background checks, and of course, they are treated a bit
differently. They are currently just swiping and not being
screened, and so one of--I am not subscribing that every
airport would screen all of its employees. We believe, given
the high profile in Atlanta, that it will be applicable.
Miss Rice. Do you have--very quickly, do you have a system
in place at the airport, and forgive me if you already answered
this, to track lost or stolen SIDA badges? Is there a way to
ensure that people are only going where they are--in secure
areas where their job and their scope of employment requires? I
mean, is there any way that you can kind-of------
Mr. Southwell. We do. We do that all day through a system
of dual access restrictions.
Miss Rice. And they are effective?
Mr. Southwell. Quite--quite so. You can't just simply
move--simply because you can access a concourse doesn't mean
that you can go down onto a ramp. We have a large number of
employees who board a bus off-site at an off-site parking lot.
They enter the airfield entrances and go onto the airfield.
That doesn't mean that once they get onto the airfield, that
they can just simply roam around. We are looking at that,
however, because we talked about one key method of managing all
of this cost. We have some 70 different portals at the airport.
We are looking to reduce those to 10, similar to what Miami has
done. So there are ways to make it feasible.
Miss Rice. Thank you both.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Miss Rice.
Thank you, Mr. Southwell, and, Ms. Pinkerton.
Next up is Mr. Payne, the gentleman from New Jersey.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Pinkerton, in your view, how can TSA airports,
airlines, vendors, and others all work together to mitigate the
insider threat?
Ms. Pinkerton. Well, I think that we are starting to do
that today by having this conversation, the sharing of ideas.
Again, I was very pleased to hear that the FBI and TSA have
started a pilot program to do constant perpetual vetting on
criminal history records, but I would say the place where we
are really formalizing that collaboration is through the ASAC
committee, that this subcommittee and Congress have certainly--
can solidified the role of ASAC by passing that legislation.
Then I think we are working together on a local basis with our
airport and TSA to follow through on some of the ideas that Mr.
Southwell has put on the table.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Southwell, you just mentioned, you know, how you have
employees come from off airport parking lots and then bused in.
Does your airport perform physical screening functions
independent of those that TSA performs randomly on employees?
Mr. Southwell. We certainly do, Mr. Congressman. We have
teams of people who not only perform these. It is random at the
entrance points. But also throughout the day, we perform these
random checks within the concourses and the various portals of
the airport.
Mr. Payne. Well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, in the interest of time, I will yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Payne.
Now the Chairman now recognizes Mr. Johnson from Georgia.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
Ms. Pinkerton, you are aware of the fact that airlines have
downsized the number of employees that they have to pay
directly, and they have done that by farming out certain
functions to contractors. Are you aware of that phenomenon?
Ms. Pinkerton. Yes. In some instances.
Mr. Johnson. Now your organization, Airlines for America,
does not represent contractors at the airport whose employees
are performing certain tasks. Is that correct?
Ms. Pinkerton. That is correct.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Southwell, what percentage of that 40,000
employee number that you stated earlier are subcon--or contract
employees of airlines? Because you have airline employees, you
have airport employees, and you also have contractor employees
at the airport. What percentage of the number are contractor
employees?
Mr. Southwell. Congressman, I don't know what that number
is, but I would imagine the vast majority of those employees
are actually employees of the airline.
I would also like to clarify because of your question that
the airlines, which represent about half of the employees on
the airport that have SIDA access, actually submit all of the
information to the FBI to do the background check.
Mr. Johnson. Well, you are kind of getting ahead of me
then.
I was wanting to know whether or not these contractor
employees are considered employees who are subject to these
employee background checks and, also, terrorist watch list
checks?
Ms. Pinkerton. Yes, Congressmen. They are.
Mr. Johnson. They are?
Ms. Pinkerton. They are.
Mr. Johnson. Well, let me ask you this, Mr. Southwell.
Thank you for that response. That is comforting.
What impact has Georgia's Guns Everywhere Law, the law that
allows guns to be carried in churches, in bars, in restaurants
serving alcohol, in Government buildings, what impact has that
law, which went into effect, I believe, in July of last year,
had on airport security if any?
Mr. Southwell. Mr. Congressman, we have not seen any
increase or marked increase in the number of weapons being
brought to the airport. The Federal Government still has a
restriction regardless of the Federal law of passengers taking
guns beyond the security checkpoint.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you.
I would close out by saying that this morning I had the
pleasure of meeting with you, Mr. Southwell, and I think we had
a very thorough and productive conversation. I want to pledge
to work with you to achieve the kind of security that you deem
is appropriate and necessary for Atlanta Hartsfield Airport.
I want to take the liberty of, on your behalf, extending to
the leadership of this committee an invitation to visit Atlanta
and take a tour. When you do that, I would like to come with
you and see the arrangements that are in place and that are
being put in place to enhance security at the airport.
Last I would just like to say again thank you for allowing
me to participate in this very important hearing today. Thank
you.
Mr. Katko. Well, I would like to thank you, Mr. Johnson.
I think we are going to take you up on that offer. I think
it is important to come to Atlanta to see how things are going,
and it would be very instructive for both of us.
I want to thank the witnesses for their testimony, both Mr.
Southwell and Ms. Pinkerton, as well as the others. The Members
of the committee may have some additional questions. As always,
the hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
But I want to note that I appreciate the professionalism of
both of you today as well. I mean, the one thing that is very
heartening is that, instead of sweeping the problem under the
rug, the industry has recognized it is a problem and we are
going to work together to solve it. You know, you can rest
assured you have a partner in Miss Rice and myself to do that.
Last, I want to thank Miss Rice as well. She has been a
very good partner here. I look forward to working with you
going forward.
So thank you.
Ms. Pinkerton. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. All right. Without objection, the committee
stands adjourned.
Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 4:39 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A REVIEW OF ACCESS CONTROL MEASURES AT OUR NATION'S AIRPORTS, PART II

----------

Thursday, April 30, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Transportation Security,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:11 p.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Katko
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Katko, Rogers, Ratcliffe, Rice,
and Keating.
Mr. Katko. First of all, welcome back, Mr. Carraway. Thank
you for being here again.
I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing on
airport access controls, which serves as a follow-up to the
subcommittee's first hearing of the 114th Congress on this very
important topic.
At the outset, I would like to express my support for
President Obama's announcement of his intent to nominate Vice
Admiral Peter Neffenger, current vice commandant of the U.S.
Coast Guard, to be the next administrator of the TSA.
TSA provides vital security to protect our Nation's
transportation systems, and it is an imperative that the agency
is equipped with the necessary leadership to ensure that it is
operating in the most effective and efficient manner.
I urge the Senate to act quickly on the nomination of Vice
Admiral Neffenger to be TSA administrator.
A number of serious security breaches by employees at major
airports in the United States in recent months has highlighted
the need for the TSA, the airport stakeholder community, and
this subcommittee to take a hard look at how we can work
together--and I stress the word ``together''--to improve access
controls and employee vetting at our Nation's airports.
I hope today's hearing can provide a positive and
productive dialogue on how this can be accomplished. Unlike
some of the hearings, I would note parenthetically, we are
going to ask your opinion on a lot of things, and we welcome
your input.
In January of this year, Acting Administrator Carraway
requested that the Aviation Security Advisory Committee conduct
a review of airport access control measures. Today, with the
final report in hand, the subcommittee intends to better
understand the ASAC's findings and discuss the feasibility of
the recommendations.
The ASAC report included 28 recommendations to improve
airport employee access control in five general areas,
including, No. 1, security screening and inspection; No. 2,
vetting of employees and security threat assessments; No. 3,
internal controls in auditing of airport-issued credentials;
No. 4, risk-based security for higher risk populations and
intelligence; and No. 5, security awareness and vigilance.
I am eager to hear how TSA and the airport community plan
on improving the employee vetting process for individuals who
have access to secure and sterile parts of the airport, as well
as how the screening of these employees when they come to work
can be improved.
In response to Acting Administrator Carraway's request, the
ASAC created a working group tasked with analyzing the adequacy
of existing security measures, as well as issuing
recommendations on what additional measures could be
implemented to improve employee access controls.
One of the initial areas the working group examined was the
practicality of conducting 100 percent employee screening.
Rather than 100 percent screening, the working group believes
that TSA should expand random employee screening and inspection
under its Playbook operations.
I am pleased that TSA has already begun increasing the
random screening for aviation employees at our Nation's
airports. I look forward to hearing about the methodology TSA
uses to determine the frequency of conducting such screening,
as well as whether that methodology is effective in providing
airport employees with the expectation that they will be
subject to screening while working at an airport.
Today, we have the assistant administrator of TSA, as well
as two representatives from the airport community to address
how those recommendations can be implemented at airports
Nation-wide. I applaud the efforts of the ASAC in finding ways
in which access control at our Nation's airports can be further
improved through the cooperation of TSA industry stakeholders.
Further, I look forward to having a meaningful discussion
with TSA and airport stakeholders on what can be done going
forward to improve employee vetting and screening for those
with access to sensitive and sterile parts of airports.
[The statement of Chairman Katko follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Katko
April 30, 2015
I would like to welcome everyone to today's hearing on airport
access controls which serves as a follow-up to the subcommittee's first
hearing of the 114th Congress on this very important topic.
At the outset, I would like to express my support for President
Obama's announcement of his intent to nominate Vice Admiral Peter
Neffenger, current vice commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard, to be the
next administrator of the Transportation Security Administration. TSA
provides vital security to protect our Nation's transportation systems
and it is imperative that the agency is equipped with the necessary
leadership to ensure that it is operating in the most effective and
efficient manner. I urge the Senate to act quickly on the nomination of
Vice Admiral Neffenger to be TSA administrator.
A number of serious security breaches by employees at major U.S.
airports in recent months have highlighted the need for the
Transportation Security Administration, the airport stakeholder
community, and this subcommittee to take a hard look at how we can work
together to improve access controls and employee vetting at our
Nation's airports. I hope today's hearing can provide a positive and
productive dialogue on how this can be accomplished.
In January of this year, Acting Administrator Carraway requested
that the Aviation Security Advisory Committee conduct a review of
airport access control measures. Today, with the final report in hand,
the subcommittee intends to better understand the ASAC's findings and
discuss the feasibility of the recommendations.
The ASAC report included 28 recommendations to improve airport
employee access control in five general areas including: (1) Security
screening and inspection; (2) vetting of employees and security threat
assessment; (3) internal controls and auditing of airport-issued
credentials; (4) risk-based security for higher-risk populations and
intelligence; and (5) security awareness and vigilance.
I am eager to hear how TSA and the airport community plan on
improving the employee vetting process for individuals who have access
to secure and sterile parts of the airport, as well as how the
screening of these employees when they come to work can be improved.
In response to Acting Administrator Carraway's request, the
Aviation Security Advisory Committee created a working group tasked
with analyzing the adequacy of existing security measures, as well as
issuing recommendations on what additional measures could be
implemented to improve employee access controls.
One of the initial areas the working group examined was the
practicality of conducting 100% employee screening. Rather than 100%
screening, the working group believes TSA should expand random employee
screening and inspection under its playbook operations. I am pleased
that TSA has already begun increasing the random screening for aviation
employees at our Nation's airports. I look forward to hearing about the
methodology TSA uses to determine the frequency of conducting such
screening, as well as whether that methodology is effective in
providing airport employees with the expectation that they will be
subject to screening while working at an airport.
Today, we have the assistant administrator of TSA as well as two
representatives from the airport community to address how those
recommendations can be implemented at airports Nation-wide.
I applaud the efforts of the Aviation Security Advisory Committee
in finding ways in which access controls at our Nation's airports can
be further improved through the cooperation of TSA and industry
stakeholders. Further, I look forward to having a meaningful discussion
with TSA and airport stakeholders on what can be done going forward to
improve employee vetting and screening for those with access to
sensitive and sterile parts of airports.

Mr. Katko. The Chairman now recognizes--well, actually, we
are going to recognize Miss Rice for an opening statement, but
she is not here yet. So when she gets here, we will recognize
her. Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
April 30, 2015
This is the second subcommittee hearing on airport access control
measures. At our first hearing on this issue in February, I stated that
each airport presents a unique set of security issues. While I
understand the need for vendors and airline employees to access various
areas of the airport to do their jobs, I also understand the need to
maintain security. That is why all airline and airport workers with
unescorted access to areas beyond the checkpoint must successfully
complete terrorism and criminal background checks.
At many airports, these vetted workers use their Secure
Identification Display Area (SIDA) badges to bypass TSA security
screening to get to their workplace--which happens to be on the other
side of the TSA checkpoint. In most cases, granting vetted airport
personnel such access to the sterile side of the airport is beneficial
to airport operations and the flying public.
However, in December 2014, we learned of an alarming instance of
SIDA badge misuse. Individuals were charged with smuggling over 150
guns from Atlanta to New York City aboard commercial flights. It seems
that one of the gun smugglers used his SIDA badge to bypass physical
screening to pass the weapons to a co-conspirator on the sterile side
of the airport. After this incident, TSA asked the Aviation Security
Advisory Committee to reevaluate airport employee screening protocols.
Involving the ASAC was a good decision by Acting Administrator.
The ASAC is comprised of stakeholders within the aviation community
who have a deep knowledge of the inner workings of our Nation's
airports and have valuable insights to offer on how to implement
security efforts in a way that does not unduly disrupt or interfere
with airport operations. Last year, I was pleased that the President
signed into law a measure that I authored--the ``Aviation Security
Stakeholder Participation Act of 2014''--to authorize this important
advisory committee.
I am pleased that the ASAC acted, and in its 90-day review, set
forth a number of considerations and approaches to address potential
airport security vulnerabilities. The ASAC made a total of 28
recommendations. Among them was a recommendation that TSA strengthen
the vetting procedures when screening employees. It also recommended
that TSA maintain a database of all employees who have had credentials
revoked.
For quite some time, I have often questioned TSA about its
recordkeeping of lost and revoked credentials. Together with Ranking
Member Rice, I have asked the Government Accountability Office to look
into this. I am looking forward to learning how TSA plans on addressing
this matter. The ASAC also recommended that airports limit the number
of access points into sterile areas and restrict access privileges when
not needed and that airports enhance auditing practices for issued
badges. I look forward to hearing Mr. Grossman's perspective, as an
airport official, on this recommendation as he testifies on the second
panel today.
Furthermore, the ASAC recommended that TSA improve its insider
threat program. While there is a case to be made for such enhancements,
often with such programs, the devil is in the details. It is critical
that TSA's insider threat program have strong protections to ensure
that the program cannot be exploited to abuse, improperly target, or
retaliate against airport workers.
I was pleased that DHS took timely action, in response to the ASAC
recommendations. Within days, DHS Secretary Johnson took immediate
actions to enhance aviation security. These actions include screening
of airport employees when they travel as passengers and increasing
randomization screenings of aviation employees.
Secretary Johnson also directed TSA to work towards requiring
recurrent criminal history records checks for SIDA badge holders. While
these are steps in the right direction, tough questions remain about
the internal controls at our Nation's airports and whether meaningful
progress can be made to address known access control vulnerabilities.
Airport security is a shared concern, and we must work across the
aisle to make sure that we strike the right balance at our Nation's
airports to protect the American flying public and our critical
aviation infrastructure, while ensuring the free flow of commerce and
people. I look forward to continued work with this subcommittee, the
ASAC, and TSA to ensure the layers of security are as strong as they
should be.

Mr. Katko. We are pleased to have two very distinguished
panels of witnesses before us today on this important topic.
For our first panel, I would like to welcome back Acting
Administrator Carraway. Let me remind the witness that his
entire written statement will appear in the record.
Mr. Carraway, as we know from previous testimony, became
acting administrator of TSA in January 2015. Prior to his
current role, Mr. Carraway served as a deputy administrator
beginning in July 2014. He has been with TSA since 2004, and
has held various positions within the Offices of Security
Operations and the Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service,
including Supervisory Federal Air Marshal in charge for the
Dallas Field Office.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Carraway to testify.
Mr. Carraway, welcome back, my friend.

STATEMENT OF MELVIN J. CARRAWAY, ACTING ADMINISTRATOR,
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Carraway. Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking
Member Rice, and distinguished Members of the committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to appear before you and provide an
update on TSA's efforts to mitigate the insider threat at our
Nation's airports.
Controlling access to the sterile side of the airport or
the area beyond the TSA's screening checkpoint requires
balancing security with the business operations of each unique
airport. The sterile area holds passengers and air crews
waiting for flights, but it is also the workplace for vendors,
mechanics, ground crews, and others employed by the airlines
and the airports, many of whom enter and exit the areas
multiple times a day as a part of their regular duties.
In January 2015, I asked the Aviation Security Advisory
Committee, or ASAC, which we call it, to review airport access
controls following the December 2014 incident in Atlanta by a
Delta Airlines employee allegedly conspiring to smuggle
firearms from Atlanta to New York. Following a 90-day
comprehensive review, this group of industry experts delivered
its report with recommendations to address vulnerabilities
posed by an insider threat at our Nation's airports.
It is important to note that TSA's engagement with the ASAC
on this important issue did not stop with the delivery of this
report. TSA officials, including myself, have been actively
engaged with our private-industry partners to ensure effective
and prompt response to the recommendations provided by the
ASAC.
Recognizing the potential for terrorists to exploit the
vulnerability highlighted in the December 2014 events, I took
several steps to address the insider threats at airports
Nation-wide. These included increasing TSA random and
unpredictable employee screening, reminding airlines that
employees on personal travel must be screened at TSA
checkpoints, and increasing communication between TSA and our
aviation industry partners on threats and potential
vulnerabilities.
While these actions could be initiated in the immediate
short term, I also recognize the need to adopt long-term
solutions. The recommendations contained in the ASAC 90-day
review are comprehensive, thoughtful, and will help TSA achieve
meaningful reforms and partnerships with our aviation
stakeholders. Additionally, these recommendations use a risk-
based approach, allowing resources to be used where they are
needed the most.
The ASAC identified five areas of analysis where TSA and
industry could take action to address potential
vulnerabilities. These areas include security screening and
inspection, employee vetting and security assessments, internal
controls and auditing of airport-issued credentials, risk-based
security for high-risk populations and intelligence, and
security awareness and vigilance.
The ASAC generated 28 recommendations focusing on
activities under TSA's jurisdictions from these five areas.
Following my initial review, I found that all of these
recommendations have merit. Some are achievable in the short
term; however, there are many that require more thorough review
to determine how to implement and if doing so will require
statutory changes and/or additional resources.
Yesterday, TSA issued updates to current security
directives and issued an information circular to implement the
measures Secretary Johnson announced last week. They are:
Requiring the fingerprint-based criminal history records check
every 2 years for all airport employee SIDA badge holders until
TSA establishes a system for real-time recurring criminal
history background checks for all aviation workers; require
airport and airline employees traveling as passengers to be
screened by TSA prior to travel; requiring airports to reduce
the number of access points to secured areas to an operational
minimum; and increase aviation employee screening to include
random screenings throughout the workday. Finally, to
reemphasize and leverage the Department of Homeland Security
``If You See Something, Say Something'' initiative to improve
situational awareness and encourage reporting suspicious
activity.
Over the coming months, TSA will examine the means and
ability to implement additional recommendations designed to
strengthen security at our Nation's airports even more. I
appreciate the ASAC's review. I look forward to continued
engagement with them and our industry partners.
The ASAC also noted that requiring 100 percent physical
employee screening would divert limited resources from other
critical security functions and may also require infrastructure
improvements, workforce expansion, and airport reconfiguration.
It concluded that a random screening strategy would be the most
cost-effective solution.
As noted by the 9/11 Commission, perfection is unattainable
and its pursuit unsustainable. Trying to eliminate all risks
results in ineffective security and unnecessarily burdens the
aviation industry and Government.
Transportation security remains a shared responsibility
among Government agencies, stakeholders, and aviation employees
and the traveling public. I want to thank the committee for
your partnership on this and other important issues, and I
truly look forward to working with you and to answering your
questions on this important topic.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Carraway follows:]
Prepared Statement of Melvin J. Carraway
April 30, 2015
Good afternoon Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and
distinguished Members of the committee. I appreciate the opportunity to
appear before you today to provide updates on the Transportation
Security Administration's (TSA) efforts in enhancing airport access
control at our Nation's airports.
In January 2015, I requested that the Aviation Security Advisory
Committee (ASAC) convene a working group of industry experts to conduct
a comprehensive review of airport access control following the December
2014 incident of a Delta airlines employee allegedly conspiring to
smuggle firearms from Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport
(ATL) to John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York. The ASAC
was tasked with examining the potential vulnerabilities for terrorist
activities exposed by this criminal incident to determine if additional
risk-based security measures, resources, or policy changes were
necessary. After a 90-day comprehensive review, the ASAC delivered its
report with 28 recommendations to address vulnerabilities at our
Nation's airports. I would like to report on these recommendations and
share with you TSA's next steps in addressing them.
access control background
Each day, TSA facilitates and secures the travel of nearly 2
million air passengers at approximately 440 airports Nation-wide.
Controlling access to the sterile side of the airport, or the area
beyond the TSA screening checkpoint, requires finding the right balance
between security and the business operations of each unique airport.
The sterile area hosts passengers and air crews waiting for flights,
but it is also the workplace for vendors, mechanics, ground crew, and
others employed by the airlines and the airports, many of whom enter
and exit the area multiple times a day as part of their regular duties.
TSA requires each airport to have a security program that includes
controlling access to the sterile area, and TSA inspects against these
plans to ensure compliance. These inspections include checks of
credentialing, perimeter security, exit lanes, employee access, and
other critical areas.
employee vetting and screening
TSA has established requirements for security background checks for
airport and airline employees who have unescorted access to the sterile
area and air operations area. This check is conducted through the
Secure Identification Display Area (SIDA) badging process before
employees are granted unescorted access to the sterile area of the
airport. TSA conducts the name-based portion of the security threat
assessment, which includes an immigration status check and recurrent
checks against the Terrorist Screening Database. Additionally, under
TSA regulations, airports are required to collect and submit
fingerprints for a Criminal History Records Check (CHRC) and adjudicate
any criminal history data for potential employees. Individuals who have
committed a statutorily-defined disqualifying offense within the
preceding 10 years are not eligible for a SIDA badge. While the CHRC is
currently a single point-in-time check prior to employment, TSA has
been working diligently towards solutions to provide recurrent vetting
of the criminal history data of employees.
Once workers are employed at airports, TSA requires airports to
conduct random physical inspections of employees entering restricted
areas, including identification verification and checks for prohibited
items. TSA also screens workers on a random and unpredictable basis as
they enter restricted areas. TSA's screening protocols vary by time,
location, and method to enhance unpredictability. Employees who fail to
follow proper procedures in accessing secure areas may be restricted
from future access, disciplined by their employer up to and including
removal, or subject to criminal charges and civil penalties.
immediate actions taken by tsa
In the immediate aftermath of the December 2014 events, I took
several steps to strengthen access control security and mitigate the
potential vulnerability associated with aviation workers' access to
secure areas. These actions include: Increasing TSA random and
unpredictable screening of airport employees as they enter for work
within the sterile area; issuing letters to airlines reiterating that
employees on personal travel must be screened at TSA checkpoints; and
increasing communication between TSA and our aviation industry partners
on threats and potential vulnerabilities.
While these actions can be conducted in the short term, I also
recognized the need to adopt long-term solutions and the opportunity to
engage stakeholders in the development of these solutions through
consultation with the ASAC, TSA's primary advisory body comprised of
industry and security representatives.
aviation security advisory committee report
While the measures TSA has in place for background checks, security
programs, and compliance inspections provide a good baseline for access
control security, the December incident of alleged gun smuggling by an
employee with SIDA access illustrated a need to consider additional
options to address the potential vulnerability of a terrorist utilizing
insider threat methods. Thanks to this committee's work in passing into
law the Aviation Security Stakeholder Participation Act, codifying the
ASAC's existence and strengthening its supporting role for TSA's
mission, the ASAC was the ideal consultation approach to review access
control vulnerabilities. The ASAC's membership of industry, law
enforcement, and other key stakeholders brought a broad range of
perspectives to the problem of insider threat and access control. The
recommendations in their 90-day review are comprehensive, thoughtful,
and will help TSA achieve meaningful reforms in partnership with our
aviation stakeholders. Additionally, these recommendations use a risk-
based approach, allowing resources to be used in the most efficient way
for the most effective security.
The ASAC identified five areas of analysis and generated 28
recommendations in each of these areas where TSA and industry can take
action to address potential vulnerabilities. These areas are:

Security Screening and Inspection;

Vetting of Employees and Security Threat Assessments;

Internal Controls and Auditing of Airport-Issued
Credentials;

Risk-Based Security for Higher-Risk Populations and
Intelligence; and

Security Awareness and Vigilance.
These recommendations focus on activities under the jurisdiction of
the TSA granted to it under the Aviation and Transportation Security
Act (ATSA, Public Law 107-71 November 19, 2001). The ASAC expects that
these recommendations will concurrently mitigate criminal activity in
the secured and sterile areas of airports as well.
In terms of security screening and inspection, ASAC recommended
that TSA and industry work together to increase the frequency of random
and unpredictable screening for airport and airline employees. On
employee vetting and security threat assessments, ASAC recommended
updating the list of disqualifying criminal offenses and implementing
recurrent criminal history records checks for airport and airline
employees. Regarding internal controls and auditing credentials, ASAC
recommended TSA and industry strengthen policies for proper airport
identification media and penalties associated with credential misuse.
On risk-based security, ASAC recommended TSA continue to work with our
Federal intelligence partners and share intelligence information as
broadly as possible and appropriate with industry partners. With
respect to security awareness, ASAC recommended TSA, industry and law
enforcement partners work collaboratively to share best practices and
encourage employee engagement on reporting suspicious activity.
The individuals employed by airlines and airports hold positions of
trust and as mentioned above are repeatedly vetted against the
Terrorist Watchlist. The ASAC recognized the unique role that airline
and airport workers may have, including responsibility in securing the
airport environment, and recommended leveraging this workforce to its
fullest potential. By creating a culture of awareness for all airport
employees, through increased training and promotion of the Department
of Homeland Security ``If You See Something, Say
Something
TM
'' program and other initiatives, these employees
can serve as a force multiplier and further enhance access control
measures.
As a result of ASAC's review, on April 20, 2015 Secretary of
Homeland Security Jeh Johnson announced a number of additional steps
TSA will take to address the potential insider threat vulnerability at
U.S. airports. First, until TSA establishes a system for real-time
recurrent criminal history background checks for all aviation workers,
we will require airports and airlines to conduct fingerprint-based
Criminal History Records Checks every 2 years for all employee SIDA
badge holders. We will reinforce existing requirements that all airport
and airline employees traveling as passengers are screened by TSA prior
to travel. We will direct and work with airports to reduce the number
of access points to secured areas to an operational minimum.
Additionally, TSA will require airports to increase aviation employee
screening, to include additional randomization screening throughout the
workday. Finally, we will work with our stakeholder partners to
emphasize and leverage the Department of Homeland Security's ``If You
See Something, Say Something
TM
'' initiative to improve
situational awareness and encourage detection and reporting of threat
activity.
These enhancements to access control Nation-wide will greatly
improve our effectiveness by reducing vulnerabilities and maintaining
our risk-based approach to aviation security. Over the coming months,
TSA will examine additional recommendations to implement in the future
to continue strengthening our Nation's airports. I appreciate the
ASAC's timely and thoughtful review, and look forward to working with
them and our industry partners.
Of note, the ASAC held the consensus opinion that while physical
screening of employees is one means of deterring terrorist activity,
100 percent physical employee screening is not the only, or necessarily
the best, solution. Requiring 100 percent physical employee screening
would divert limited resources from other critical security functions.
Such physical screening, moreover, would require infrastructure
improvements, workforce expansion, and airport reconfiguration. This
would constitute an ineffective use of resources with limited security
value. An ASAC working group concluded that ``the provision of so-
called `100 percent measures' as a layer of airport security does not
appreciably increase the overall level of system-wide protection, nor
does it lower over-all risk.'' It concluded that a random and
unpredictable screening strategy would be the most cost-effective
solution.
For TSA, risk-based security considers how to provide the most
effective security in the most efficient way to fulfill our
counterterrorism mission and protect the traveling public. As noted by
the 9/11 Commission, perfection is unattainable and its pursuit
unsustainable. Trying to eliminate all risk results in ineffective
security and unnecessarily burdens the aviation industry and
Government.
conclusion
Transportation security remains a shared responsibility among
Government agencies, stakeholders, aviation employees, and the
traveling public. TSA will continue to apply risk-based, intelligence-
driven security measures to address vulnerabilities associated with
employees who have access to aircraft and secure areas of the airport,
while working with industry representatives and the public to
strengthen aviation security.
I want to thank the committee for your continued partnership on
this and other important issues, and I look forward to answering your
questions.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Carraway. I will note that you
are remarkably on the button time-wise, which is a rarity as I
am finding out on this committee.
I will note also that it is heartening to have a problem be
identified by everybody and to call a hearing and for everyone
to come to the table, not to fight about whether it is a
problem, to acknowledge a problem, and working together to find
a solution. That is how it is supposed to work, and I am glad
that we are here today to work on working out--not to decide
whether or not there is a problem, we are way past that--how to
fix it. That is why I am glad we are here.
Mr. Carraway. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. The Chairman now recognizes Ranking Minority
Member of the subcommittee, the gentlelady from New York, Miss
Rice, who is as busy and I am, and she was a few minutes late
getting here. So I want to give her an opportunity to give her
opening statement.
Miss Rice. Thank you for calling me out on that, Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate that. I want to thank you for convening
this very important hearing.
Recent incidents, most notably the gun-smuggling operation
involving a Delta employee, have highlighted the urgent need
for us to look closely at access controls in our Nation's
airports and the potential threat of employees exploiting
security credentials to commit criminal activity, like we saw
in Atlanta, or even to commit acts of terrorism.
Our first oversight hearing in February revealed what I
think we would all agree to be alarming vulnerabilities that
exist in regard to employee screening, employee vetting, and
access controls. These vulnerabilities constitute a major
threat to our homeland security and they must be eliminated.
As part of our effort to correct those deficiencies, Acting
Administrator Carraway asked the Aviation Security Advisory
Committee, or ASAC, to review security measures for industry
employees. The ASAC, which was codified into law by legislation
that Ranking Member Thompson offered last year, recently
released its 90-day report on access control.
First, I want to thank the members of the advisory
committee for their swift and diligent response. Obviously, we
are very grateful for your work. I also want to say that I am
pleased to see that the ASAC is working exactly as it was
intended. The job of maintaining our aviation security doesn't
fall solely on the TSA or any one agency or entity. It is and
must be a collaborative effort, and that is why this advisory
committee serves such an important purpose.
The ASAC brings all the stakeholders to the table, from
Federal agencies and law enforcement to leaders in the aviation
industry, so that we can consider all perspectives and work
together to identify ways to make our aviation system safer and
more secure.
That kind of collaboration is exactly what this report
represents. The 28 recommendations in the report are
thoughtful, constructive, and well-researched, and I look
forward to the dialogue today to understand how they can help
us strengthen security procedures, tighten access controls, and
neutralize the insider threat.
So, Mr. Carraway, thank you very much for your appearance,
and for all of the witnesses here today. Thank you.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rice follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Kathleen M. Rice
April 30, 2015
Recent incidents--most notably the gun-smuggling operation
involving a Delta employee--have highlighted the urgent need for us to
look closely at access controls in our Nation's airports and the
potential threat of employees exploiting security credentials to commit
criminal activity like we saw in Atlanta, or even to commit acts of
terrorism.
Our first oversight hearing in February revealed alarming
vulnerabilities that exist in regard to employee screening, employee
vetting, and access controls. These vulnerabilities constitute a major
threat to our homeland security, and they must be eliminated.
As part of our effort to correct those deficiencies, Acting
Administrator Carraway asked the Aviation Security Advisory Committee,
or ASAC, to review security measures for industry employees. The ASAC,
which was codified into law by legislation that Ranking Member Thompson
offered last year, recently released its 90-day report on access
control.
First, I want to thank the members of the Advisory Committee for
their swift and diligent response--we're very grateful for the work you
put into this report. I also want to say I'm pleased to see the ASAC
working exactly as it was intended. The job of maintaining our aviation
security doesn't fall solely on the TSA, or any one agency or entity.
It is and must be a collaborative effort, and that's why this advisory
committee serves such an important purpose.
The ASAC brings all the stakeholders to the table--from Federal
agencies and law enforcement, to leaders in the aviation industry--so
that we can consider all perspectives and work together to identify
ways to make our aviation system safer and more secure. That kind of
collaboration is exactly what this report represents. The 28
recommendations in the report are thoughtful, constructive, and well-
researched. And I look forward to the dialogue today to understand how
they can help us strengthen security procedures, tighten access
controls, and neutralize the insider threat.
I want to thank each of our witnesses for being here today. I thank
Acting Administrator Carraway for his service, and look forward to
hearing his perspective on how the TSA will work with industry partners
to act on these recommendations, as well as how TSA is working to
implement the mandates issued by Secretary Johnson at the time of the
report's release. Ms. Olivier, I want to also thank you for being with
us today, and look forward to hearing the perspective of the American
Association for Airport Executives on this report and these important
issues. Your ideas and knowledge of the collective sentiments of
airport executives across the Nation will add tremendous value to this
discussion.
Lastly, I would like to thank Mr. Grossman, the CEO and executive
director of Jacksonville International Airport and member of Airports
Council International-North America, who will explain how one
individual airport handles access control and insider threats issues. I
understand that your airport participated in the 2008 100% employee
screening pilot program, and I'm eager to hear about that experience.
I also understand that your airport employs unique strategies to
mitigate the insider threat, such as yearly background checks from
surrounding States, and I'm eager to hear about that as well.
Certainly, every airport in this country is different and there is no
one cure-all solution--but I think we may be able to draw best
practices from your experience that could enhance the security across
our aviation system.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Miss Rice.
I will now recognize myself for 5 minutes to ask questions.
Mr. Carraway, there are many areas that I think that we all
agree on, so I want to kind of delve down into how we make what
we agree on reality. The area I see the most difficulty trying
to set parameters on is the security screening and inspection
aspect. When I say set parameters, I think it is important to
have some sort of general parameters within which all must
operate to ensure that there is some sort of uniformity Nation-
wide.
Now, on the same token, I am mindful of the fact that every
airport is different. They are physically different. Kennedy
Airport cannot be handled the same way as Syracuse, New York,
where I am from, or an airport in a smaller city, or like
Atlanta even. They are all different. I know Atlanta is
endeavoring to many of the things talked about in this report,
including 100 percent screening. But it is still the question:
What is screening?
You talked about random screening as an option, but the
committee has a strong desire, I would say, overall, to set
some sort of general parameters for each of the employee
entrance points to begin with. You can overlay that with random
screening on the job in different areas inside the secure area
and outside the secure area. But that critical point when they
go from the non-secure to the secure area is what we are
probably most concerned with.
So I want you to kind-of address that for us and tell us
what you think employee access points should look like. Be
mindful of the fact that we want to have some sort of general
parameters for each of the employee access points, give
airports the option of how many they want to have, but at least
have some general standards within which they have to abide. So
with that proviso, could you help us out here a second?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, sir. Thank you very much again for this
opportunity.
Chairman, the issue that you are addressing was taken very,
very seriously by the ASAC. In fact, I would say that that was
probably the most critical issue. In referring to the ASAC
report, they indicated specifically that this report was based
upon looking at the employee coming to work, doing their work,
and also then leaving from work. So it was very important for
them to consider exactly what would happen to that employee in
the aspect of their operation.
In addition to that, they realized that every airport was
different, that one size didn't fit all, utilizing the risk-
based security perspective in doing so. Also, that they wanted
to make certain that the employees felt that any time, at any
place that they would have this feeling that they would receive
screening and/or some inspection in some form or fashion.
That is the basis of the randomness that they brought to
the table in the ASAC report and one that we have continued to
do even today and which, immediately following the incident, we
felt there had to be some sort of, again, this randomness that
occurred so that every airport employee would have this feeling
that they would be inspected in some form or fashion.
That is truly the basis of what the risk-based security
initiative is truly about, because, as you well know, the
screening that is done on the front side of the airport is
nowhere near that that can be done on the back side. The
infrastructure, as you say, is not the same, cannot be fitted
in that form or fashion. But creating an environment where they
can be feeling that they could be screened at any time is what
we are going for. So that is what we are doing and exactly what
the ASAC members have stressed for us to do.
What that looks like by the way of resources, it means our
individuals, our TSOs, or BDOs, our behavior detection
officers, it can also means canines, canines as well. Some
airports have even gone on their own to do this themselves, in
addition to the support that we bring to the table. My
discussions with many airport directors and airports is that
they felt this was significant for them to do and have begun to
do it on their own.
Mr. Katko. Yeah, I understand that, but maybe I am hung up
on the physical composition of what the entrances should look
like. Because I agree with everything you have just said, and I
agree with what the ASAC is saying, but if you are screening
someone after they are already in the secure area it may be too
late. If you are screening before they get into the secure area
that is great, but there is still that point where they enter
in that there should be some sort of threat, if you will, or
randomness to the access that they are going to get searched
possibly coming into the secure area, and that is what I want
you to address.
Mr. Carraway. Well, unfortunately, there isn't this 100
percent place for every employee to go through. I think that is
really evident by the ASAC's report.
What happens for most employees when they get there is
there is either a biometric that is used, a swiping that is
done, or a biometric using their hands, like in Dallas, that is
done that allows them into that access area. There are some
places in the airport, specifically Orlando and Miami, that
they are doing some employee screening. But you have to
realize, again, it is not 100 percent employee screening, there
are some exceptions even to that rule, because there is
equipment that has to be brought in, there are tools that are
accessed there.
Chairman Katko, what I think I really would like to do is
change the narrative, because I think we get so hung up on this
100 percent screening initiative that we miss the dynamic that
truly is here. That is, as you said, the insider threat issue.
So to change that dynamic requires this cultural change across
the whole system, exactly what Miami and Orlando have done,
created a culture where every employee believes that any time
they could be screened. By having this randomness inserted into
that process, that can happen.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. I have so many more questions, but I
am not going to hog the time. My time is up, and I now yield to
Miss Rice.
Miss Rice. So, Mr. Carraway, let me ask you this: Do you
think that there are any additional recommendations that you
would make to increase security in this regard other than the
ones that were suggested in the report?
Mr. Carraway. At this time, I believe that the ASAC
committee has done a very thorough job in identifying the
issues for us, to include the criminal history checks.
Recurrent history checks I think are very central to this as
well.
Miss Rice. So that to me is one of the most glaring
vulnerabilities that existed prior to this. Why was that?
Mr. Carraway. Well, this was a trusted population, a
trusted group of individuals. As you well know, airport airline
workers are a unique bunch. They really are quite extraordinary
about their work and prideful in what they do. Unfortunately,
there are a few that took advantage of that, and that is what
has brought us here today. I still believe they are a very
professional group of very, very high integrity, and that is
why it is important to institute the ``See something, say
something'' and try to change that culture within the aviation
worker industry.
Miss Rice. So who do you think does it best?
Mr. Carraway. Who does it best? I mean, is there one that
you would say gets as close to best practices? I don't know if
there is an answer to this. There may not be. I am just curious
as to whether there is one that you think represents really
what best practices should be.
Mr. Carraway. I think there are security levels at each
area. I have been to practically all 450 airports. I can tell
you that each one of them has a level of security that I would
tout as very best practices. You have to understand that the
ASAC committee is made up of just those individuals, and what
they brought to the table were all of those best practices that
they are familiar with and aware of in the industry.
I know we have touted Miami and Orlando to have initiatives
out there. They are just a compendium of best practices. I
think what we are going to do is take a look at all of those
things over time and bring the very best to the industry,
because at the end of the day we want the industry to be safe
and secure.
Miss Rice. Well, there is no question about that. I think
everyone would agree that everyone in this room, we are on the
same team. We are not opponents in this.
Mr. Carraway. Yeah, yeah.
Miss Rice. Will you tell me, would you agree, that there
really isn't a one-size-fits-all, that the airports are
different, uniquely different in their own ways? Would you
agree with that?
Mr. Carraway. I couldn't agree with you more. One size does
not fit all. That is the crux of what they have brought to the
table as well, to make certain that we find the best of all of
those best practices. Something that may work at a large Cat X
like Chicago may not work at a small Cat 1 or even smaller in
North Dakota or in Iowa, not that those are----
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Carraway.
Mr. Carraway. Yes, ma'am.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Unfortunately, they have called votes, but I
think we can probably squeeze in one more 5-minute line of
questioning. If Mr. Ratcliffe is ready, we will do that, and
then we will break.
Mr. Ratcliffe. How about if I talk fast?
Mr. Katko. You will be just like me.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Rice, for holding another important hearing on this issue.
Thank you, Acting Administrator Carraway, for your
testimony and for coming back to the committee. Clearly, since
9/11, Congress has entrusted TSA with the safety of Americans
as they travel this country. As the gentlelady from New York
commented, there have been a number of incidents fairly
recently that have called into question the ability of airport
employees to circumvent screening mechanisms. She talked about
the incident, I think, at Atlanta Airport involving a Delta
Airlines' employee smuggling firearms, but just in January
there were two additional incidents, one with an FAA
administrator, safety inspector, with a gun in his carry-on
bag, and then also a Delta gate agent boarding a flight to
Paris after circumventing passenger screening.
So all of this begs the question: How can we truly have a
secure airport when employees are not fully vetted to the same
standards that passengers are? So, Mr. Carraway, I want to talk
a little bit about the process here and give you an opportunity
to explain how static security measures in your opinion are
better-suited to screen airport employees than 100 percent
screening.
Mr. Carraway. Sure.
Mr. Ratcliffe. If you believe that.
Mr. Carraway. Yes, I really do. I know this comes down to a
random versus static or 100 percent employee screening, but we
will never have the resources, sir, to ever fill up every
doorway and access in the airport. That is why one of the
recommendations of the ASAC committee was to look at those
access points in the airport and with a recommendation to close
those or to find ways to limit the number of access points in
the airport.
Again, that strengthens the position of airport employees,
having the realization that wherever they may be, they could be
required to go through inspection or screening of some sort.
That is the real strength of it: At any time, at any place that
could occur.
So that is the real strength of it. Having the resources
and the dollars put towards 100 percent employee screening
seems to be out of balance, both from my perspective, as well
as from the ASAC review.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. So let me ask you a little bit about
the security process as it exists right now. Right now, an
airport employee undergoes a background check where their
fingerprint is cross-referenced with a criminal history
background check. Is that right?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Are there any other checks in place
right now?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, they also go through a terrorist
screening base as well, and other security processes that we
have through TSA. Also in the criminal history background there
are certain qualifiers or offenses that will eliminate them
from the process of being hired as well. So that information
then goes back to the airport.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. But is it fair to say that this only
happens one time?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, that is the inefficiency of the system,
yes.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. At some point in time didn't TSA
inform the House Homeland Security Committee, this committee,
that it was interested in implementing the FBI's Rap Back
service?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ratcliffe. That being the case, as I understand that,
that is where the employer would receive immediate notification
if there was evidence of some criminal activity. That being the
case, can you tell us the status of where TSA is with respect
to that?
Mr. Carraway. We are looking at that program and any others
that would come to our attention that would allow us to do this
recurrent, on-going vetting of employee criminal history
status. The idea, obviously, is if they are involved in any
arrests or warrants or prosecution that would happen, the
airport would be immediately notified of that offense and could
take action towards that individual or individuals for the
crime.
Currently, Rap Back is being reviewed. It is not fully
vetted and possibly on par to be implemented at this particular
time. It takes a technology whole review, and implementation of
that system would require both TSA and others to change their
system to do that. That is why we have implemented the 2-year
implementation or review of the criminal history at the
airport, and we issued a security directive yesterday for all
airports to do that immediately.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I see my time
has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Unfortunately, as I noted, votes were called. We stretched
out as far as we can. There are three votes. The first vote is
going, a few minutes left, then there are two 5-minute votes.
So we are going to take a recess subject to the call of the
chair, but I can tell that as soon as we are done voting, we
are coming right back and going to get right back at it, so a
minimal delay for you all.
Mr. Carraway. No problem, sir. Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. Katko. The committee will come to order. I want to
thank you for indulging us in getting our votes. We endeavored
to get back as quickly as possible, and I am not getting used
to this humidity here. It is brutal, and it is just starting.
Mr. Keating is up next.
Mr. Keating, please. You have 5 minutes.
Mr. Keating. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for waiting, Administrator Carraway.
Administrator, November 2010, before I was in Congress, I
was a district attorney, a 16-year-old, Delvonte Tisdale, snuck
into the tarmac at Charlotte Douglas Airport, and he hid
himself in the wheel well. I know this because, unfortunately,
he met a tragic end. The altitude froze him. They put the
landing gear, he perished falling 30,000 feet in my district.
When I came here, I started asking questions about airport
security as a result, because if a 16-year-old with no evil
intent can do that. He didn't even show up in the video
afterwards, when our police went to investigate the issue.
Now, since then, there has been somewhere in the vicinity
of over 1,000 breaches. In that period that I look back with
the latest statistics, 2004 to 2008, incredibly, I found out in
terms of the security reviews that were done, the vulnerability
assessments, that 87 percent of the airports weren't subject to
that kind of security review.
So I brought it up with then-Secretary Napolitano. We have
had other instances. We had a 15-year-old boy in California who
stowed himself away in a wheel well. Fortunately, he lived and
survived going to Hawaii. We had a Chicago man throw his bike
over the perimeter fence and ride across the runway terminal to
the door.
In Philadelphia, a man drove through a SUV, in the security
fence there, and he drove across the runway as a plane was
trying to land. In Los Angeles, a man climbed the perimeter
fence 8 times within a year and twice reached the stairway in
the tarmac. In Florida, a man running from law enforcement
climbed the perimeter fence and hid in an empty plane. I mean,
I could go on and on and on.
So I followed what has been done by TSA to try and deal
with this issue, and I found out that for fiscal year 2011 to
2013, 30 airports were assessed annually. It is going down
instead of improving. In 2014--I just got these figures a short
time ago--that the assessments for that whole year were only 12
airports in the entire country, of approximately 450, as you
mentioned. That is less than 3 percent.
So over 97 percent of our airports aren't even getting this
kind of security review. It is getting worse instead of better.
Yet we are putting so much attention at the gate that, in fact,
it is getting worse in the perimeter. Now, how tough is it for
someone, if a 15- and 16-year-old can do these things, for
someone to put a bomb there, a terrorist with a different kind
of intent?
How can this continue to happen and, in fact, go in the
opposite direction? We had a field hearing on this with the
committee, with Chairman McCaul and myself when we were head of
Oversight. We knew the jurisdictional issues. We talked about
the perimeter issues. We have had expert after expert after
expert, including
9/11 Commission members, and they said it remains one of the
top security threats that we have.
Yet, it is getting worse. We are not even doing 3 percent.
My patience is gone on this issue. Something is going to
happen, and we are not doing anything about it. If you hear
frustration, it is real.
Mr. Carraway. I understand.
Mr. Keating. So I know you are the acting administrator, I
am not putting it on your doorstep, because this is happening
for years. But something has to be done before we are reacting
to a terrorist attack and a tragedy.
Mr. Carraway. I thank you for the opportunity to address
that, and it is a concern for TSA as well as the airports as
well.
The enormous responsibility of protecting perimeters is a
combined effort both between TSA and the airports. No one owns
it totally. Yes, we do the JVAs and we have increased the
number of JVAs over the years. Yes, we are still ramping up
that, particularly on a risk-based security perspective.
Mr. Keating. I hate to bother you, but this is GAO
information. It is going down.
Mr. Carraway. Well, we are looking at it on a risk-based
security perspective, hitting those airports that we deem to be
the most at-risk airport. It is a matter of resources, as you
can well imagine. Doing a joint vulnerability assessment with
the FBI is an enormous task in doing. You don't look at just
the perimeter, you look at every operation that is within the
airport's purview to do that.
Perimeter security is an enormous issue. There have been
millions and multimillions of dollars spent on security
systems, and still they are penetrable by individuals. The fact
that someone could use a boat and come across and into Kennedy
Airport is just an indication of that, and they have spent
multi-million dollars on intrusions systems.
I think the takeaway truly is that there are still layers
in support of the airport and perimeter environment. Although
someone made it through the fence and reached an airport or an
airplane, there is still law enforcement, there is still some
other capacity issues that are in place to assure that nothing
further gets done. By just simply getting inside the belly of
an airplane, there is still going to have to be something done
to create this catastrophic event that we are talking about.
Mr. Keating. Well, if they couldn't pick up a 15-year-old
boy or a 16-year-old boy, how are they going to pick up an
explosive? I mean, you are saying that we are doing better. It
is risk assessment. It is a network. You are doing less than 3
percent of the airports. Once a plane is in that network it can
go to Charlotte and it is in the system. So it is vulnerable
everywhere in that respect.
So I just have to tell you, something has got to be done.
And fact that you said more is being done on perimeter security
just doesn't match up to the facts. If you have facts that can
prove me wrong, I want to hear them, but the numbers don't lie.
Mr. Carraway. Well, I would simply tell you, we work very
hard with the airports to deal with perimeter security. We
discuss it constantly. We know that there is not one-size-fits-
all, and exacting one solution is not going to keep someone
with intent of doing something in that airport environment.
That is why we have layers of security, both from TSA and the
airport's perspective.
Mr. Keating. Well, the layers are not working in this
instance. I have got to tell you, discussing it is great, but
it is time to do something about it.
I yield back.
Mr. Carraway. Thank you very much, sir.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much, Mr. Keating.
Seeing no other Congressmen and -women, I want to follow up
on some of the questions before we let you go, Mr. Carraway.
One thing I want to do at the beginning is make a point of
clarification. I think you mentioned in your comments in
answering some of the questions that we were looking for 100
percent screening. That is not the case.
What I was envisioning and what we as the committee are
envisioning with respect to these employee entrance points is
that if employees go through a certain point, a select number
of them may be randomly selected at any time, whatever the
ratio may be, and that we can work out--in fact, we should
probably talk for a moment at some point before you are done
here today--but the idea is that when they come into the
airport screening, they are going from the nonsecure to the
secure area, that critically transitional point, that there is
some sort of threat at that point that they are going to get
searched, not just swiping a card.
I understand that there are costs involved, and in the next
session we will be talking with the airport people and they are
going to tell me, ``Are you nuts?'' because it is going to cost
too much money. I understand that. We will get to that, and we
want to work with them on that. But I am curious to see what
you think of that concept.
Mr. Carraway. I see what you are saying.
Mr. Katko. Okay.
Mr. Carraway. Yeah, let me clarify, and maybe I didn't
express it very clearly. The randomization is a full gamut of
activities that the airport and TSA will employ as an
individual comes to work. In some locations, it could very well
be a magnetometer. It could be very well at an airport location
electronic trace detection equipment of testing someone's
hands. It could be an array of someone just simply looking into
their bags or asking, verifying with their identification card
to certify who they are.
The ASAC, as well as TSA, did not want to limit that range
of suites of activities for an employee coming to work that
day. That too increases the randomness and the opportunity and
expectation that an individual will be inspected when they come
to work and even possibly as they exit the airport environment
as well.
I a bit misunderstood where you are coming from, from that,
but that is how it is going to look across the network.
Mr. Katko. Okay. So what do you think the employee access
points should look like? What are the minimum requirements you
think we should have at those access points?
Mr. Carraway. That is a discussion I think would be best to
have with the ASAC. At this particular point, it has not come
to a point of requiring a minimum standard.
I can tell you from a law enforcement perspective, I didn't
want to tie anyone's hands, to say this is what you are going
to have to get, because I think it is an unfunded mandate, and
we didn't want to do that.
We have had such great success in having communication and
discussing with our stakeholders and our partners about this
issue. If they find the need, most of them have literally gone
out and taken care of those responsibilities without TSA having
the authority to say: This is an SD, here is the directive, go
forth and do those things.
Mr. Katko. Okay. All right. Well, we will follow up on that
with the next panel.
We have talked a lot about screening inspection and risk-
based security aspects. We could probably go on for a while
with that, but I want to touch on a few other things before we
are done here. Talk for a moment about the vetting of employee
and security threat assessments.
There has been some talk in the ASAC report, and I just
want to know if the recommendations with respect to the vetting
of employees are something that you agree with and increasing
the vetting and the randomization and recurrent vetting, et
cetera.
Mr. Carraway. This is a very important step. I think, as
you can tell from the ASAC report, that they very much agree
with it, and we have too. Having that recurrent vetting gives
us a level of security about who and what the individual has
been involved in. Couple that with looking at their past
history, criminal activity, if any concerns, is another
critical component of that.
Mr. Chairman, working with you and others to help solidify
that with those disqualifying criteria would be very helpful.
In addition, strengthening the time frame of those
disqualifying offenses would be very helpful as well.
But the first component is doing that recurrent vetting
process, whether or not it is the FBI's Rap Back initiative or
some other recurrent vetting process that we take advantage of.
That is just the very first step to assure the safety and
knowledge of who that airport worker really is.
Mr. Katko. Yeah, understood. Because with respect to the
Delta Airline employee, if they went back a little further,
they would have found that he had some convictions that were
relevant to his criminal conduct. I think that is part of it,
going back farther, doing the social media aspect of it as
well. I think that is something we all agree on and so that is
not really a controversial point. So I think that we will move
on.
Briefly, with respect to the internal controls and auditing
of the airport-issued credentials, you agree with the
recommendations as well in the ASAC report?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, I do. Again, that is another critical
component. Many times we find individuals who have had the
opportunity, they may have been discharged for some activity at
one end of the airport and by the end of the day they are hired
at another end of the airport. Having that critical information
about that individual is very essential to the airport as well
as TSA, and we will have a database established to have that
information and share with the airport environment.
Mr. Katko. Now, the next category I just want to touch on
is risk-based security for higher-risk populations and
intelligence.
Mr. Carraway. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. Now, of course, this was touched on in the
report as well. What do you think about that?
Mr. Carraway. Again, it is another critical aspect for
securing the airport. We believe sharing of information with
our partners is essential to securing the airport. We already
have intel briefings and FIOs, our field information offices
that share information with the airports and the like. But I
think we can do an even better job in sharing that information,
and we are looking at ways in which to do that.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Then last, the security awareness and
vigilance, the proverbial ``if you see something, say
something'' campaign, I think that, to me, is no-brainer that
everyone agrees with, to encourage them to speak up. The
question is: Do you think we should establish a hotline to DHS,
or how do you want to do that?
Mr. Carraway. Yes, we are looking at establishing a hotline
specifically to TSA at this particular point and to create even
an anonymous reward effort through the airports if necessary.
All of these things in conjunction, ``see something and say
something,'' will help to secure and create that culture that I
spoke about earlier.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now, I know you are all happy that we are
not coming out here saying you have to have 100 percent
employee screening, and I am sure that is a good thing, but at
the same time we are still, I don't know if hung up is the
right term, but we are concerned about the fact that there has
got to be some sort of uniformity that is applied Nation-wide
that is flexible enough to deal with the different airports,
because I know that airports are different all over the
country.
So that is a discussion we are going to have to have going
forward. I don't know if we need to have another hearing.
Perhaps we may just call you back in a panel discussion type of
thing after I raise these issues. So between now and that time
I reach out to you again, I want you to kind of think more
about it with your people in Homeland Security about what it is
we can try and memorialize that would at least set some sort of
parameters for the employee access point.
That seems to me to be the biggest sticking point. I mean,
there are people that say it should be 100 percent employee
screenings, everyone goes through magnetometers. I understand
the costs involved with that.
But I also realize and acknowledge that I probably don't
sound much like a Republican when I am saying this, but we
can't worry just about the cost of things. When it comes to
security, if there are things that should be done, we have got
to find a way to find the money through offsets to keep our
country and our airlines as safe as possible.
So we probably will revisit this issue with you either
formally or informally, so I guess I am going to ask you to
chew on it going forward and we can talk more about it.
Mr. Carraway. Mr. Chairman, can I just simply say, thank
you for your comment and obviously your diligence in seeking
this issue, because I can tell you, those behind me and the
other airport and airline executives and workers feel the very
same way about this issue. This is the environment that they
work in. They are very proud of what they do. They want to make
certain that their environment is safe and secure as well.
So thank you, and I look forward to working with you and
others in this regard.
Mr. Katko. Well, I appreciate that. I will close by noting,
again, what I said at the outset, and that is, it was
heartening to know that at the beginning we identified an issue
and everyone said, yes, it is something that needs to be worked
on, and we are all working towards the same goal here. That is
a good thing. No one had to yell at each other, so that is a
good thing.
Mr. Carraway. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Katko. So thank you very much, sir, and have a good
evening.
Mr. Carraway. Thank you.
Mr. Katko. The committee will stand in recess for just a
few moments.
[Recess.]
Mr. Katko. The Chairman now recognizes the second panel.
Good afternoon. We are pleased to have another panel of
distinguished witnesses before us today. Let me remind the
witnesses that their entire written statements will appear in
the record.
Our first witness, Ms. Jeanne Olivier, is an assistant
director of the Security Operations and Programs Department of
the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and is testifying
on behalf of the American Association of Airport Executives. I
will note also that she is an avid statistician, which
horrifies me, because I really struggled with that in school.
So welcome to our arena.
The American Association of Airport Executives is the
world's largest professional organization for airport
executives, representing thousands of airport management
personnel at public use, commercial, and general aviation
airports. Ms. Olivier has worked with the port authority for
over 30 years in airport operational management positions at
JFK International, LaGuardia, Newark Liberty International, and
Teterboro Airports.
The Chairman now recognizes Ms. Olivier to testify.

STATEMENT OF JEANNE M. OLIVIER, A.A.E., ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,
AVIATION SECURITY AND TECHNOLOGY, SECURITY OPERATIONS AND
PROGRAMS DEPARTMENT, THE PORT AUTHORITY OF NEW YORK & NEW
JERSEY, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
AIRPORT EXECUTIVES

Ms. Olivier. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to be with you
today. I am testifying, as you said, on behalf of the American
Association of Airport Executives, which represents thousands
of men and women across the country who manage and operate the
Nation's airports. I am actively involved with AAAE as the
chair of the association's Transportation Security Services
Committee.
Mr. Chairman, airport executives want to assure you and all
of the Members that we take recent incidents and the prospect
of the insider threat very seriously. Airports are public
entities with their own security responsibilities, and they
meet those obligations with a focus on the need to protect
public safety, which is a fundamental mission of all airports.
Collectively, airports have invested billions of dollars
since 9/11 to enhance security with meaningful results. Perhaps
as important as the financial investment is the resolve that
airport executives have to enhance security every day. My
fellow colleagues and I are public servants, sir, and we take
our charge to protect public safety and security, be assured,
very seriously.
The security imperatives of airports and the TSA are
closely aligned, and collaboration between the two to enhance
the layers of security that exist and to identify and address
potential threats in the airport environment is quite
essential. Our work together continues to evolve and improve,
as Acting Administrator Carraway has described just a few
minutes ago, and we are confident that even more progress will
be made in the days ahead.
In our view, we have an important roadmap on how to proceed
thanks to the work of the Aviation Security Advisory
Committee's ad hoc working group that was established in
January to review employee screening and airport access
control. I was fortunate to serve as a subject-matter expert on
the working group, joining several of my airport colleagues in
that effort, along with a number of professionals from law
enforcement and the aviation and security industries.
The group in early April provided TSA with a report
outlining 28 recommendations that collectively take a risk-
based and multi-layered approach to employee screening and
airport access control with shared responsibilities across the
aviation community. Specifically, the ASAC recommendations
cover employee vetting, random security screening and
inspection, internal controls and audit of badges, risk-based
security for higher-risk employee populations, intelligence and
intelligence sharing, and security awareness and vigilance.
As you know, Secretary Johnson recently outlined several
immediate actions based on the recommendations of the working
group that the aviation industry is now working to comply with.
We were all gratified to hear Acting Administrator Carraway
refer to the representations of the group as comprehensive,
thoughtful, and promising in helping TSA achieve meaningful
reforms in partnership with the aviation industry.
We couldn't agree more. The working group approached this
task with a seriousness of purpose and determination that
reflects what we believe Congress had in mind when it codified
the ASAC last year. We believe firmly that the final ASAC
recommendations offer a roadmap of how TSA and industry can
partner together to enhance security and mitigate the insider
threat and other potential vulnerabilities highlighted by the
events that led to the establishment of the working group in
the first place.
Before closing and moving to answer any questions you may
have, I would like to make just a few final points.
No. 1: The ASAC process. We believe it worked incredibly
well, bringing a wide array of industry professionals together
to partner with TSA in producing recommendations for how to
effectively deal with security threats with meaningful,
actionable, and implementable solutions.
No. 2: What is next? We urge Congress and DHS to recognize
and support the important work of the ASAC and avoid the
temptation to pursue other approaches in legislation or
otherwise that could divert resources from other critical
security functions.
No. 3: Cost in operations. As efforts continue to address
the insider threat and other potential vulnerabilities,
Congress and DHS must work to minimize the financial and
operational implications that new requirements, individually
and collectively, will have on airports and the aviation
industry. In a world of limited resources, we must proceed
smartly with Federal backing when possible.
In closing, please allow me to offer my sincere thanks to
the TSA for its work in providing the resources necessary to
ensure that the ASAC process was successful and to the
subcommittee for your continued engagement on these important
issues. I appreciate being here, sir, with you today, the
committee, and look forward to answering any questions you
might have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Olivier follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jeanne M. Olivier
April 30, 2015
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to be with you to discuss
airport access control--an important security function that local
airport operators have held for decades in accordance with strict
Federal standards, requirements, and oversight. I am testifying today
on behalf of the American Association of Airport Executives, which
represents thousands of men and women across the country who manage and
operate the Nation's airports. I am actively involved with AAAE as
chair of the Association's Transportation Security Services Committee.
In addition to my work with AAAE, I currently serve as assistant
director, aviation security and technology for the security operations
and programs department of the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey. In this capacity, I oversee security operations for New York's
Kennedy and LaGuardia airports and for Newark Liberty International
Airport and Stewart International Airport.
Mr. Chairman, I want to assure you and Members of the subcommittee
that airports take recent incidents and the prospect of the ``insider
threat'' in the aviation environment very seriously. Airport executives
are working constantly in collaboration with the Transportation
Security Administration to enhance the layers of security that exist to
identify and address potential threats in the airport environment.
In addition to partnering with TSA to help the agency meet its
primary mission of passenger and baggage screening, airports as public
entities also perform a number of inherently local security-related
functions at their facilities, including incident response and
management, perimeter security, employee badging and credentialing,
access control, infrastructure and operations planning, and a myriad of
local law enforcement functions. These important duties have long been
local responsibilities that have been performed by local authorities in
accordance with Federal standards under Federal oversight.
Airport operators meet their security-related obligations with a
sharp focus on the need to protect public safety, which remains one of
their fundamental missions. The professionals who perform these duties
at airports are highly trained and have the first responder duties that
I know each and every Member of this subcommittee, the Congress, and
the country value immensely. From a security and resource perspective,
it is critical that these inherently local functions remain local with
Federal oversight and backed by Federal resources when appropriate.
aviation security advisory committee working group report on airport
access control
I also recently served as a subject-matter expert on the Aviation
Security Advisory Committee's ad-hoc working group to review employee
screening and airport access control. I was honored to join my other
airport colleagues who also served on the group, including Jan Lennon
from Atlanta Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, Michele Freadman
from Boston Logan International Airport, Cedric Johnson from BWI
Thurgood Marshal International Airport, Alan Black from Dallas Fort
Worth International Airport, and Chief Stephen Holl from the
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority Police Department, as well
as staff from AAAE and ACI-NA. In addition to airport operators and
airport associations, the working group was comprised of a broad cross-
section of industry representatives, including air carriers, airline
associations, labor, law enforcement, general aviation, security
technology, and airport services providers.
In a letter dated January 8, TSA Acting Administrator Mel Carraway
asked the ASAC to evaluate the aviation industry's current approach to
airport employee screening and to review other risk-based approaches to
address potential vulnerabilities related to security in the sterile
area, including policy and procedures, industry best practices,
technology, and employee training. TSA tasked the working group with
providing 30-day, 60-day, and 90-day reports. The working group's final
90-day report was submitted to TSA on April 8 after approval by the
full ASAC.
The working group's report outlines 28 recommendations that
collectively take a risk-based and multi-layered approach to employee
screening and airport access control with shared responsibilities
across the aviation community, including TSA, air carriers, and airport
operators. Specifically, the ASAC recommendations cover employee
vetting; random security screening and inspection; internal controls
and audit of badges; risk-based security for higher-risk employee
populations; intelligence and intelligence sharing; and security
awareness and vigilance. I have attached the list of recommendations to
the end of my statement.
Due to the interdependent nature of each of the recommendations and
the complex variables associated with each one, the working group did
not have the time to prioritize the recommendations. Time constraints
also limited our ability to provide detailed cost analysis. The working
group urged TSA to base any future actions related to employee
screening and access control on these community-driven recommendations.
The group also made clear its belief that any action taken by TSA
should be made through the established regulatory process.
The report contains a discussion and analysis of 100 percent
employee screening, concluding that 100 percent physical screening
would not completely eliminate potential risks and could divert limited
resources from other critical security functions. Recent studies have
indicated that implementing a 100 percent physical screening approach
would cost an estimated $15 billion annually and could cause
significant operational disruptions at many airports. As a result, the
working group developed their recommendations within the context of
Risk-Based Security (RBS), a comprehensive approach to aviation
security endorsed by the Department of Homeland Security and TSA.
In this regard, the working group agreed that greater
implementation of RBS is essential in continuing to shift the aviation
security paradigm in a very positive and meaningful way. RBS replaces
the old one-size-fits-all security system that was in place prior to
the attacks of 9/11, and it has proven to be a significantly better
system because it enables allocation of available resources where they
have the greatest ability to reduce risk. It also is driven by
identifying those with intentions to do harm.
The working group applied risk management principles in considering
aviation's exposure to the insider threat and developed appropriate
mitigation strategies within the current and proposed budgetary
framework. The working group exercised a RBS approach that employed a
systematic process of understanding, evaluating, and addressing these
risks to mitigate the exposed vulnerabilities and to close any security
gaps in airport access control. The risk-based system for employee
screening or access control encompasses intelligence, employee vetting,
RBS based on higher-risk populations, security awareness, training and
behavior analysis, as reflected in the final recommendations.
On April 20, as a result of the recommendations contained in the
ASAC report, DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson directed TSA to take several
immediate actions:

Until TSA establishes a system for ``real-time recurrent''
criminal history background checks for all aviation workers,
require fingerprint-based CHRCs every 2 years for all airport
employee SIDA badge holders.

Require airport and airline employees traveling as
passengers to be screened by TSA prior to travel.

Require airports to reduce the number of access points to
secured areas to an operational minimum.

Increase aviation employee screening, to include additional
randomization screening throughout the workday.

Re-emphasize and leverage the Department of Homeland
Security ``If You See Something, Say Something
TM
''
initiative to improve situational awareness and encourage
detection and reporting of threat activity.
Airports and the aviation industry are working collaboratively with
TSA to implement these requirements. And, while there may be a
difference of opinion on the specifics of the short-term actions from
DHS and the recommendations of the ASAC working group to TSA, I think
it is important to highlight the success of the overall ASAC effort
over the past few months and the opportunity it provides as a model for
pursuing security enhancements in the future. Airports are very pleased
with the collaboration and feel confident that we will achieve better
results quicker by having Government and industry work together toward
the shared imperative of enhanced security.
As the subcommittee contemplates further engagement and potential
action to address the insider threat, we urge you to pay careful
attention to the detailed work and recommendations of the ASAC working
group. Congress and TSA have rightfully recognized the value of the
ASAC and the promise of its approach in achieving real, implementable
security enhancements.
other industry efforts--access control and perimeter security
In addition to my work on the ASAC, I serve on the RTCA Special
Committee on airport access control, which in 2014 released the updated
standard for airport access control (RTCA DO230-D). The document was
prepared under the auspices of RTCA, which serves as a Federal Advisory
Committee, and provides a vehicle for Federal regulators and regulated
parties to develop consensus-based guidance and standards documents.
Notably, the RTCA document provides guidance on acquiring and
designing airport security access control systems, testing and
evaluating system performance, and operational requirements. It also
incorporates the latest technological advances in security access
control system and identity management. The major areas covered
include: Credentialing; Biometrics; Physical Access Control Systems
(PACS), Perimeter Intrusion Detection Systems (PIDS); Video
Surveillance Systems; Security Operations Centers (SOC); Integrations;
Communications Infrastructure; and General Acquisition-Related
Considerations.
The 2014 document was the fourth version since the first standard
for airport access control was published by RTCA in 1996. The Special
Committee has spent the last year working on yet another update--no
other airport security standard is updated so regularly. Like ASAC, the
RTCA process involves the airport and aviation community working with
TSA to provide consensus recommendations and a comprehensive set of
guidelines on all technical aspects of access control. The document
provides both TSA and airport operators a convenient source of
information on current practices and procedures and unbiased
information on new technology.
The comprehensive guidance document also contains an entire section
on perimeter intrusion detection, which reviews options from patrols to
state-of-the-art technology solutions and what factors airport
operators need to consider when implementing a perimeter security
solution at their facility. I would be pleased to discuss this
important work with the committee in more detail.
Mr. Chairman, airport executives are working constantly in
collaboration with TSA to evaluate and enhance the layers of security
that exist to identify and address potential threats in the airport
environment, including extensive background checks for aviation
workers, random physical screening of workers at airports,
surveillance, law enforcement patrols, robust security training, and
the institution of challenge procedures among airport workers, to
mention a few.
In our view, the best approach to enhancing access control at the
Nation's airports moving forward lies with continuing to focus on
robust background checks, maintaining our multi-layered security
approach, and preserving and protecting the critical local layer of
security that airports provide with credentialing, access control, and
other local functions. Inherently local security functions should
remain local with Federal oversight and backed by Federal resources
when appropriate.
Members of the committee, recent events have highlighted the fact
that we can never rest when it comes to airport security. Airport
operators take their responsibilities in this area very seriously and
are constantly seeking better approaches in close collaboration with
our partners at TSA. I am confident that we can find productive ways to
move forward, and I can assure you that the airport community is eager
to partner with the subcommittee and all of you to achieve our shared
goal of ensuring the highest level of security for the traveling
public.
final report of the aviation security advisory committee's working
group on airport access control recommendations
Security Screening and Inspection
1. DHS should immediately shift existing resources, as needed, to
expand the TSA's random employee screening/inspection program
(i.e. the Playbook to secured area access points).

2. TSA, in coordination and collaboration with Government and
industry subject-matter experts and airport and aircraft
operators, should develop an employee access security model
using intelligence, scientific algorithms, and risk-based
factors. This model should give all employees the expectation
that they are subject to security screening/inspection at any
time while working at an airport.

3. TSA should establish risk-informed, enhanced random screening/
inspection for all employees, which would be increased on the
basis of identified risk.

4. DHS should request from Congress needed funding for
implementation of security measures for a to-be-developed
employee access security model and the Playbook.

5. Airport and aircraft operators should prominently post signage
at access portals or via other means to alert employees that
they will be subject to screening/inspection in order to
support compliance with random screening/inspection programs.
Vetting of Employees and Security Threat Assessment
6. TSA should accelerate the implementation of the FBI/Next
Generation Identification (NGI) Rap Back Service with an
immediate pilot with airport and aircraft operators with a goal
of full implementation by the end of calendar year 2015. Real-
time recurrency should be part of the CHRC vetting process,
similar to the perpetual vetting conducted by TSA for the STA.

7. TSA should review the existing list of disqualifying criminal
offenses to ensure that it is comprehensive enough to address
the current threat environment and pursue any legislative or
regulatory changes needed to update the list of disqualifying
criminal offenses, other eligibility criteria, the addition of
permanent disqualifying criminal offenses, extending the look-
back period, and starting the period of adjudication on the
individual's sentence release date or program completion date.

8. Airport and aircraft operators should introduce new
certification language for badge applications that broadens the
focus from existing regulatory requirements to a greater focus
on overall suitability.

9. Airport and aircraft operators, in coordination with TSA, should
review current training for Trusted Agents and Signatory
Authorities and, as needed, provide enhanced training on
identification documents, identity fraud, and behavioral
analysis.

10. TSA should create and maintain a National database of employees
who have had their airport- and/or aircraft operator-issued
badges revoked for cause.

11. A comprehensive review should be conducted by the TSA to enable
a web-based portal for industry utilization for employee
vetting by TSA.

12. TSA's Security Threat Assessment should be enhanced to include
SSN, running all U.S. citizens against SAVE, fingerprints
against DHS' IDENT system, TSA PreCheck Disqualifying
Protocols, and run foreign nationals and foreign-born against
international databases.
Internal Controls and Auditing of Airport Issued Credentials
13. TSA, and airport and aircraft operators should assess the
efficacy of the auditing program requirements for airport-
issued identification media (e.g., security badges) designed to
ensure the integrity, accountability, and control of security
media.

14. In cooperation with airport and aircraft operators, TSA should
consider the establishment of biometric standards which may be
used in identity verification and badge validation. Included in
this effort should be recommended standards and a cost/benefit
analysis focused on implementing any such standards.

15. TSA should implement direct enforcement requirements upon
authorized signatories associated with non-compliance, to
include failure to immediately report lost, stolen, and
unaccountable employee badges and employee separations.

16. Airport operators, in conjunction with tenant business
partners, should identify opportunities to further restrict
access privileges and/or further reduce access points as
operationally necessary.

17. TSA, in coordination with airport and aircraft operators,
should support the enhancement/expansion of CCTV or other
measures to monitor employees at certain entry points and other
areas, as necessary.
RBS for Higher-Risk Populations and Intelligence
18. To foster the effectiveness of employee screening/inspection,
TSA should consider the development of risk matrices for
various employee groups using RBS principles.

19. TSA should maximize the dissemination of Sensitive and
Classified intelligence collection as widely as practicable.

20. TSA should further explore the use of social media to track and
assess emerging threats that may pose a risk to aviation.
Analysis and best practices gained from this effort should be
disseminated to regulated parties.

21. TSA should expand/improve the existing City and Airport Threat
Assessment (CATA) or similar program to capture, quantify, and
apply applicable intelligence information, and engage the
aviation community in developing mitigation measures.

22. TSA should partner with airport and aircraft operators in
conducting the Airport Risk Evaluation (A.R.E.) and provide the
results of any and all risk and vulnerability assessments to
appropriate regulated parties within the aviation community.

23. TSA should further analyze applicable insider-threat cases to
create a model of predictive risk factors based on research and
applied knowledge of the involved individuals and techniques
used to circumvent security measures.

24. TSA, FBI, and CBP should provide and make available enhanced
training and information on insider threat activity and
suspicious indicators that could be incorporated into airport
and aircraft operator training programs.
Security Awareness and Vigilance
25. TSA should consistently provide briefings to airport and
aircraft operators on the results of their security assessments
to provide awareness of potential risks at the airport.

26. Airport and aircraft operators should be encouraged to develop
and implement employee engagement/recognition programs aimed at
promoting employee engagement in aviation security.

27. TSA, and airport and aircraft operators should promote existing
National anti-terrorism reward/employee engagement programs to
increase security awareness and reporting of suspicious
activity.

28. TSA should promote or establish an existing or new Anonymous
Tip Line to receive information from aviation employees who
report a security concern or incident, and direct it to the
appropriate regulated party(ies).

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Olivier, for your testimony. We
appreciate you being here today as well.
Our second witness, Mr. Steven Grossman, currently serves
as the chief executive officer and executive director of the
Jacksonville Aviation Authority and is testifying on behalf of
Airports Council International, North America. I don't know if
he is going to shed some light on who Jacksonville is going to
select tonight in the NFL draft, since they have a high draft
pick, but maybe we can talk off-line about that.
But the Airports Council International, North America,
represents local, regional, and State-governing body that own
and operate commercial airports in the United States and
Canada. Mr. Grossman assumed his role as CEO and executive
director in 2009 and oversees the operation, maintenance,
development, and marketing of all authority assets, which
include Jacksonville International Airport, Cecil Airport,
Jacksonville Executive at Craig Airport, and Herlong
Recreational Airport.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Grossman to testify.
Mr. Grossman.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN J. GROSSMAN, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER/
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, JACKSONVILLE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT,
JACKSONVILLE AVIATION AUTHORITY, TESTIFYING ON BEHALF OF THE
AIRPORTS COUNCIL INTERNATIONAL, NORTH AMERICA

Mr. Grossman. Thank you, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Rice, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to provide a perspective of both an airport
operator and that of Airports Council International, North
America, on airport access control measures.
For airports, the safety and security of passengers,
employees, and facilities are top priorities. Airports are in
full compliance with Federal requirements and work closely with
the Transportation Security Administration and airline partners
to examine, test, and refine the aviation security system to
provide the optimum level of security.
TSA Acting Administrator Carraway is a strong leader and
his team is always willing to partner with airports on security
initiatives. In addition, we appreciate the opportunity for
ACI-NA and airports to participate on the Aviation Security
Advisory Committee review of access control.
Criminal acts involving the unauthorized transportation of
guns on aircraft prompted calls for the TSA to mandate 100
percent screening of employees. As we have talked about, 100
percent employee screening does not translate to 100 percent
security and is simply the wrong approach. A low-employee
screening is one of the multiple players of the aviation
security system. It is not a stand-alone solution and should
not be viewed as a silver bullet.
In 2008, the Jacksonville International Airport and six
other airports participated in an employee screening pilot
program. During the pilot, only one prohibited item was
discovered. Checkpoint screening operations were impacted.
Construction was also disrupted, as it was necessary to devote
resources to promptly screen the drivers and cement vehicles in
order to prevent the cement from hardening before it could be
delivered.
As the ASAC appropriately noted, to implement 100 percent
employee screening in the United States would be a significant
investment of resources that would be unavailable to address
other pressing threats. TSA has a random screening program
called Playbook, which uses roving teams of TSA transportation
security officers to conduct random and unpredictable physical
screening of employees.
At the Jacksonville International Airport and other
airports, access points have been reduced, airports routinely
support Playbook operations to reinforce employees'
expectations of being screened, and conduct random inspections
of employees and their Security Identification Display Area
badges. In addition, some airports, including Jacksonville,
conduct additional background checks on employees when their
badges are renewed or at other intervals.
TSA identified the need to implement risk-based,
intelligence-driven initiatives that enhance security. Airports
support the TSA PreCheck for enrolled travelers and other risk-
based approaches that provide the flexibility to apply security
measures in areas where they have greatest ability to
effectively reduce risk. Airport perimeter security involves
multiple layers of integrated processes, procedures, and
technologies. The layers of security provide an effective
system to deter and detect potential intruders.
In addition to perimeter fencing and controlled-access
gates, frequent patrols of perimeters are conducted by airports
and airline personnel, law enforcement officers, and other
representatives. Employees are trained to identify and
immediately report suspicious activities.
It is important to note that most of the perpetrators of
recent breaches were promptly apprehended, and I think this
demonstrates the effectiveness of the measures already in
place, although more can be done. Reporting about lost and
unaccounted-for SIDA badges provided no information about the
security systems designed to mitigate potential
vulnerabilities.
In addition to the badge swipe, many access control
suspects require personal identification numbers to be entered
to gain access through controlled portals. Furthermore,
airports frequently reissue badges to all authorized employees
upon receiving reports of lost or stolen identification media,
badges--and badges are immediately deactivated.
Now I would like to offer five recommendations to further
enhance the airport access control, and this is probably most
important: Invest in intelligence. History has demonstrated
that effective intelligence information and sharing plays a
critical role and provides one of the best opportunities to
identify potential threats and prevent terrorist attacks.
No. 2, continually review security requirements and
eliminate those that are outdated. Based on such a review,
adjustments can be made so that resources are applied in those
areas where they can effectively reduce risk.
Immediately implement the FBI's Rap Back program so that we
can have real-time information on security issues.
Further, expand the TSA Playbook program to provide for
random screening.
No. 5, institute an airport security-focused grant program
or modernize the PFC to provide readily available funding
support for these types of security measures.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to testify, and
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Grossman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steven J. Grossman
April 30, 2015
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to provide the perspective
an of airport operator as well as that of Airports Council
International--North America (ACI-NA) on airport access control
measures.
I am the CEO and executive director of the Jacksonville Aviation
Authority and a member of the ACI-NA U.S. Policy Board, which is
responsible for the formulation and direction of policy decisions
arising under U.S. legislative and regulatory matters. As a member of
the ACI-NA U.S. Policy Board, I have a profound interest in and
advocate for risk-based aviation security initiatives that not only
enhance security but also provide airport operators needed flexibility.
The Jacksonville Aviation Authority, an independent government
agency created by the Florida legislature, operates the Jacksonville
International Airport, Cecil Airport, Jacksonville Executive at Craig
Airport, and Herlong Recreational Airport.
Located in Florida, Jacksonville International Airport has more
than a dozen major airlines and a network of regional carriers that
provide some 200 daily arrivals and departures. In 2013, the number of
passengers using Jacksonville International Airport (JAX) reached
5,129,212.
Mr. Chairman, the safety and security of passengers, employees, and
facilities are top priorities for U.S. airports. As such, the
Jacksonville International Airport, and airports across the United
States, are in full compliance with Federal requirements and,
continually works with the Federal Government and airline partners to
examine, test, and improve upon the aviation security system to provide
the optimal level of safety and security. In partnership with the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP), the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), other
Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, and airlines,
airports maintain a comprehensive, multi-layered, risk-based aviation
security system. In my testimony, I have included several suggestions
to further enhance airport access control measures.
employee screening
As a result of recent criminal acts involving the unauthorized
transportation of guns on-board commercial aircraft, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) Secretary Jeh Johnson and TSA Acting
Administrator Melvin Carraway requested that the Aviation Security
Advisory Committee (ASAC) conduct an ``expedient and comprehensive
review'' of access control measures to address potential security
vulnerabilities at airports.
Tasking the ASAC to identify security enhancements was the right
approach and ensured collaboration across the industry. ACI-NA, along
with representatives of several member airports, participated on the
ASAC Working Group on Airport Access Control in the development of
substantive, meaningful, and risk-based recommendations. Further, the
final report accurately recognizes that each airport is uniquely
different and one size certainly does not fit all.
In addition, some have called on TSA to mandate that airports
immediately implement 100 percent employee screening. As I will outline
in my testimony, 100 percent employee screening does not translate to
100 percent security and moving forward with such a mandate is simply
the wrong approach.
Although employee screening is one of the multiple layers in the
aviation security system, it is not a stand-alone ``solution'' and
should not be viewed as a ``silver bullet,'' and I am in agreement with
the risk-based approach identified by the ASAC.
In 2008, Jacksonville International Airport participated, along
with other airports, in a Congressionally-mandated employee screening
pilot program conducted by TSA. Despite augmented TSA Transportation
Security Officer (TSO) staffing drawn from other airports to support
100 percent screening during the pilot program, there was a negative
impact on checkpoint screening operations, and significant additional
TSO staffing would have been necessary to permanently sustain 100
percent employee screening. Construction was also disrupted during the
pilot and it became necessary to devote resources to screen the drivers
and cement vehicles in a timely manner in order to prevent the cement
from hardening before it could be delivered.
As occurs routinely at other small and medium-sized airports,
employees regularly transit between public and sterile or public and
secured areas. At large airports, hundreds of employees transit such
areas during shift changes and at other times. Not surprisingly, it was
observed during the pilot that the same employees were repeatedly
subject to screening throughout the day.
During the 90-day employee screening pilot at Jacksonville
International Airport, approximately 121,000 employees (51,000 of which
were passengers in about 35,000 vehicles) were screened, but only one
prohibited item was discovered.
The costs associated with the implementation of true 100 percent
screening of employees at airports in the United States are staggering
and are estimated to be in the tens of billions of dollars for the
first year alone. Given the questionable security benefit of such a
costly initiative, and in consideration for the significant impact on
aviation operations, 100 percent employee screening is simply not
realistic.
As the ASAC appropriately noted in its Final Report on Airport
Access Control, there is no system domestically or internationally that
``would qualify as 100 percent screening of 100 percent of all airport
employees to passenger screening standards.'' Implementing such a
system in the United States would necessitate a significant investment
of resources that would then be unavailable to address other pressing
threats.
A 2008 Homeland Security Studies and Analysis Institute (HSSAI)
report--on the pilot program conducted at Jacksonville and other
airports--titled, Airport Employee Screening Pilot Program Analysis,
concluded that ``a random screening strategy is the more cost-effective
solution'' for airports.
As identified by the ASAC, there is no perfect security system. The
multiple layers of security--which can be routinely enhanced or
modified--provide an effective means to secure passengers, employees,
and facilities. A clear strength of this type of system is the
unpredictable nature of the individual layers of security and the fact
that many airport and aircraft operators exceed the baseline security
requirements through the implementation of additional processes,
procedures, and technologies that consider and are adapted to their
unique geographic locations and facility designs.
Therefore, multiple layers of security, including enhanced
background checks, security awareness training, and random screening of
employees, as recommended by the ASAC, are much more effective than a
rigid and predictable 100 percent employee screening regime.
random and unpredictable screening
Unlike airport operators, TSA is in the business of effectively and
efficiently screening passengers, baggage, and employees at airports. A
key element of the TSA Playbook program, formerly known as the Aviation
Direct Access Screening Program, is the roving teams of TSA
Transportation Security Officers, Behavior Detection Officers, and
Transportation Security Inspectors that conduct random and
unpredictable physical screening of employees working in or accessing
secured areas. The Playbook program has proven to be very effective in
mitigating risk.
Some airports work in close partnership with TSA in support of
Playbook operations to close certain access points and funnel employees
through the screening locations. The Playbook program mitigates the
risk of prohibited items being introduced at the perimeter, which would
go undetected under a fixed-point employee screening system. In
addition to introducing a high level of deterrence, Playbook provides
employees the expectation of being screened at any time, not just when
they enter through an access control point. This type of random and
unpredictable screening program represents a formidable layer of
security.
risk-based, multi-layered security
Several years ago, TSA appropriately identified the need to
transition from a one-size-fits-all approach to risk-based,
intelligence-driven initiatives that not only enhance security but also
increase efficiency. With limited industry and Government resources,
risk-based security programs--and regulations--are essential, as we
simply cannot continue the process of adding new security requirements
and deploying new technology to respond to each new threat.
Probably the most significant risk-based security initiative is TSA
PreCheck, the agency's trusted traveler program, which provides
expedited screening to travelers who are enrolled and pre-vetted while
focusing the most invasive screening resources on those about whom the
least is known. This type of risk-based system is absolutely what is
needed and TSA should be commended for directing the implementation of
this and other risk-based security initiatives.
We also need to commit to an on-going transition from the one-size-
fits-all approach in the regulatory environment to risk-based security
measures and regulation. With only limited resources available, it is
essential that airports have the flexibility to apply security measures
to those areas where they have the greatest ability to effectively
reduce risk.
Airport security systems rely on multiple risk-based layers of
security implemented in partnership with airports, airlines, and the
TSA. While each layer is not designed to be impenetrable, the
individual layers have the ability to deter and mitigate potential
risks, and when integrated, the multiple layers provide a robust
aviation security system that is not only effective but also capable of
being readily adapted to address new and emerging threats.
Through the implementation of the risk-based enhancements
identified by the ASAC, the current system will be even more effective
in mitigating risk.
employee background screening
An essential layer of security is the multi-faceted employee
background screening process which is initiated prior to an employee
being granted access to the secured area of an airport. In advance of
issuing a Security Identification Display Area (SIDA) badge, which
provides unescorted access privileges to secure areas, airport
operators conduct extensive vetting of employee backgrounds. There are
two critical facets of the employee background screening regime that
all employees who work in secured areas must successfully pass: A
fingerprint-based Criminal History Records Check (CHRC), and a Security
Threat Assessment (STA). Upon receiving an application from an employee
seeking unescorted access to a secured area, airport operators validate
the identity of the individual, collect and transmit their fingerprints
and the associated biographic information to the TSA. The biometric
fingerprint data is routed by TSA to the FBI for a CHRC. Through the
STA process, TSA conducts a threat assessment against terrorism and
other Government databases.
If the STA reveals derogatory information about the individual, TSA
informs the airport operator that they must not issue a SIDA badge
granting unescorted access privileges. If at any point thereafter,
recurrent STA vetting reveals derogatory information about an employee
with unescorted access, TSA will notify the airport operator to
immediately revoke their SIDA badge. Similarly, in accordance with
existing regulations, when an airport operator discovers, during a
review of CHRC results, that an applicant has been convicted of a
disqualifying criminal offense within the previous 10 years from the
date of application (``look-back period''), they refuse to issue the
individual a SIDA badge. A distinct security feature is the ability for
airport operators to review each and every applicant's criminal record
to make a determination about their suitability for being granted
unescorted access privileges.
Although some airports go above and beyond the baseline measures in
current TSA regulations and have implemented longer ``look-back
periods'' and/or an expanded list of disqualifying criminal offenses,
others are unable to do so due to restrictive State laws. While some
airport operators re-submit a portion of the population of SIDA-badged
employees for a CHRC, it only provides a snapshot of their criminal
record as of the date of submission.
As recommended by the ASAC, the ``look-back period'' should be
extended, and, through collaboration between Government and industry, a
harmonized list of disqualifying criminal offenses should be developed.
perimeter security
Airport perimeter security involves multiple layers of integrated
processes, procedures, and technologies. Although there is no perfect
perimeter security system, the multiple layers of security--which
airports routinely enhance--provide an effective system to deter and
detect potential intruders. While perimeter fencing and controlled
access gates are the most outwardly visible layer of security, there
are numerous other layers (systems), both conspicuous and
inconspicuous, in place at airports to bolster perimeter security.
Frequent patrols of perimeters in the public and secured areas are
conducted by airport and airline personnel, law enforcement officers
and other representatives. In addition to patrols, employees at
airports are trained to identify and immediately report suspicious
activities.
Many airports go above and beyond the baseline security
requirements for perimeter security, implementing additional processes,
procedures, and technologies that integrate more effectively with their
unique geographic locations and facility designs.
The individuals involved in most of the ``breaches'' in recent
reports were promptly apprehended. Rather than presenting a gaping
vulnerability as some would have us believe, this is clear evidence of
the effectiveness of the layered security system in place at airports.
In addition, none of the individuals have been linked to terrorism, and
the suggestion that terrorists may attempt to breach perimeters is
purely speculative and not based on any empirical data.
Airports, in conjunction with representatives of the TSA, the FBI,
and other Federal, State, and local law enforcement officials, conduct
joint vulnerability assessments (JVA) of their facilities, systems, and
perimeters. The JVA results, along with the latest intelligence
information, are used by airports to direct the application of
resources to enhance individual security layers.
An investment in research and development (R&D) of promising
perimeter security technology is essential. In order to evaluate the
effectiveness in the operational environment, TSA should commission a
pilot test at airports of promising technologies identified through the
R&D process. These pilot programs would provide valuable information
about cutting-edge technologies that could be used to by airports to
further enhance perimeter security.
The National Safe Skies Alliance, in partnership with airports, and
funded through the Airport Improvement Program, conducts testing and
operational evaluations of security technologies designed to further
enhance perimeter security and access control. Many airports have
deployed the systems tested and evaluated by the National Safe Skies
Alliance. The reports, which are available to all airports, provide
specific details about the application and functionality of
technologies tested under the program and contain valuable information
for airports as they make decisions on which technologies may work best
at their facility.
biometrics
Although biometric access control technology can be a potentially
useful tool in limiting access or supporting post-incident forensic
analysis, such systems are not a panacea and would not have prevented
the situation involving the unauthorized transportation of guns on-
board aircraft. In addition to being incredibly costly and challenging
to integrate with some legacy airport systems, biometric access control
systems are susceptible to environmental conditions and contamination
from substances routinely found in the aviation industry. Reports from
TSA officials subsequent to a study of biometrics in aviation and other
sectors revealed that such systems are not ready for full-scale
deployment at airports, and individual airports should conduct a cost-
benefit analysis to determine whether to procure and deploy such
systems.
lost badges
Recent reports about lost and unaccounted SIDA badges failed to
accurately characterize the situation and provided no information about
the various security processes, procedures, and technology specifically
designed to mitigate potential vulnerabilities. Many airports go above
and beyond TSA regulations and have designed additional features into
their SIDA badges and access control systems to address concerns with
lost or unaccounted badges. These include requirements for not only a
swipe of the badge but also a personal identification number or a
biometric to gain access through controlled portals, security features
incorporated into the badges, and employee training. Some airports have
deployed closed circuit television at access portals. In addition,
airports frequently re-issue badges to all authorized employees. Upon
receiving reports from badge holders of lost or stolen identification
media, airports immediately deactivate the badges in their systems. Due
to their sensitive nature, other security features incorporated into
access control systems cannot be discussed publically.
security directives vs. proposed airport security program changes
The most effective approach to rulemaking exists when regulatory
agencies afford airports the opportunity to comment on proposed changes
to their airport security program. Over the years, ACI-NA and airports
have participated on various National and international Government/
industry working groups intended to enhance aviation security as well
as improve efficiency. This coordinated process has been very effective
in allowing TSA to identify potential threats to civil aviation, and
industry to collaboratively develop aviation security enhancements that
minimize unnecessary costs and operational impacts at airports.
Although TSA has the ability to avoid the notice and comment
process and issue security directives (SDs), this regulatory option
should be strictly reserved for situations involving an immediate
threat, as was stipulated in the Aviation and Transportation Security
Act and current TSA security regulations. Airports do not believe that
Congress intended to provide TSA such latitude that it could issue SDs
absent or months after an identified threat.
security enhancements
Following are five suggestions to further enhance the security of
airport access control:
1. Invest in Intelligence
The importance of timely and actionable intelligence information
being used to disrupt terrorist plotting and adjust security baselines
cannot be emphasized enough. In the aviation industry, history has
demonstrated that effective intelligence information and sharing plays
a critical role and provides one of the best opportunities to identify
potential threats and prevent terrorist attacks. By way of example, the
2006 liquid explosives plot, the 2010 toner cartridge bomb plot and,
more recently, the 2012 ``improved'' underwear bomb plot were all
foiled by intelligence information developed and provided to industry
by intelligence agencies.
Armed with this type of information, airports make adjustments to
security measures to mitigate threats. Therefore, it is crucial to
invest in and provide additional resources to the intelligence agencies
with the understanding that actionable intelligence information be
shared with airports and airlines in a timely manner.
2. Review and Revise Security Requirements
Even today, there continues to be general hesitancy or fear of
rescinding long-standing security requirements, even when it is readily
acknowledged that they are outdated--because no one wants to be accused
of being weak on security. However, it is the very essence of risk-
based security to continually assess the latest intelligence
information and conduct informed reviews of security procedures. Based
on such a review, adjustments can be made so security measures maximize
risk reduction, something that may necessitate shifting or reallocating
security resources to bolster other areas. This reallocation of limited
resources ensures that they are being applied to those areas where they
can most effectively reduce risk.
3. Institute Real-Time Recurrent Background Checks
Unlike the STA process, through which TSA conducts perpetual
vetting of employees who have been granted unescorted access
privileges, the CHRC is currently a one-time snapshot of the
applicants' criminal history. According to the FBI, Rap Back provides
``the ability to receive on-going status notifications of any criminal
history reported on individuals holding positions of trust.'' When
implemented, this program will provide airports (and airlines) much
better and needed visibility into employees' criminal records, allow
them to make informed determinations as to the suitability of existing
employees and greatly assist in making determinations about whether
employees should be allowed to retain their unescorted SIDA access
privileges.
As recommended by the ASAC, TSA should ensure the immediate
implementation of the FBI's Rap Back program, so that real-time
recurrent CHRCs are conducted on SIDA badge holders.
4. Expand Random Employee Screening Operations
As a means to enhance an important layer of security, TSA should
further expand its Playbook employee screening program, so that every
employee entering or working in a secured area of an airport has the
expectation that they will be subject to screening. Airport operators
can support expanded Playbook operations by selectively closing access
portals in order to route employees through the screening locations.
5. Institute an Airport Security-Focused Grant Program
Although DHS, through its Homeland Security Grant Program,
dispenses billions of dollars annually for systems and technology to
bolster State, Tribal, and local preparedness, resiliency, and improve
security, very little, if any, is allocated to airport operators. As
airport operators have only limited funding that must be prioritized
across a multitude of safety, security, and operational projects, an
airport security-focused grant program would provide readily available
funding to support perimeter, access control, and other security
enhancements.
conclusion
Jacksonville International Airport and airports across the United
States are committed to working with Congress, TSA, FBI, CBP, State,
and local law enforcement agencies and aviation stakeholders to enhance
airport security through the application of risk-based measures. The
recommendations identified by the ASAC for multi-layered, risk-based
security enhancements provide the best approach to further enhance the
security of the aviation system.
Working in coordination with ACI-NA and airports, TSA should make
it a priority to move forward with the implementation of the ASAC
recommendations to enhance airport security. Through continued
Government-industry collaboration to enhance security, we can better
achieve our mutual goals of enhancing security and efficiency while
minimizing unnecessary operational impacts.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this written testimony.

Mr. Katko. Thank you very much, Mr. Grossman.
I will start with both of you. One of the five programs
that Homeland Security has recently implemented through Mr.
Johnson was the requirement that airports reduce the number of
access points to secured areas to an operational minimum.
Sounds good. What does that mean to you?
Mr. Grossman. Ladies first.
Ms. Olivier. Each airport needs to work with their local
TSA on that and with all of their tenants. The layouts of the
airports, of course, as you know, are very different. You can
have cargo areas, you can have direct terminal areas, you may
have general aviation areas. Depending on the layout of the
airport, there may be a need for various more remote access
points, as well as ones that are close to the terminal.
So in reducing those, an airport has to understand what the
necessary movements are through these areas, as well as take
into consideration what the vulnerabilities and risks
associated with that location are. In heavily-trafficked
airports, you have to understand what it does to the daily
operations of the airport. Often in cargo situations it is very
time-sensitive and so deliveries have to be made very quickly.
They have to get in and get out and on their way. So we have to
understand for every portal that we might reduce what the
implications of that are.
Mr. Katko. Mr. Grossman.
Mr. Grossman. Over the last several years at Jacksonville,
we have reduced our entry points from 24 to 14. During the
pilot program that we participated in, that number was reduced
to four. That became an operational nightmare, both for airport
personnel and, more importantly, for airline personnel.
So there is a right answer. For every airport it is going
to be different. I think with all of the new security measures,
airports do need to take a second look at that: How are we
going to control those access points and work with the TSA so
that the random screening is effective at each and every one of
those entry points?
Mr. Katko. Who decides what is an adequate reduction in
entry points? Who says, ``That is good, you are where we want
you to be''? Or who decides?
Ms. Olivier. We think it should be consensus. At an
airport, we engage the entire airport in the security program
of the airport. Together, we try to get a comprehensive problem
solving from all of our partners. That includes the TSA. It
includes our tenants. We invoke our employees through
committees to evoke their best ideas. So together with some
very deliberate time and motion studies and the like, we come
to an informed decision about what, in fact, can practically be
decreased.
Mr. Grossman is quite correct, airports across the country
have already worked in previous rounds to reduce the number of
access points. As we all continue to work on our airports and
oftentimes as construction changes on the airports, that will
present other opportunities for us to do further work in that
area.
Mr. Grossman. Yeah, Mr. Chairman, as you know, all airports
are required to have airport security programs that are put
together by the airport and approved by the TSA. We do that in
conjunction with all of our partners.
One of the things that is most impressive is at many of our
airports, if not most of our airports, the cooperative working
relationship between the TSA, the airport, and the airlines. I
will tell you, it has not always been that way. But I think in
the last few years we have worked very well together to solve
problems that not only enhance security, but work operationally
for the airport.
Mr. Katko. So is it fair to say that the ultimate arbiter
really is TSA through your airport security plans that you
present them?
Mr. Grossman. I would say yes.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now, have either one of you begun that
evaluation given the recent guidelines from Homeland Security?
Ms. Olivier. Personally in our airports, sir?
Mr. Katko. Yes.
Ms. Olivier. Yes, sir. We continue to look into that.
Mr. Katko. Okay. When you say ``we,'' to whom are you
referring?
Ms. Olivier. Well, I have several airports that I work
with.
Mr. Katko. Yes, you do.
Ms. Olivier. So we address this at things like our security
consortiums with our partners, but I also have the airport
security managers at each of those airports looking at
opportunities to how we can reduce these gates. In fact, we are
looking at that right now at JFK.
Mr. Katko. Okay.
Mr. Grossman. I think in almost all aspects of these
recommendations we are a bit ahead of the game. We have reduced
portals at our airport with regard to airport employees. An
employee who gets on an airplane to take a flight without going
through security is terminated as soon as that is discovered.
There is no tolerance.
In many of these other areas, we conduct with airport
personnel over 250 temporary checkpoints every month at access
doors with our staff. We have beefed up all of the challenge
programs in the secure area. So just even talking this morning
with the staff about the new security directives that are out,
we were talking about: Okay, when does Rap Back come about?
Because we already do additional background work every year
when we review badges through a law enforcement database called
LexisNexis. So we check that. We basically go back when we do
the initial background check, and this is different in every
State depending on State law, but we go back to when the person
was 18 years old, regardless of how old they are now.
Mr. Katko. That is great. That is great.
Mr. Grossman. We will evaluate acts that happened back many
years ago to see if there is a pattern and use our judgment as
to whether or not that person should have a security badge. So
it is basically a daily thing.
Mr. Katko. One of the things that we are probably most
concerned with, and you have heard this already several times
today, is that point when the employee goes from the nonsecure
to the secure area. How do you best try and prevent that from
happening? I have heard a lot about the risk-based theories and
the randomization and everything, which I understand on both
sides, both before and after they get into the airport secure
area.
But at that critical point we might be able to stop it. It
is probably where the committee itself is really kind-of hung
up the most. I would like to hear from both of you. What do you
think with the minimum requirements for a security check, or
however you want to say it, for the access points when you are
going from the nonsecure to the secure area for employees?
I guess, for each of you, in your own words, tell me what
you think should be the minimum requirements for each of the
entry points.
Mr. Grossman. I think in general I would say, if we were
doing it, it would be a security person or two, minimum be able
to wand somebody, make sure they are not carrying a gun, and
then a fairly detailed inspection of anything they were
carrying. I think if TSA is doing it, they have a bit more
access and training to check for explosive residue than we do.
We are just unequipped to do that. So I think it is going to be
a combination of both TSA personnel, and at airports that can
do it, airport personnel.
Mr. Katko. So is this for each and every entry point for
employees?
Mr. Grossman. In doing it on a random basis, absolutely.
Mr. Katko. Okay. So when you say on a random basis, okay,
what does that mean? So sometimes they are there and sometimes
they are not?
Mr. Grossman. Correct.
Mr. Katko. Okay. All right. So you would have that
randomization component, which I understand you all do anyways,
you all support, but I am talking about the physical
composition, if you will, of what that entry point looks like.
Tell me what you think it should look like.
Ms. Olivier. Well, I would express some level of caution. I
may be misinterpreting your question, but I would be reluctant
to impose a particular specific model or requirement on a
particular portal, because portals have different functions,
they are trafficked by different people, they are located in
different places.
I would be reluctant to impose a solution that is uniform.
I guess specific to that is, I would be reluctant to impose a
uniform solution for all portals because that can then militate
against the flexibility and agility that is needed at airports
to address the various security postures that they need to
employ depending on their information about risk and threat, et
cetera.
The minimum requirement certainly is that the people
conducting the inspections, or physical searches, are trained
to do so.
Mr. Katko. Let me back up, though. You see, we are getting
again into the randomization aspect of it, and I am talking
about just the physical description. I know I probably am
sounding like I am too focused on it, but we still don't have
it yet. I mean, doors should be locked. They have a SIDA access
badge. For the ones that aren't manned, what should be there?
Ones that are manned, what should be there? That type of stuff.
The nuts and bolts.
Mr. Grossman. I mean, I would suggest, as is done now at
many airports, just swiping a badge isn't enough. There has to
be some form of other means that you have to enter in. It could
be biometric, it could be your own personal code, et cetera.
That is as a minimum. The door absolutely has to be locked.
Mr. Katko. We are getting somewhere.
Ms. Olivier. Well, certainly. Or guarded.
Mr. Grossman. Right.
Ms. Olivier. There may be times when you have to have the
door open.
Mr. Grossman. When a door malfunctions we automatically put
a guard on the door.
Mr. Katko. Right.
Mr. Grossman. So I guess there are probably things we take
for granted, of course, because we live it every day.
Mr. Katko. Right. Right.
Mr. Grossman. But I do think that those things are
important. Then it is really going to be what is decided about
what is the random check process going to look like.
Mr. Katko. Right.
Mr. Grossman. No door should ever be left unlocked.
Mr. Katko. Okay. So as far as the random check process
goes, we are trying to figure out how to get some sort of
prescription to this without causing too much problems for the
airports given their operational flexibility. But we are
concerned about having some sort of basic standards that
everyone understands they have to adhere to, and obviously to
randomness.
Much of what the ASAC says is great, but it still doesn't
say how often it should be done or when it should be done or
how often. People like me facing this random screening, is it
once a month? Is it once a year? Is it 1 out of 4 employees on
a daily basis should get screened?
I mean, I guess, we want to set achievable goals that they
can abide by so when you come later on and do inspections of
airports, and they say, you have only been screening 1 out of
1,000 employees, that is unacceptable. Without some sort of
standards, your response could be: Well, that is what we
thought was good for this airport, you know what I mean? So we
have got to kind-of find a happy medium here.
Ms. Olivier. Basically, I think another way of saying that
is what employees say to me all the time too is, how do you
actually operationalize this, right?
Mr. Katko. Correct.
Ms. Olivier. So I think further work, as you suggested, is
going to be needed for us to work with our partners on that.
But the ASAC did lay out some very fundamental principles for
us to build upon on that. In the recommendations, it did
suggest that there needed to be a reasonable expectation on the
part of employees that they would be checked and inspected that
moment when they walked through that portal.
So whatever methodology we construct, whatever methods,
whatever channeling we construct, is that employees have to
expect whenever they come to work that day or whenever they
return from lunch that they have a reasonable expectation that
somebody is going to be taking a look at what they are
carrying.
Then to pick on an area in the ASAC recommendations that
may have come across a bit obscurely is that we believe that
the particular frequency, where we do it, when we do it, would
be a matter of rather smart modeling, and this is where you and
I are going to have some statistic lessons after class.
Mr. Katko. Oh, man. I am getting flashbacks of my days at
Catholic schools with the nuns. So go ahead.
Ms. Olivier. Yeah, but I am not carrying a ruler.
Mr. Katko. That is right. Thank God.
Ms. Olivier. So, in fact, we will be able to work with
industry experts in this area to determine the most efficacious
model for each area where we can achieve that ultimate result
that everyone has the reasonable expectation, it is very real,
and it achieves a level of frequency and stratification that
the public too feels that we have a very good chance of
identifying any problems as they emerge.
Mr. Katko. Mr. Grossman.
Mr. Grossman. Yeah, I think the answer is much more
frequently than once a month. It may not be every day, but it
would be multiple times each month.
Further, it needs to apply to everybody. In the pilot
program, a number of employee groups were exempted from it,
most particularly TSA employees, who probably access back and
forth more times each day than any other group of employees at
the airport. So that is going to be a big challenge as to how
we get those people through these temporary checkpoints, but it
has got to be done.
Ms. Olivier. Remember too, when he described temporary
checkpoints, exactly that. Sometimes we can choose to close
down a checkpoint, right, or choose to close down a portal and
say every employee or the next 10 employees have to go over to
this other area where we do have screening set up, right? So
there are many different options to achieve this.
Mr. Katko. Right. Okay.
I think I have got it, and it is just going to take some
more fleshing out. But the overarching observation is that we
all agree we have to step it up, and just a question of how to
do that and how to make sure that the people that are committed
to it are doing it the same way that people who may not have
the same desires to.
My concern is not so much an airport, you two, because you
sound like you are on your game, but what about an airport
authority that is really struggling for money? There are
pressures from whomever and maybe they cut corners. That is why
there have got to be some sort of generalized standards,
minimal standards, which must be uniform so at least when they
fall below those minimum standards we can do something about
it. Right?
Ms. Olivier. May I interject a comment that I don't think
anybody expected to be saying?
Mr. Katko. Sure. Of course.
Ms. Olivier. But I would like to assert that many security
professionals through the commercial airports in this country
talk to one another. We do it through usually two associations,
ACI and AAAE, and many of us are members of both. We have
committee work. We have ways of corresponding in many other
ways. I can attest that every day these folks are talking to
one another by email, phone call or what about particular
issues they are trying to solve at their airport and how they
can address it.
That involves people in the smaller airports that you have
just cited, as well as the larger airports. There is a lot of
cross-fertilization, everyone committed to trying to find
solutions, things that others have thought of that we can
capitalize on. My colleagues and I steal any good idea we can
find.
Mr. Katko. That is a good thing. Collaboration is
wonderful.
Now, I want to switch gears if I can and talk about some of
the other subject areas, which I think we are all pretty much
on agreement on these, that is the vetting of the employee and
security threat assessment. The information set forth in the
ASAC report about this subject, do either one of you have any
questions or objections about those?
Mr. Grossman. No, I think we are doing more than that right
now. So we will continue to do that, but I think that process
can be further assisted using the FBI's Rap Back program.
Ms. Olivier. Yes, and taking a look, people need to take a
look at this, but perhaps expanding the disqualifying crimes,
expanding the length of look-back, integrating with certain
foreign databases for a better understanding in that way. All
of those recommendations we fully support.
Mr. Katko. Okay. All right. As far as the internal controls
and auditing of airport-issued credentials, I presume neither
one of you have any questions about that. I mean, when people
are losing their credentials, that is a problem?
Mr. Grossman. Right.
Ms. Olivier. Sure.
Mr. Katko. Yeah. Okay. As far as the risk-based security
for higher-risk populations and intelligence, I want to talk a
bit about that. What do you understand that to mean, and what
do you think about what the ASAC's recommendations are about
that?
Mr. Grossman. Well, I think I have always said that,
unfortunately, over many decades as an industry we have been
very reactive. We seem to plan for yesterday's incident.
Mr. Katko. That is what we are doing right now, I guess, in
a way. We want to get better than that.
Mr. Grossman. Right.
Mr. Katko. Right.
Mr. Grossman. We are starting to get more proactive,
developing scenarios of what might happen and what do we do,
how do we prevent it? But the real key is intelligence. As I
mentioned in my testimony, if there are more resources
available, give them to the FBI, give them to other agencies
developing real intelligence, and then let's do a better job
of, No. 1, stopping these acts, and sharing the information
locally.
I think the Federal agencies are doing much better at
talking to each other. They still have a ways to go in talking
to us. That will come over time. But really, we have to stop
bad actors before they get to the airport, when you are talking
about terrorists.
Mr. Katko. I agree with that.
Ms. Olivier. I would like to highlight something too. We do
often struggle to try to understand what intelligence is out
there that can affect our day-to-day decisions at the airport,
but also our long-term decisions. What intelligence out there
can help me decide on major investments at the airport for
protective elements, perimeter intrusion detection,
surveillance systems, bollards on the frontage of airports.
Those kinds of major capital investments may be worthwhile,
but I need to know from an intelligence standpoint, is that
appropriate or is there intelligence out there that tells me I
should change some of my operational procedures or policies?
There is an activity initiated by the Department of
Homeland Security right now on intelligence that is attempting
to reach out to industry partners, airlines as well as airport
operators, to participate in an effort, referred to as ADIIC,
to understand what intelligence is actually useful to airports.
So I think that is a very excellent new initiative to bring
airports closer to this intelligence-gathering effort and to
ask airports: Is this useful to you? What else would you like
to know? So I think that is very promising.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Last, and then I am just going to bounce
something off both of you, security awareness and vigilance. I
take it you all agree that the efforts to beef that up and
establish a hotline, if you will, and to encourage people to
speak up when they have concerns is fine with both of you.
Mr. Grossman. I think it is fine. I have always been very
impressed with how serious airport workers take their role in
security. We drill it into them when they first come on as an
employee, whether it is my employee or an airline employee, and
every year they get recurrent training that they are part of
the security program. I think it works very effectively.
The tools that were advocated in the report are all good
enhancements to that. But I think they do a pretty good job
right now.
Mr. Katko. Now, the last thing I will leave you both with
before we wrap up, and that is, as we were sitting here I was
thinking how do we kind of ensure that this organic exchange of
information and information sharing and just kind-of
institutionalizing the information sharing on the security side
for employees as well, how do we do that moving forward?
I just want to bounce this off of you. What would your
thoughts be about using ASAC as a vehicle through which maybe
on an annual basis you kind-of do a review of what you have
learned for the year, basically, and recommendations going
forward, so all airports can have it, and we can have it, and
if there are things we need, if we need to get more money to
you, if we need to do things differently, if we need to tweak
the laws, we need to back off on this, we have kind of a
uniform way to do that? I think it just would lead to a better
dialogue on both sides of the fence. What do you think about
that?
Mr. Grossman. As an outsider to the ASAC process, I will
tell you how impressed I was that it really represents almost
the first real collaboration of industry and TSA. I think the
results of that were shown in how the report was received. They
did a great job. I think if you can institutionalize it and
make it part of the culture, I think that has been one of the
issues we see with TSA, is what is the culture, and it needs to
be a culture of collaboration. Because most at TSA headquarters
have never run an airport. They have never worked at an
airport. They need our input. This was a prime example of what
can come from getting that input.
Ms. Olivier. It was a very respectful process. It provided
for a great deal of crosstalk across the industry. Remember
that it is not just airports that are responsible for many of
the things that were discussed today, but our airline partners,
a great deal of responsibility there.
Mr. Katko. Correct.
Ms. Olivier. To bring all the parties to the table with the
TSA for joint problem solving certainly seems to reap the
highest level of product and benefit in a very short length of
time.
So we feel that this kind of collaborative process is a lot
better too than issuing perhaps certain directives that haven't
been vetted in the same way.
Mr. Katko. Understood. Understood. Give me one moment,
please.
Unless there is anything else you want to offer here, I
appreciate the efforts. Again, I will reiterate what I said to
Mr. Carraway. This type of collaborative effort on attacking a
real problem is what we are supposed to all be doing. I am
proud to be part of the process. I very much appreciate your
efforts in that regard as well.
Moving forward we have got to remember, we are all trying
do the same thing here. There are not two sides to this fence.
We are all in the same boat. We look at it from different
perspectives, and that is a good thing.
So moving forward, I hope we continue this collaborative
relationship on this issue and others relating to the airline
industry. The risks are far too great to do anything other than
that. I just wish more Americans would see that sometimes we
can work together and get things done. I think this is a good
example of that.
So thank you both very much, and have a good evening.
Ms. Olivier. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Grossman. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 4:20 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman John Katko for Melvin J. Carraway
Question 1a. At the hearing, you announced that TSA is requiring
airports to increase aviation employee screening to include additional
randomization screening throughout the workday.
What is the estimated percentage of airport and airline employees
being screened at Federalized airports daily?
Question 1b. Will airports be required to screen a minimum
percentage of employees on a daily basis? If so, what methodology did
TSA use to determine that percentage? Do you think such measures are
sufficient in providing employees with the expectation that they will
be subject to screening every day?
Question 1c. Has TSA issued minimum screening standards for
airports when conducting employee screening? If so, please describe
those standards.
Question 1d. In your opinion, what are the best and most effective
options for access points to ensure the integrity of the security
apparatus?
Answer. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) captures
general metrics associated with employee screening operations conducted
by TSA; however, it does not maintain metrics identifying the
percentage of airport employees screened as they enter the sterile
area. TSA is using a risk-based security approach to affect the
increase in employee screening, which includes TSA-directed inspections
conducted by the airport operator, as well as TSA-conducted screening.
TSA-conducted screening includes screening of airport and air carrier
employees at TSA screening checkpoints (as required for sterile area
airport tenants), as well as at other access points in the Aircraft
Operations Area (AOA), sterile, secured, and cargo areas.
Airport operators are required to conduct random inspections of
individuals entering the sterile area at entry points other than the
screening checkpoints to verify that they have appropriate and valid
identification and access control media, and to determine if they are
carrying prohibited items other than those required for operational
needs. The inspections must be clearly visible to other individuals
exercising their access privileges. While TSA does not require that a
specific minimum percentage of employees be inspected, the rate and
locations of random inspections must be approved by the Federal
Security Director and must be frequent enough such that there is a
reasonable expectation that individuals exercising their unescorted
access privileges will be subject to an inspection. Additionally, TSA
does not issue Standard Operating Procedures (SOP)-type parameters to
airport operators, rather their requirement is to verify access
authority and determine if an individual is in possession of prohibited
items. In response to direction from Secretary Johnson to address
insider threat vulnerabilities at domestic airports, TSA recently
issued an Information Circular (IC) to airport operators encouraging
them to work with their Federal Security Directors (FSDs) to utilize a
continuous random methodology of inspections; increase the breadth of
inspections to include public to secured area access points in addition
to public to sterile area access points; and capture the updated
measures in their regulated Airport Security Program (ASP) so that the
measure become enforceable, rather than a recommendation through IC.
TSA currently is compiling a survey establishing the level of the
cooperative compliance with the IC recommendations. Industry has been
advised by TSA that if there is insufficient voluntary process with the
measure contained within the IC, TSA will consider other mandatory
means of compliance. Airport operators are also expected to collaborate
with their FSDs to determine the best location, frequency, and duration
of these random inspections and amend their security programs
accordingly. In addition, TSA also conducts screening, via Playbook, of
individuals entering the sterile and secured areas of airports at
access points other than the screening checkpoint on a random basis.
The combination of enhanced vetting, security awareness training,
intelligence and information sharing, and random screening/inspection
help to ensure that airport employees do not introduce prohibited items
into the sterile area or secured area. Prohibited items may go
undetected if airport employees undergo only a fixed point-of-entry
inspection process. Introducing a high level of random and
unpredictable screening/inspection presents a formidable deterrence. As
noted above, each airport operator works with its FSD to establish the
manner and frequency with which these measures will be implemented and
that activity is supplemented by TSA screening operations.
Question 2. On average, how many Playbook operations are run daily
and how many employees are screened in a typical day? Does TSA intend
to expand Playbook operations so that more randomized screening occurs?
Answer. Playbook is regularly performed at 117 of our Nation's
busiest airports, which have been identified as higher-risk locations.
Currently, Playbook is required at 100 percent of CAT X and I airports,
in addition to 40 percent of CAT II airports. Other airports have the
ability to implement Playbook, as needed. On average, across the 117
Playbook-required airports, the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA) conducts approximately 5,000 operational hours of Playbook per
day, focusing approximately 95 percent of these hours on employee
screening. As a result, Playbook screens about 45,000 airport employees
daily. These figures have steadily increased over the past few months
as TSA has expanded operations to concentrate more on employee
screening.
Question 3a. How does TSA define ``operational minimum'' as the
term pertains to the number of access points to secured areas of an
airport?
Does TSA believe it is best to let local Federal Security Directors
and airport officials determine the operational minimum for the number
of access points?
Question 3b. Do you think there should there be a National
definition?
Answer. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has not
provided a numerical value to the term ``operational minimum.'' Each
airport has unique operational and geographical considerations that
must factor into the decision as to how many access points are
appropriate to achieve an operational minimum. Accordingly, based on
operational and geographical diversity of airports, varying in size
from the Los Angeles International Airport to Tupelo Regional Airport,
a Nationally-driven numeric value is not feasible. For that reason,
there is no definition for operational minimum, and TSA currently does
not plan to create one.
TSA believes that the Federal Security Director (FSD) at each
airport, working in coordination with airport officials, is in the best
position to determine the operational minimum number of access points
for that airport.
TSA has directed FSDs to work with airport operators to further
review the minimum number of access points to ensure they are at the
operational minimum, and to include that information in the airport's
Airport Security Programs.
Question 4. The Aviation Security Advisory Committee recommended
updating the list of disqualifying criminal offenses for SIDA badge
holders. What criminal offenses do you think should be added or removed
from the list?
Answer. See response, Question 5.
Question 5. In your testimony, you stated that individuals who have
committed a statutorily-defined disqualifying offense within the
preceding 10 years are not eligible for a SIDA badge. Do you think the
10-year look back period is adequate? How feasible is to look back to
age 18 for disqualifying offenses?
Answer. TSA will require additional time to review the current list
of disqualifying crimes and any new criminal offenses that should be
considered to disqualify individuals from receiving a SIDA badge.
Additionally, TSA will need more time to evaluate the 10-year look-back
period to consider whether changes are warranted. Any updates to the
list of disqualifying offenses or the length of the look-back period
will likely require legislative and rule-making changes.
Question 6a. Is TSA considering creating a National database for
airport employees?
Could it be modeled after the Federal Aviation Administration's
database of individuals who hold some type of certificate (pilots,
mechanics, etc.)?
Question 6b. How quickly could such a database be created?
Answer. TSA has a database of all airport employees for whom TSA
has completed a security threat assessment (STA). TSA's system contains
the biographic information these workers submitted to TSA as part of
their STA and application for an airport credential which if approved,
would afford access to airport secured areas. TSA is reviewing
technical, regulatory, civil rights and civil liberties, and privacy
issues related to implementing a National database that would be used
for other purposes or accessed by other entities. When TSA has
determined what, if any, legal or operational impediments exist, we can
determine how long implementation would take.
Question 7. Is TSA creating a National anonymous tip line for
employees to report suspicious behaviors? If so, what is the time frame
for doing so? Which office would be responsible for investigating the
complaints?
Answer. Yes, the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has
created a National anonymous tip line for employees to report
suspicious behavior.
The anonymous tip line, 844-MY-ARPRT (844-692-7778), began
operation on May 26, 2015, when materials about the tip line were
delivered to the airports.
The Tip Line is routed to the TSA's Call Center. The caller will be
informed that he/she has reached the TSA Call Center. Once the caller
presses ``2'' to report a security threat, the call is then forwarded
to the Watch Desk at the TSA's Transportation Security Operations
Center (TSOC). The Watch Desk is staffed 247.
TSOC will refer the information to the appropriate office for
further investigation.
Questions From Chairman John Katko for Jeanne M. Olivier
Question 1. What is the feasibility of mandating a percentage of
airport employees that must be randomly screened daily at airport
access points? If feasible, what do you think that percentage should
be?
Answer. Mandating a fixed percentage of airport employees to be
screened would limit the Transportation Security Administration's (TSA)
and airport operators' ability to implement a risk-based and random
screening methodology. A cornerstone of risk-based security is the
continuous reevaluation of processes and protection measures in light
of changing vulnerabilities, better understanding of risks,
availability of new technologies, and the evolution of industry
business practices. TSA and airport operators need the flexibility and
agility to respond to not only changing operational needs but also
changing threats and vulnerabilities--which would be hampered by a
mandated percentage for employee screening. Rather, the ASAC working
group recommends establishing a science-based methodology to determine
``randomness'' in the context of employee screening at airport access
points.
It is critical from a security and resource perspective that risk
mitigation efforts remain intelligence-driven, balanced, and effective.
In a world of limited resources, we are concerned that placing so much
emphasis on one approach--such as screening a certain percentage of
employees--could divert significant funding from other critical
security functions that are currently producing significant benefits.
Question 2. Is there an industry definition of ``operational
minimum'' as the term pertains to access points for employees at
airports? If so, what is that definition?
Answer. There is not an industry definition of ``operational
minimum.'' It is defined on a facility-by-facility, and often even
terminal-by-terminal, basis in conjunction with air carriers, tenants,
and TSA. Under current regulation, airport operators have already
worked to reduce access points to an operational minimum and also
segment which employee populations can use certain access points and
when. Airport operators must also factor safety concerns into the
determination of ``operational minimum,'' often needing to keep access
points active to meet fire code regulations and provide access or
egress for emergency response. Condition changes, such as terminal
modifications and flight schedule changes, may also provide
opportunities for further reduction of access points. As a result,
airport operators continuously monitor the need and utilization of each
access point.
Question 3. In your opinion, what are the best and most effective
options for each access point to ensure the integrity of the security
apparatus?
Should there be a minimum threshold of technology (i.e. biometrics,
CCTV) and physical screening?
Answer. Each access point should have the security apparatus needed
to provide an agile screening response based on intelligence and a
risk-based methodology that would result in all airport employees
having the expectation of being screened. We would be reluctant to
impose a specific requirement or standard for access portals because of
the different uses, layouts, and populations using each of the access
points.
Again, risk-based security provides for the continuous reevaluation
of processes and protection measures in light of changing
vulnerabilities, better understanding of risks, availability of new
technologies, and the evolution of industry business practices. TSA and
airport operators need the flexibility and agility to respond to not
only changing operational needs but also changing threats and
vulnerabilities--which would be severely hampered by a mandated minimum
threshold of technology at each and every access point. Security
resources, whether measured in terms of infrastructure or personnel,
provide a higher degree of risk mitigation when used in random and
unpredictable ways, consistent with risk-based security. Static
security measures, such as physical screening done at the same place at
the same time with the same technology, can be studied, tested, and
more easily circumvented than those that are dynamic and less
predictable. No single measure can provide broad-spectrum protection
against risks or adversaries. Therefore, risk-based, multi-layered
security offers the greatest ability to mitigate risks through the
application of flexible and unpredictable measures to protect
commercial aviation. This also creates the expectation for airport
employees that they can be screened at any time and any place.
Once again, it is critical from a security and resource perspective
that risk mitigation efforts remain intelligence-driven, balanced, and
effective. In a world of limited resources, we are concerned that
placing so much emphasis on one approach--such as screening a certain
percentage of employees--could divert significant funding from other
critical security functions that are currently producing significant
benefits.
Question 4. The Aviation Security Advisory Committee recommended
updating the list of disqualifying criminal offenses for SIDA badge
holders. What criminal offenses do you think should be added or removed
from the list?
Answer. A comprehensive review of the list of disqualifying crimes
is needed in order to adequately answer this question. The review of
disqualifying criminal offenses should be done in the context of
determining that an individual can be trusted to perform his or her job
and responsibilities in a manner that poses no threat of intentional
harm to themselves or others while in the secure areas of airports with
access to aircraft. The review should ensure that the existing list of
disqualifying criminal offenses is comprehensive enough to address the
current threat environment and to address changes within today's legal
system. Specific areas of review should include making a distinction
between a charge and a conviction (since many serious crimes are plead
down to non-disqualifying convictions), identifying patterns of
misdemeanors or other non-disqualifying criminal offenses, and
expanding the limited look-back period and variances in look-backs from
the date of application instead of the sentence-release date, and
increasing the potential for permanent disqualifying criminal offenses.
The disqualifying criminal offenses should also be referenced against
other similar programs operated by DHS, U.S. Customs and Border
Protection, United States Postal Service, and Department of
Transportation.
By regulation, airport operators are responsible for adjudication
of the criminal history records check, which allows airport operators
to know more about individuals that have access to their facilities. It
is critical that airport operators maintain the responsibility for
reviewing each and every applicant's criminal record prior to making a
determination about their suitability for being granted unescorted
access privileges. For example, in some cases, an individual is
eligible under the list of disqualifying criminal offenses; however,
the individual may require further scrutiny or at least situational
awareness for the Airport Security Coordinator. In addition, some
airport operators have adopted local regulations/ordinances and used
other practices to add disqualifying crimes beyond those listed in the
Federal regulation. TSA published Legal Guidance on Criminal History
Records Checks (dated May 28, 2004) that states, ``In addition to the
disqualifying offenses set forth in the CHRC statute and regulations, a
credentialing authority may apply its own criteria in making a decision
to grant or deny unescorted access authority.'' Consequently, airports
have added various processes to enhance their vetting practices. It
would be helpful for airport operators to have the regulatory support
for suspending or revoking access privileges if a current badgeholder
is arrested for a disqualifying or serious crime.
Question 5a. In your opinion, are there any impediments to creating
a National database for airport employees?
Do you think it could it be modeled after FAA's database of
individuals that hold some type of certificate (pilots, mechanics,
etc.)?
Question 5b. How quickly do you think it could it be created?
Answer. Given the transitory nature of aviation workers, a National
database--maintained by TSA but available to all airport operators--of
employees who have had their SIDA badges revoked would provide yet
another security enhancement. Such a database would eliminate the
potential for an employee whose unescorted access privileges were
revoked because of security violations at one airport from transferring
to another airport and being granted unescorted access privileges. This
models best practices in other industries that maintain databases of
sensitive information for reference purposes and suitability concerns.
The relevant information is already reported by airport operators
to TSA which should facilitate a relatively quick creation of such a
database. The biggest obstacles to implementation are likely addressing
privacy and legal concerns on behalf of airport employees, providing
airport operators access to such a database (which is key to its
value), determining exactly what information will be included in the
database (revoked badges, badges not issued, etc.), establishing a
redress process for airport employees and allocating TSA resources for
the database creation.
Question 6. Do you think the Aviation Security Advisory Committee
(ASAC) should produce an annual report on airport access control
security and employee screening?
Answer. As we stated in the cover letter for the final ASAC report
on airport access control, we stand ready to provide additional
assistance to TSA on the issue of airport access control security and
employee screening. In particular, it is important that TSA work with
the ASAC and industry on the implementation of the recommendations.
Some recommendations, like the review of the list of disqualifying
criminal offenses, need additional study and review which the ASAC
working group could not do in the limited 90-day time frame. Other
recommendations, like the use of the FBI RapBack program for recurrent
criminal history record checks, require industry input to accelerate
current TSA time lines for implementation. At a minimum, it would be
prudent for ASAC to produce a follow-up report in a year's time to
assess implementation of the recommendations as well as a review of the
adequacy of airport access control security measures after such
implementation of the recommendations.

[all]
