- RISK-BASED SECURITY: ASSESSING THE PATH FORWARD FOR TSA PRE CHECK

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

RISK-BASED SECURITY: ASSESSING THE PATH
FORWARD FOR TSA PRE CHECK

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 25, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-12

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-887 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.
2015

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Filemon Vela, Texas
Curt Clawson, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
John Katko, New York                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Vacancy
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION SECURITY

John Katko, New York, Chairman
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Kathleen M. Rice, New York
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia    William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
John Ratcliffe, Texas                Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Amanda Parikh, Subcommittee Staff Director
Dennis Terry, Subcommittee Clerk
Vacancy, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable John Katko, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Transportation
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Kathleen M. Rice, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     8

Witnesses

Mr. John Roth, Inspector General, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Kenneth Fletcher, Chief Risk Officer, Transportation Security
Administration, Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Ms. Jennifer A. Grover, Director, Homeland Security and Justice,
U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    19

For the Record

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
H.R. 48........................................................    40

RISK-BASED SECURITY: ASSESSING THE PATH FORWARD FOR TSA PRE CHECK

----------

Wednesday, March 25, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Transportation Security,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 2:06 p.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. John Katko
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Katko, Rogers, Carter, Walker,
Rice, and Thompson.
Also present: Representatives Ratcliffe, Keating, and
Jackson Lee.
Mr. Katko. The Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee
on Transportation Security, will come to order. The
subcommittee is meeting today to examine TSA's PreCheck
program. I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
I would like to thank our witnesses for their participation
in this hearing. We know your time is valuable, and we
appreciate you taking the time to be here today to discuss the
future of TSA's PreCheck program.
At the outset, I would like to express my sincerest concern
for the victims who were attacked last Friday night at Louis
Armstrong New Orleans International Airport. Transportation
Security officers have the important responsibility of securing
our Nation's aviation systems, and once again we have seen TSA
and law enforcement personnel act swiftly and, more
importantly, bravely to protect passengers from a security
threat at the checkpoint. I commend them all for that.
I commend also the TSA and law enforcement personnel in New
Orleans, as well as at airports across the country, for their
service and dedication to keeping the traveling public safe.
Over the last 3 years, TSA has adopted a more common-sense,
risk-based approach to passenger screening through the
implementation of its PreCheck program. Since its inception,
TSA PreCheck has garnered a positive response from both
passengers and transportation security industry stakeholders
from moving away from a one-size-fits-all approach to aviation
security. TSA PreCheck has fundamentally changed the way
Americans think about passenger screening in a post-9/11 world,
and I believe it should continue to expand.
However, in order to do so, this program must grow and
mature in a manner that saves taxpayers' dollars while also
improving the experience of the traveling public and reducing
security risks to aviation.
Growth in PreCheck should not be at the expense of any of
these core objectives, and I am concerned that several
initiatives related to expansion of TSA PreCheck do not meet
these criteria.
One such initiative is the Managed Inclusion program, which
involves conducting a real-time threat assessment to identify
passengers who are eligible for TSA PreCheck on a flight-by-
flight basis through the use of such tools as passenger
screening canine teams, explosives trace detection technology,
and behavior detection officers.
While this program may help reduce wait times and increase
utilization of TSA PreCheck lanes, it has not been shown to
improve the experience of travelers or reduce risks to
aviation.
On the contrary, passengers that go through TSA PreCheck
enrollment process and pay $85 for expedited screening are not
seeing the benefits that were promised to them. This is largely
due to the fact that passengers who did not enroll and are
unfamiliar with TSA PreCheck are being ushered into expedited
screening lanes through Managed Inclusion with little to no
information about the expedited screening process.
The experience for many of these travelers is, at best,
confusing and, at worst, infuriating when TSO screeners act as
though travelers who have been conditioned for over a decade to
take their shoes and belts off should suddenly know to leave
them on.
In addition to the poor and confusing experience many
travelers face due to Managed Inclusion, serious questions
remain as to overall effectiveness of the program at detecting
threats.
The Government Accountability Office released a report in
December 2014 and found that TSA failed to comprehensively test
Managed Inclusion's security effectiveness. Rather, TSA has
tested the effectiveness of individual Managed Inclusion
security layers, but has not yet tested the security
effectiveness of the overall Managed Inclusion process as it
functions as a whole.
TSA's failure to conduct such testing leaves us without an
accurate assessment of the program's performance. While TSA has
cited the random nature of the Managed Inclusion program as a
positive, I believe that the benefits of this unpredictable
program have not been shown to outweigh the potential risks.
Simply put, TSA should not continue operating Managed Inclusion
if it does not address the issues I have just outlined.
Finally, we have recently learned that a convicted felon
and former member of a domestic terror organization was allowed
to utilize PreCheck screening as part of TSA's risk assessment
program. Risk assessment determines PreCheck eligibility by
using risk algorithms built into TSA's Secure Flight system and
grants certain passengers PreCheck status on a flight-by-flight
basis.
In this instance, we understand that, even though the
traveler document-checker recognized the individual from media
reports, a TSA supervisor allowed the passenger to proceed
through PreCheck screening. We must be wary not to become
complacent at screening checkpoints because of PreCheck, and it
is important that screening officers are empowered to use their
better judgment in the screening process.
Fortunately, we all share the same goal, which is to
protect the millions of passengers who use our Nation's
critical transportation systems every day. With this in mind,
the subcommittee looks forward to today's important dialogue on
how to enhance risk-based security going forward.
[The statement of Chairman Katko follows:]
Statement of Chairman John Katko
March 25, 2015
I would like to thank our witnesses for their participation in this
hearing. We know your time is valuable, and we appreciate you taking
the time to be here today to discuss the future of TSA's
PreCheck
TM
program.
At the outset, I would like to express my sincerest concern for the
victims who were attacked last Friday night at Louis Armstrong New
Orleans International Airport. Transportation Security officers have
the important responsibility of securing our Nation's aviation systems,
and, once again, we have seen TSA and law enforcement personnel act
swiftly and bravely to protect passengers from a security threat at the
checkpoint. I commend the TSA and law enforcement personnel in New
Orleans, as well as at airports across the country, for their service
and dedication to keeping the traveling public safe.
Over the last 3 years, TSA has adopted a more common-sense, risk-
based approach to passenger screening through the implementation of its
PreCheck
TM
program. Since its inception, TSA
PreCheck
TM
has garnered a positive response from both
passengers and transportation industry stakeholders for moving away
from a one-size-fits-all approach to aviation security. TSA
PreCheck
TM
has fundamentally changed the way Americans think
about passenger screening in a post-9/11 world, and I believe it should
continue expanding. However, in order to do so, this program must grow
and mature in a manner that saves taxpayer dollars while also improving
the experience of the traveling public and reducing security risks to
aviation. Growth in PreCheck
TM
should not be at the expense
of any of these core objectives, and I am concerned that several
initiatives related to expansion of TSA PreCheck
TM
do not
meet these criteria.
One such initiative is TSA's Managed Inclusion program, which
involves conducting a ``real-time'' threat assessment to identify
passengers who are eligible for TSA PreCheck
TM
on a flight-
by-flight basis through the use of such tools as passenger screening
canine teams, explosives trace detection technology, and behavior
detection officers. While this program may help reduce wait times and
increase utilization of TSA PreCheck
TM
lanes, it has not
been shown to improve the experience of travelers or reduce risks to
aviation.
On the contrary, passengers who go through the TSA
PreCheck
TM
enrollment process and pay $85 for expedited
screening are not seeing the benefits that were promised to them; this
is largely due to the fact that passengers who did not enroll and are
unfamiliar with TSA PreCheck
TM
are being ushered into
expedited screening lanes through Managed Inclusion with little-to-no
information about the expedited screening process. The experience for
many of these travelers is at best confusing and at worst infuriating
when TSA screeners act as though travelers who have been conditioned
for over a decade to take their shoes and belts off should suddenly
know to leave them on.
In addition to the poor and confusing experience many travelers
face due to Managed Inclusion, serious questions remain as to the
overall effectiveness of the Managed Inclusion program at detecting
threats. The Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a report
in December 2014 and found that TSA failed to comprehensively test
Managed Inclusion's security effectiveness. Rather, TSA has tested the
effectiveness of individual Managed Inclusion security layers but has
not yet tested the security effectiveness of the overall Managed
Inclusion process as it functions as a whole. TSA's failure to conduct
such testing leaves us without an accurate assessment of the program's
performance. While TSA has cited the random nature of the Managed
Inclusion program as a positive, I believe that the benefits of this
unpredictable program have not yet been shown to outweigh the potential
risks. Simply put, TSA should not continue operating Managed Inclusion
if it does not address the issues I have just outlined.
Finally, we recently learned that a convicted felon and former
member of a domestic terror organization was allowed to utilize
PreCheck
TM
screening as part of TSA's Risk Assessment
program. Risk Assessment determines PreCheck
TM
eligibility
by using risk algorithms built into TSA's Secure Flight system and
grants certain passengers PreCheck
TM
status on a flight-by-
flight basis. In this instance, we understand that even though the
Travel Document Checker recognized the individual from media reports, a
TSA supervisor allowed the passenger to proceed through
PreCheck
TM
screening. We must be wary not to become
complacent at screening checkpoints, because of PreCheck
TM
,
and it is important that screening officers are empowered to use their
better judgment in the screening process.
Fortunately, we all share the same goal, which is to protect the
millions of passengers who use our Nation's critical transportation
systems every day. With this in mind, the subcommittee looks forward to
today's important dialogue on how to enhance risk-based security, going
forward.

Mr. Katko. I would like to thank each of you for being here
today; before we get to your statements, I want to introduce
the Ranking Minority Member of the subcommittee, the
gentlewoman from New York, Miss Rice, for any statements she
may have.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you for convening this hearing, first and
foremost.
Before I begin, I want to take a moment to note the
disturbing incident that occurred at Louis Armstrong New
Orleans International Airport last Friday when an individual
assaulted multiple TSA officers with wasp spray and a machete.
It is a chilling reminder of the risks Transportation
Security officers face every single day on the front lines of
the effort to protect passengers and maintain the security of
our Nation's aviation sector. It is a difficult, dangerous, and
often thankless job.
But I want you to know--and I feel safe saying I speak for
everyone up here--that our thoughts and prayers and our
gratitude are with you all. I also want you to know that we are
committed to developing solutions to enhance the security at
our checkpoints for your safety as well as that of the
passengers you protect.
Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for convening this
important hearing today so that we can examine the TSA PreCheck
program. The TSA PreCheck program, as I understand it, is one
of TSA's risk-based initiatives aiming to maintain effective
security while also maximizing efficiency.
When the Aviation and Transportation Security Act became
law, it authorized TSA to establish requirements to implement
trusted passenger programs and use available technologies to
expedite the security screening of passengers who participate
in such programs.
This allows the TSA to vet passengers on the front end
through the PreCheck application process. Those passengers can
go through expedited screening, and TSA can allocate resources
on the ground to focus on travelers who we know less about or
suspect of criminal intent.
I understand that more than 1 million people have now
voluntarily submitted their biographic information in order to
participate in this trusted traveler program. That makes sense
to me. It seems like an appropriate balance between
effectiveness and efficiency.
But I also understand that certain populations who have not
undergone this vetting on the front end are, nonetheless,
sometimes permitted to use the expedited PreCheck screening
lanes. That is something that doesn't make sense to me. It
suggests to me that the balance sometimes tips maybe too far
towards efficiency and maybe at the expense of effective
security. But I am looking forward to hearing the comments of
all of the panelists.
Certainly that was the case when a convicted felon and
former member of a domestic terrorist organization was
permitted to use a PreCheck lane, as we learned from last
week's report by the Department of Homeland Security's Office
of Inspector General. That kind of breach is simply
inexcusable.
Of course, it is beneficial to use PreCheck so that we can
concentrate our resources on passengers who are unknown to us
and pose the highest potential risk. But when a passenger such
as this individual who was known to us and clearly posed
enormous risk is given access to the PreCheck lane, it demands
that we take a hard look at the methods being used to calculate
that risk.
So that is why we are here today, to examine the risks of
expanding PreCheck beyond pre-vetted, pre-approved passengers,
to reassess the methodology used to assign a person to a given
risk category, and to ensure that we never allow the pursuit of
efficiency to compromise security.
I look forward to hearing from all of the witnesses here
today. I also want you to know that we are currently working
with Ranking Member Thompson on legislation that will be
introduced, and our hope is that the information we gather
through today's hearing will better inform that measure.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I thank all of the witnesses for
joining us today and yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Rice follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Kathleen M. Rice
March 25, 2015
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for convening this hearing.
Before I begin, I want to take a moment to note the disturbing incident
that occurred at Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport last
Friday, when an individual assaulted multiple Transportation Security
officers with wasp spray and a machete. It's a chilling reminder of the
risks Transportation Security officers face every single day on the
front lines of the effort to protect passengers and maintain the
security of our Nation's aviation sector.
It's a difficult, dangerous, and often thankless job--but I want
you to know our thoughts, our prayers, and our gratitude are with you
all. I also want you to know that we are committed to developing
solutions to enhance the security at our checkpoints--for your safety
as well as that of the passengers you protect.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for convening this important hearing
today so that we can examine the TSA PreCheck Program. The TSA PreCheck
Program, as I understand it, is one of TSA's risk-based initiatives,
aiming to maintain effective security while also maximizing efficiency.
When the Aviation and Transportation Security Act became law, it
authorized TSA to ``establish requirements to implement trusted
passenger programs and use available technologies to expedite the
security screening of passengers who participate in such programs.''
This allows TSA to vet passengers on the front end through the
PreCheck application process. Those passengers can go through expedited
screening, and TSA can allocate resources on the ground to focus on
travelers who we know less about, or suspect of criminal intent.
I understand that more than 1 million people have now voluntarily
submitted their biographic information in order to participate in this
trusted traveler program. That makes sense to me--that seems like an
appropriate balance between effectiveness and efficiency.
But I also understand that certain populations who have NOT
undergone this vetting on the front end are, nonetheless, sometimes
permitted to use the expedited PreCheck screening lanes. That doesn't
make sense to me--that suggests to me that the balance sometimes tips
too far towards efficiency, maybe at the expense of effective security.
Certainly, that was the case when a convicted felon and former
member of a domestic terrorist organization was permitted to use a
PreCheck lane, as we learned from last week's report by the Department
of Homeland Security's Office of Inspector General. That kind of breach
is simply inexcusable.
Of course it's beneficial to use PreCheck so that we can
concentrate our resources on passengers who are unknown to us and pose
the highest potential risk. But when a passenger such as this
individual--who WAS known to us and clearly posed enormous risk--is
given access to the PreCheck lane, it demands that we take a hard look
at the methods being used to calculate that risk.
So that's why we're here today--to examine the risks of expanding
PreCheck beyond pre-vetted, pre-approved passengers; to reassess the
methodology used to assign a person to a given risk category; and to
ensure that we never allow the pursuit of efficiency to compromise
security.
I look forward to hearing from Mr. Fletcher--his testimony mentions
that TSA is currently working to expand PreCheck to other low-risk
populations. I'm eager to hear about those efforts, and about what
methodology can ensure that these populations are indeed low-risk and
don't pose a threat to our aviation security.
I want to thank Inspector General Roth for being here and for his
report last week on the security breach I mentioned earlier. I look
forward to hearing more details about how this incident transpired, as
well as his recommendations on how we can prevent such a breach from
ever occurring in the future.
I would also like to thank Jennifer Grover for being here to
represent the Government Accountability Office, which has compiled a
significant body of work regarding the use of risk-based security.
I look forward to hearing from Ms. Grover and Inspector General
Roth about the security implications of expanding the use of PreCheck
expedited screening beyond passengers who have undergone the
application process, as well as their recommendations for how we can
make this program more secure going forward.
We are currently working with Ranking Member Thompson on
legislation that will be introduced, and our hope is that the
information we gather through todays' hearing will better inform that
measure.
With that Mr. Chairman, I thank all of the witnesses for joining us
today, and yield back the balance of my time.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Miss Rice.
I want to now recognize the Ranking Minority Member of the
full committee, the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson,
for any statement he may have.
I want to note preliminarily, though, that Mr. Thompson is
a very busy man, and it is an honor and it is a pleasure to
have him here. I really very much appreciate his input and
guidance on this subject matter. So thank you very much.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for holding today's hearing.
I appreciate the subcommittee's willingness to take a hard
look at the security vulnerabilities associated with how the
Transportation Security Administration is administering the
PreCheck program.
As a frequent flyer, I have long believed that TSA should
have a trusted traveler program where individuals identified as
low-risk travelers are provided expedited airport security
screening.
When TSA was established in 2001, Congress granted TSA the
authority to establish a trusted traveler program. However, as
many of you may recall, it took years for TSA to get over its
initial reluctance about modifying its screening operations for
vetted trusted travelers.
Former TSA Administrator John Pistole deserves great credit
for recognizing the potential of a trusted traveler program and
integrating the PreCheck program into TSA's risk-based airport
screening operations. It just makes good sense to provide
expedited screening to passengers who have voluntarily
submitted biographical information and fingerprints and have
been fully vetted.
Today there are 1 million known low-risk travelers in the
PreCheck program. That is a good start. But given that about 2
million people fly every day, TSA needs to continue working to
bring more Americans into the PreCheck program.
That said, the focus of today's hearing is not on the
vetted population that are legitimately low-risk and receive
expedited screening. It is on what TSA has called their real-
time intelligence-based methods for identifying passengers on a
trip-by-trip basis for expedited physical screening.
The so-called Managed Inclusion program and the other real-
time screening methods that TSA is currently employing at our
Nation's airports have not been scientifically validated as
effective security approaches.
Further, as both the Department's own inspector general and
comptroller general have independently found, these approaches
create security vulnerabilities.
Last week the inspector general released a report about a
very troubling incident involving a traveler who was granted
enhanced security screening. Suffice it to say, the terrorist
and criminal history of the traveler involved should have
resulted in TSA determining that enhanced security screening
was in order, not expedited screening.
This is just one incident. I am sure it would have never
come to light if not for the courageous TSA employee who came
forward to report it, commonly referred to as a whistle-blower.
This incident begs the question: Are these procedures
appropriately designed to ensure that a person who actually
presents a security risk is not given lighter screening? I have
no confidence, based on the public and Classified information I
have seen, that this is the case. As such, I believe that this
situation demands legislative action.
To this end, together with Chairman Katko and Ranking
Member Rice, I will be introducing legislation to address these
known vulnerabilities regarding expedited screening. It is
important that there is not a permanent leader at TSA to
address the security vulnerabilities that have come to light.
I look forward to working with the leadership of this
subcommittee to bring our concerns to the attention of Acting
Administrator Mel Carraway to get timely action to address the
security vulnerabilities.
With that, Chairman and Ranking Member, I thank you for
your prompt attention to this critical security matter and
yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
March 25, 2015
I thank Chairman Katko for holding today's hearing.
I appreciate the subcommittee's willingness to take a hard look at
the security vulnerabilities associated with how the Transportation
Security Administration is administering the PreCheck program. As a
frequent flier, I have long believed that TSA should have a trusted
traveler program where individuals identified as ``low-risk travelers''
are provided expedited airport security screening.
When TSA was established in 2001 Congress granted TSA the authority
to establish a trusted traveler program. However, as many of you may
recall, it took years for TSA to get over its initial reluctance about
modifying its screening operations for vetted, trusted travelers.
Former TSA Administrator John Pistole deserves great credit for
recognizing the potential of a trusted traveler program and integrating
the PreCheck program into TSA's risk-based airport screening
operations. It just makes sense to provide expedited screening to
passengers who have voluntarily submitted biographical information and
fingerprints and have been fully vetted.
Today, there are 1 million known low-risk travelers in the PreCheck
program. That's a good start but given that about 2 million people fly
every day, TSA needs continue working to bring more Americans into the
PreCheck program.
That said, the focus of today's hearing is not on the vetted
population that are legitimately ``low-risk'' and receive expedited
screening. It is on what TSA has called their ``real-time/intelligence-
based methods'' for identifying passengers, on a trip-by-trip basis,
for expedited physical screening.
The so-called ``Managed Inclusion'' program and the other real-time
screening method that TSA is currently employing at our Nation's
airports have not been scientifically validated as effective security
approaches.
Further, as both the Department's own Inspector General and the
Comptroller General have independently found, these approaches create
security vulnerabilities.
Last week, the Inspector General released a report about a very
troubling incident involving a traveler who was granted enhanced
security screening. Suffice as to say, the terrorist and criminal
history of the traveler involved should have resulted in TSA
determining that enhanced security screening was in order, not
expedited screening.
This is just one incident and I am sure it would have never come to
light if not for the courageous TSA employee who came forward to report
it. This incident begs the question, are these procedures appropriately
designed to ensure that a person who actually present a security risk
is not given lighter screening?
I have no confidence, based on the public and Classified
information I have seen, that this is the case. As such, I believe that
the situation demands legislative action.
To that end, together with Chairman Katko and Ranking Member Rice,
I will be introducing legislation to address these known
vulnerabilities regarding expedited screening. It is unfortunate that
there is not a permanent leader at TSA to address the security
vulnerabilities that have come to light.
I look forward to working with the leadership of this subcommittee
to bring our concerns to attention of Acting Administrator Mel Carraway
and to get timely action to address the security vulnerabilities.
With that, I yield back and thank Chairman Katko and Ranking Member
Rice for their prompt attention to this critical security matter.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Thompson.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Hon. Jackson Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
March 25, 2015
I thank Chairman John Katko and Ranking Member Rice for holding
this morning's hearing on ``Risk-Based Security: Assessing the Path
Forward for TSA PreCheck.''
I welcome and thank today's witnesses: Mr. Kenneth Fletcher, chief
risk assessment officer with the Transportation Security
Administration; Mr. John Roth, the inspector general for the Department
of Homeland Security; and Ms. Jenny Grover, director of homeland
security and justice section, Government Accountability Office.
I want to offer my well wishes to Senior Transportation Security
Officer Carol Richel for a speedy and complete recovery.
Officer Richel was attacked last Friday by an assailant with a
machete at the B Concourse of the Louis Armstrong New Orleans
International Airport.
Officer Richel was transported to a local hospital, thankfully,
with non-life-threatening injuries and since has been released.
She was grazed by a bullet as a Jefferson Parrish Sheriffs deputy
fired shots during the attack.
The assailant also sprayed what is believed to be wasp repellent at
three other TSA officers. During the attack, three other officers were
sprayed by the assailant with the same substance.
This is the latest case that reflects the potential danger that TSA
officers face and the need to assure that air travel safety is the best
that is can be.
Today's hearing comes as a result of the report released last week
entitled ``Allegation of Granting Expedited Screening through TSA
PreCheck Improperly'' investigated a whistleblower allegation that a
former member of a domestic terrorist group and convicted felon was
cleared for PreCheck screening through the TSA's Secure Flight program.
While I understand that expedited screening is an interest of the
traveling public, it should not be employed at the expense of security.
This new report comes just after a December Government
Accountability Office report on PreCheck and problems with the Managed
Inclusion program.
Both these reports illustrate shortcomings with the methods TSA
uses to identify low-risk passengers and demand a legislative response.
As a senior Member of this committee and former Chair of the
Homeland Security's Subcommittee on Transportation Security the
establishment and security of the TSA PreCheck program is of great
interest.
Although the OIG Report found that TSA did not grant the traveler
in question TSA PreCheck screening through the TSA PreCheck
``Application Program'' or Managed Inclusion (MI). TSA did grant the
traveler TSA PreCheck screening through risk assessment rules in the
Secure Flight program, which is very concerning.
This passenger had a felony conviction for murder and offenses
related to a domestic terrorist organization that involved explosives.
I have introduced H.R. 48, the No Fly For Foreign Fighters Act of
2015, legislation that will help keep foreign fighters and terrorists
from entering our country through an American airport.
Specifically, the No Fly for Foreign Fighters Act requires the
director of the Terrorist Screening Center to review the completeness
of the Terrorist Screening Database and the terrorist watch list
utilized by the Transportation Security Administration to determine if
an individual who may seek to board a U.S.-bound or domestic flight,
and who poses a threat to aviation or National security or a threat of
terrorism and is known or suspected of being a member of a foreign
terrorist organization, is included in the database and on such watch
list.
I am pleased that Ranking Member Thompson is now preparing
legislation to ensure that the approach TSA uses to identify low-risk
passengers does not create security gaps. I look forward to working
with him and the rest of the committee to ensure the PreCheck is a safe
and credible program.
The OIG report, which the subject of this morning's hearing,
reached the conclusion that TSA awarded PreCheck screening to unknown
passengers, creates aviation security vulnerability.
The TSO who came in contact with the traveler had personal
knowledge of the felony conviction did not feel empowered to redirect
the traveler from the TSA PreCheck screening to standard lane
screening.
The TSO is reported to have believed that supervisors and
Behavioral Detection Officers (BDOs) had the discretion to make a
decision to redirect a traveler, but the TSO did not think he had that
authority.
The OIG recommends that TSA modify standard operating procedures to
clarify that TSOs and supervisory TSOs are authorized to refer
passengers with TSA PreCheck boarding passes to standard screening
lanes when they believe the passenger may be a threat to transportation
security.
The formal application process for TSA PreCheck requires a formal
application and the collection of biographic information and
fingerprints to be checked against intelligence, law enforcement, and
immigration automated data systems to determine PreCheck eligibility.
TSA will deny membership into the PreCheck program if the applicant
is confirmed to be a match to an intelligence-based data system,
convicted of any of the 28 disqualifying criminal offenses, or not a
U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident.
The incident recounted in the OIG report over the last few days has
generated a great deal media and public attention regarding the
integrity of the program.
The Aviation and Transportation Security Act (ATSA), 49 U.S.C.
Statute 114(e) is the law establishing the TSA as the agency to
coordinate security for all forms of domestic transportation, including
aviation, rail, and other surface transportation, as well as maritime
transportation.
A provision of the ATSA directs the TSA to ``established standards
to implement trusted passenger programs and adopted protocols and
technologies to expedite security screening of passengers who
participated in the program.''
The Registered Traveler program was a result of this provision of
the law.
At the core of TSA's efforts in PreCheck is the idea of focusing
scrutiny on ``high-risk'' passengers, while simultaneously reducing the
hassle factor for ``low-risk'' travelers.
This is an important aspect of what TSA does to assure air travel
security, but what is allowed on flights is also a critical component
of travel safety.
On March 5, 2013, TSA publicly announced its decision to permit
passengers, to bring previously-banned items in their carry-on baggage
when boarding flights.
I sponsored an amendment to the Fiscal Year Homeland Security
Appropriations Act that successfully blocked the reintroduction of
knives on commercial aircraft.
The list of prohibited items that would be permitted included
hockey or lacrosse sticks, golf clubs, and, most alarmingly, small
knives.
I heard from flight attendants, air marshals, pilots, passengers,
TSA screeners, and airlines who are unequivocal in their unified view
that allowing knives to be brought into the cabin of passenger planes
is dangerous, unnecessary, and irresponsible.
Because of the level of concern regarding this important issue I
led a successful bipartisan effort that led the TSA to reverse its
decision.
Getting air transportation security right requires a partnership
between the TSA, members of the Homeland Security Committee.
I am happy to join with Members of the committee in working with
the TSA to improve air travel security.
I thank today's witnesses and look forward to their testimony.
Thank you.

Mr. Katko. We are pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today on this important topic.
Let me remind the witnesses that their entire written
statements will appear in the record.
Our first witness, the Honorable John Roth, assumed the
post of inspector general of the Department of Homeland
Security on March 10, 2014. Previously, Mr. Roth served as the
director of criminal investigations at the Food and Drug
Administration.
Prior to that, he had a long and distinguished career with
the Department of Justice, beginning in 1987 as assistant U.S.
attorney for the Eastern District of Michigan. I will note that
Mr. Roth had excellent on-the-job training at the Narcotic and
Dangerous Drug Section, doing very complex organized cases, as
did I.
So welcome today, Mr. Roth.

STATEMENT OF JOHN ROTH, INSPECTOR GENERAL, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Roth. Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Rice, Mr. Thompson, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you
for inviting me here today to testify about TSA's PreCheck
initiative. My public testimony today will focus only on the
Unclassified portions of our recent inspection reports.
The majority of what we found is either Classified at the
Secret level or contains Sensitive Security Information. I look
forward to discussing the complete results and recommendation
of our reports in greater detail once we move into the closed
session.
In October 2011, TSA piloted PreCheck at four airports.
After that program ended in 2012, Congress directed TSA to
certify by the end of December 2013 that 25 percent of air
passengers are eligible for expedited screening without
lowering security standards. Congress also directed TSA to
outline a strategy to increase the number of air passengers
eligible for expedited screening to 50 percent by the end of
December 2014.
To accomplish these goals, TSA did the following:
First, it granted some Government-vetted or known
populations PreCheck eligibility.
Second, it deployed Managed Inclusion to allow the general
public opportunities to receive PreCheck benefits.
Third, it implemented risk assessment rules to allow others
to receive PreCheck eligibility.
Finally, it established the PreCheck application program
for membership.
These actions have resulted in a massive increase in the
population eligible to receive PreCheck. Our audits assessed
the PreCheck initiative to determine, first, what processes and
procedures TSA uses to vet program applicants properly; second,
how TSA assesses member continued eligibility; and, third, how
TSA tests is process for effectiveness and timeliness.
We conducted field work on this from January to June 2014.
We determined that, as a concept, PreCheck is a positive step
towards risk-based security screening. However, TSA needs to
modify PreCheck vetting and security processes. We also
determined that PreCheck communication and coordination need
improvement. Our specific findings are either Classified or
contain Sensitive information.
In addition, we responded to a whistle-blower disclosure
concerning the use of the risk-based rule by the TSA Secure
Flight program that may create a gap in aviation security. The
inspection results of that are likewise SSI and have been
delivered to the subcommittee.
Finally, to further illustrate the need for modification of
PreCheck vetting and screening processes, we issued a letter
report this month that found a notorious felon convicted of
domestic terrorism crimes was granted PreCheck as a result of
TSA's risk assessment rules. We reviewed the allegation after
receiving information alleging the convicted felon was
improperly cleared for PreCheck screening.
We are naturally concerned that, as evidenced by this
incident, such rules are inadequate to ensure only low-risk
populations receive PreCheck screening. As a result, we
recommended TSA limit PreCheck screening to known passengers
that TSA itself or other trusted Government partners had
determined are members of trusted populations.
We are concerned about TSA's response to our findings. TSA
has not accepted the majority of our recommendations.
Chairman Katko, this concludes my prepared statement. I
welcome any questions that you or other Members of the
subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Roth follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Roth
March 25, 2015
Good afternoon Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of
the subcommittee. Thank you for inviting me here today to testify about
the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) PreCheck
TM

initiative.
My testimony today will focus on the Unclassified and non-Sensitive
Security Information (SSI) results of our two recent inspection
reports.\1\ I look forward to discussing the complete results and
recommendations of our reports in greater detail once we move into the
closed session. In general, we concluded that while TSA
PreCheck
TM
is a positive step toward risk-based security
screening, modifications are necessary. We made a number of
recommendations to TSA to improve the PreCheck
TM
initiative.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Security Enhancements Needed to the TSA PreCheck
TM

Initiative, OIG-15-29, January 2015. Allegation of Granting Expedited
Screening through TSA PreCheck
TM
Improperly (OSC File NO.
DI-14-3679), OIG-15-45, March 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
background
The Aviation and Transportation Security Act of 2001 authorizes TSA
to implement trusted passenger programs and use available technologies
to expedite security screening of participating passengers. The intent
is to allow airport security personnel the ability to focus more
extensive screening on higher-risk and unknown populations. The TSA
PreCheck
TM
trusted traveler initiative is a component of
TSA's intelligence-driven, risk-based security approach to identify
low-risk passengers for expedited airport checkpoint screening.
In October 2011, TSA piloted TSA PreCheck
TM
at four
airports. In the pilot, TSA partnered with Delta Air Lines and American
Airlines to allow their frequent flyers to participate. TSA also
partnered with the U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Trusted
Traveler Programs during the pilot to identify eligible members to
participate. TSA considers CBP Trusted Traveler Programs members a low-
risk population because they undergo background checks prior to
enrollment.
After the pilot program ended in 2012, Congress directed TSA to
certify by the end of December 2013 that 25 percent of air passengers
are eligible for expedited screening without lowering security
standards. Congress also directed TSA to outline a strategy to increase
the number of air passengers eligible for expedited screening to 50
percent by the end of December 2014. To accomplish these goals TSA,
chronologically:

Granted other Federal Government-vetted or ``known''
populations TSA PreCheck
TM
eligibility.--Initial
eligible populations included frequent flyers, CBP Trusted
Travelers, National Intelligence Agencies, and Federal Judges.
Later, TSA extended eligibility to Members of Congress, Medal
of Honor recipients, U.S. military personnel, and other
populations.

Deployed Managed Inclusion to allow the general public
opportunities to receive TSA PreCheck
TM
benefits.--
TSA uses Managed Inclusion to regulate passenger throughput and
wait times during peak hours at airport security checkpoints.
When operating Managed Inclusion, TSA employs at some airports
tools and processes beyond regular TSA PreCheck
TM

checkpoint screening procedures. TSA Behavioral Detection
Officers and Passenger Screening Canine Teams conduct real-time
threat assessments on unknown passengers to determine their
eligibility for TSA PreCheck
TM
screening. In
addition, Transportation Security officers use explosive trace
detection swabbing and random generator technology to assess
and direct passengers, respectively. However, these additional
tools are not in place at every airport operating Managed
Inclusion. Furthermore, we and GAO have questioned the efficacy
of some of these tools.

Implemented risk assessment rules.--These rules contain SSI.

Established the TSA PreCheck
TM
Application
Program for membership.--The application program allows U.S.
citizens and Lawful Permanent Residents to apply on-line and at
TSA PreCheck
TM
enrollment centers. The non-
refundable application fee is $85.00 and approved membership is
valid for 5 years. TSA incorporated the TSA
PreCheck
TM
Application Program into its existing
security threat assessment vetting system for the
Transportation Worker Identification Credential and Hazardous
Materials Endorsement and adopted the disqualifying offenses
for these programs. The TSA PreCheck
TM
application
process requires applicants to provide their biographic
information and immigration status on-line or in-person at an
enrollment center. Applicants also respond to questions
regarding 28 disqualifying criminal offenses. All applicants
must visit an enrollment center to provide identity documents
and have their fingerprints captured. TSA checks this
information against the U.S. Government watch list, criminal
records, and immigration data systems.
results of our review
We assessed the TSA PreCheck
TM
initiative to determine:
(1) What processes and procedures exist to ensure TSA vets program
applicants properly; (2) how TSA assesses member continued eligibility;
and (3) how TSA tests its processes for effectiveness and timeliness.
We conducted fieldwork from January 2014 to June 2014.
We determined that, as a concept, TSA PreCheck
TM
is a
positive step towards risk-based security screening. However, TSA needs
to modify TSA PreCheck
TM
vetting and screening processes. We
also determined that TSA PreCheck
TM
communication and
coordination need improvement.
In addition, we responded to a whistleblower disclosure concerning
the use of a risk-based rule by the TSA Secure Flight program that may
create a gap in aviation security. The inspection results are SSI and
have been delivered to this subcommittee.
To further illustrate the need for modification of TSA
PreCheck
TM
vetting and screening processes, we issued a
letter report this month that found a notorious felon convicted of
domestic terrorism crimes was granted TSA PreCheck
TM

screening through Secure Flight risk assessment rules. We reviewed the
allegation after the U.S. Office of Special Counsel received a
whistleblower disclosure alleging the convicted felon was improperly
cleared for TSA PreCheck
TM
screening.
We determined TSA did not grant the convicted felon TSA
PreCheck
TM
screening through the TSA PreCheck
TM

Application Program or Managed Inclusion, but rather, through risk
assessment rules. Specifically, the Transportation Security Officer
(TSO) in this case scanned the traveler's boarding pass and received a
TSA PreCheck
TM
eligibility notification. The TSO knew of the
traveler's disqualifying criminal conviction. The TSO followed the
standard operating procedure and reported this to the supervisory TSO
who then directed the TSO to take no further action and allow the
traveler through the TSA PreCheck
TM
lane.
As a result, we recommended TSA limit TSA PreCheck
TM

screening to known passengers that TSA determines to be members of
trusted populations. We also determined the TSO followed standard
operating procedures but did not feel empowered to redirect the
traveler from TSA PreCheck
TM
screening to standard lane
screening. We recommended TSA modify standard operating procedures to
clarify TSO and supervisory TSO authority to refer passenger with TSA
PreCheck
TM
boarding passes to standard screening lanes when
they believe the passenger may be a threat to transportation security.
We are concerned about TSA's response to our findings. In the first
inspection report, we made 17 recommendations and TSA did not accept
the majority of these recommendations. In the second inspection, we
made three recommendations but TSA nonconcurred with two. We made two
recommendations in the third report and TSA concurred with only one. We
are disappointed that TSA did not concur with the majority of our
recommendations, and we believe this represents TSA's failure to
understand the gravity of the situation.
Chairman Katko, this concludes my prepared statement. I welcome any
questions that you or other Members of the subcommittee may have.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Roth. Obviously, your testimony
will be somewhat limited until we get into the secure portion
of the hearing. But, nonetheless, what you can talk about in
the open hearing here, I appreciate your input. So thank you.
We appreciate all of you being here today, of course.
The second witness, Mr. Fletcher, is the chief risk officer
at the Transportation Security Administration. In this new
position, he is responsible for developing and driving the
long-range strategic vision and objectives for TSA with respect
to risk-based security and risk-managed activities and
implementing risk management across all areas of the agency.
The Chairman will now recognize Mr. Fletcher to testify.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH FLETCHER, CHIEF RISK OFFICER,
TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY

Mr. Fletcher. Thank you, sir.
Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the
opportunity to appear before you today.
As you have already noted, this hearing closely follows the
second brazen attack on a TSA screening checkpoint in less than
18 months. The heroic efforts of our law enforcement partners
in New Orleans and a TSA workforce trained in responding to
emergency situations prevented this incident from ending in
tragedy.
Acting Administrator Carraway traveled to New Orleans on
Saturday to meet with and show support for TSA and law
enforcement personnel and was inspired by the resilience of all
involved.
I am confident that I speak for all of TSA when I say thank
you to all of the TSA law enforcement and airport personnel in
New Orleans for their swift response to this senseless attack.
Since its creation, TSA has focused on building and
enhancing a multi-layered aviation security system, which
includes a well-trained workforce, state-of-the-art
technologies, intelligence analysis and information sharing,
explosive detection canine teams, and the Federal Air Marshal
Service.
For nearly a decade, TSA applied these layers in a one-
size-fits-all approach where nearly every traveler was assessed
as posing essentially the same level of risk. This equal risk
philosophy started changing in late 2011, when TSA began
implementing an intelligence-driven, risk-based approach to
aviation security.
Commercial aviation remains the target of terrorist groups
who have proven intelligent and adaptive as demonstrated by
their development of nonmetallic explosive devices designed to
evade aviation security measures. These devices remain one of
the most serious threats to aviation.
One way to address this threat is to implement increasingly
strict security requirements that of necessity become more
invasive and cumbersome to travelers and then to apply these
measures broadly to every passenger and their baggage.
Another way to deal with this threat is by adopting the
intelligence-driven risk-based approach reflected in more than
three dozen policy decisions implemented by TSA over the last 4
years.
The idea of a risk-based approach to aviation security is
by no means novel. TSA's founding legislation, the Aviation and
Transportation Security Act, mentions creating a trusted
traveler program, and the 9/11 Commission Report recommends TSA
establish risk-based priorities to protect transportation
assets and then adopt practical and cost-effective means while
balancing security and civil liberties.
Through our risk-based policies, TSA is able to deploy our
limited security resources to more effectively manage risk by
concentrating on higher-risk travelers and commerce while
facilitating the legitimate movement of those deemed to
represent lower risk.
Effective risk management involves identifying, analyzing,
and communicating risk and then deciding whether to accept,
avoid, transfer, or control that risk to an acceptable level
considering the associated costs and benefits of any actions
taken.
For TSA, effective risk management considers how to provide
the most effective security in the most efficient way to
enhance the value TSA provides to the American people as we
fulfill our counterterrorism mission.
As noted by the 9/11 Commission, perfection is
unattainable. In my view, its pursuit is unsustainable. Risk
management is not a no-risk approach. Trying to eliminate all
risk results in poor security, unnecessarily burdens the
aviation industry, and will create greater pressures on civil
rights and liberties.
A key component of our passenger screening approach is the
TSA PreCheck application program launched in December 2013.
Over the past 12 months, TSA has sustained a daily average
enrollment volume of nearly 3,500 travelers, more than double
our original projections. Last week we exceeded 1 million
applications to the program.
The enrollment potential is significantly greater. Recent
U.S. Travel Association market research indicates that more
than 15 million U.S. travelers not currently enrolled in the
TSA PreCheck program are likely to enroll, with an additional
21 million undecided. These 36 million travelers are our target
market. The key to realizing this enrollment potential is the
continued collaboration with private-sector partners across the
travel and tourism industry.
Our industry and stakeholder partners are vital to TSA's
ability to implement risk-based security. Cooperation with and
engagement by these partners was essential in helping TSA
establish and expand the TSA PreCheck program, which now
includes 11 airlines representing over 85 percent of domestic
travelers, with nearly 530 TSA PreCheck screening lanes now
operating at 133 airports Nation-wide.
TSA plays an important role in partnerships with airports
and airlines in securing our Nation's commercial aviation
system and is committed to fielding responsive risk-based
solutions that can enhance our current security posture.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and for your
interest and support of our risk-based security initiatives. I
look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fletcher follows:]
Prepared Statement of Kenneth Fletcher
March 25, 2015
Good afternoon Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity
to appear before you today to discuss the Transportation Security
Administration (TSA) PreCheck
TM
program.
The primary mission of TSA is to secure our Nation's transportation
systems, while ensuring freedom of movement for people and commerce. To
fulfill this vital mission, TSA employs a multi-layered, risk-based
approach to security through a well-trained workforce, state-of-the-art
technologies, intelligence analysis and information sharing, explosives
detection canine teams, Federal Air Marshals, Visible Intermodal
Prevention and Response (VIPR) teams, and our industry partners who
voluntarily adopt security improvements and comply with regulations.
These initiatives help TSA focus resources on high-risk and unknown
travelers and commerce, while facilitating the movement of travelers
and commerce and enhancing the customer experience for the traveling
public.
The 9/11 Commission Report noted that the U.S. Government should
set risk-based priorities to protect transportation assets, and
implement the most practical and cost-effective programs to protect
them. By applying a risk-based approach to security, TSA is able to
employ resources with the greatest impact in reducing risk and
enhancing the security of the traveling public and the Nation's
transportation systems. Expedited screening for low-risk passengers is
key to the success of RBS in aviation security. Through RBS measures,
TSA increased the percent of passengers receiving some form of
expedited screening from 9.6 percent in September 2013 to 50 percent by
November 2014. This increase resulted in an overall average of 43.5
percent of passengers receiving some form of expedited screening by TSA
during 2014.
Our approach to Risk-Based Security (RBS) is to effectively manage
security risks to maximize the value TSA provides to the Nation in
executing our security mission. The RBS measures implemented over the
past 3 years have significantly increased our ability to move people
through the checkpoint, requiring fewer resources than traditional
screening operations. As a result, TSA has gained efficiencies through
RBS initiatives, with savings totaling $319 million over the past 2
years.
tsa pre check program
In December 2013, TSA launched our TSA PreCheck
TM

application program, which is the cornerstone of our expedited
screening efforts. TSA PreCheck
TM
was one of the first
initiatives in TSA's shift toward a risk-based and intelligence-driven
approach to security. Through this program, U.S. citizens and lawful
permanent residents can apply directly to participate in TSA
PreCheck
TM
and undergo a background check in order to become
eligible for a period of 5 years. Passengers may qualify for the
program either directly through the TSA's PreCheck
TM

application program, or through the U.S Customs and Border Protection's
Global Entry program.
TSA has worked closely with U.S. and foreign airlines to expand the
number of airlines participating in TSA PreCheck
TM
, and has
enhanced the Known Crewmember Initiative, as well as extended
eligibility for TSA PreCheck
TM
to U.S. Armed Forces
personnel, Department of Defense personnel, and U.S. Coast Guard
civilian employees. In November 2014, TSA extended TSA
PreCheck
TM
expedited screening benefits to students of four
U.S. service academies. More than 60,000 DOD employees benefit from TSA
PreCheck
TM
each week, and that number continues to steadily
increase.
TSA is currently working with a number of other Federal departments
and agencies to include other lower-risk populations into TSA
PreCheck
TM
. TSA increased the number of airports with TSA
PreCheck
TM
screening lanes to 125, established 481 dedicated
and supplemental TSA PreCheck
TM
lanes, and added TSA
PreCheck
TM
Application Program enrollment centers for a
total of 326 centers processing more than 1 million applicants. Since
September 2013, TSA PreCheck
TM
volume has increased 600
percent with more than 300 million passengers receiving TSA
PreCheck
TM
screening to date.
This year, TSA will continue to focus on increasing participation
in TSA PreCheck
TM
with the goal of providing expedited
screening to a majority of the traveling public. We plan to accomplish
this by identifying and enrolling more low-risk populations, expanding
participation to additional U.S. and foreign airlines, exploring
potential opportunities to leverage private-sector capabilities and
expertise in the TSA PreCheck
TM
application process, and
offering additional opportunities for enrollment in TSA
PreCheck
TM
.
risk-based security
RBS enhancements do not stop with prescreening through TSA
PreCheck
TM
. Beyond efforts like TSA PreCheck
TM
,
RBS screening at checkpoints includes real-time threat assessments
through the deployment of behavior detection techniques, explosives
detection canines and explosive trace detection equipment, and risk-
based physical screening utilizing differentiated screening procedures
and technology applications.
RBS is not a stand-alone program, but a strategic application of
intelligence-driven risk mitigation principles that moves away from the
one-size-fits-all approach to security. TSA will continue to focus on
applying our risk-based security approaches to other aspects of
transportation security, including checked baggage, air cargo,
regulatory compliance, and Federal Air Marshal deployments.
industry engagement
Our industry and stakeholder partners are vital to TSA's ability to
implement risk-based security into every area of transportation
security. Cooperation with and engagement by these partners was
essential in helping TSA establish and expand the TSA
PreCheck
TM
program across the aviation sector. Airlines
worked with us to update their systems to handle new requirements, such
as TSA PreCheck
TM
interconnectivity and boarding pass
markings. Our airport partners also worked with us to reconfigure
checkpoint space to accommodate a TSA PreCheck
TM
lane for
passengers. To date, TSA has expanded the program to 10 domestic and
one foreign airline at 125 airports Nation-wide, and continues to
partner with industry to add partners and innovations to the program.
TSA's goal of increasing the number of passengers who receive
expedited screening can only be accomplished through continued
collaboration with industry stakeholders. We must develop a
collaborative governance strategy between TSA and the private sector as
we are asking them to invest their resources to realize risk-based
strategy-driven changes. Recent market research conducted by the U.S.
Travel Association indicates that more than 15 million travelers are
willing to enroll in TSA PreCheck
TM
, and we believe private-
sector involvement can significantly increase that enrollment
potential.
oig report
The DHS Office of Inspector General (OIG) recently concluded an
audit of TSA PreCheck
TM
and made 17 recommendations, of
which 13 are resolved but open. TSA is working to address the OIG's
recommendations, such as working with the DHS Office of Policy and CBP
to establish a common definition for identifying ``lower-risk''
travelers and low-risk trusted travelers across the Department for
consistency in application across all DHS vetting programs. The OIG
also recommended that TSA work to improve communications about TSA
PreCheck
TM
to the public, as multiple avenues for access to
TSA PreCheck
TM
can be confusing. TSA is working with OIG to
address the intent of the outstanding recommendations, and further
improve the program's security and access for the traveling public.
conclusion
TSA plays an important role in partnership with airports and
airlines in securing access to our Nation's airports, and is committed
to fielding responsive, risk-based solutions that can enhance our
current security posture. I want to thank the subcommittee for your
interest in this important issue and your support as we consider
recommendations and future changes to improve aviation and airport
security Nation-wide. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, I
look forward to your questions.

Mr. Katko. I am not sure if you timed that or not, but you
are just about within a few seconds of being perfectly at 5
minutes. That is pretty good. That is really good.
I also want to make clear to you one thing. The PreCheck
program with Homeland Security is the best example of what
Government thinking outside the box can accomplish, so I
commend TSA for that program.
We are not here today to cast aspersions at the program. We
are here to make sure that it is being properly implemented and
that it is still safe. That is what we are here to do today. So
I thank you very much for being here today.
Our final witness, Ms. Jenny Grover, serves as director of
homeland security and justice issues at the Government
Accountability Office. Prior to this position, Ms. Grover was
assistant director for GAO's health care team, where she led
reviews on a wide range of health care issues. Ms. Grover has
been with the GAO since 1991.
The Chairman now recognizes Ms. Grover to testify.

STATEMENT OF JENNIFER A. GROVER, DIRECTOR, HOMELAND SECURITY
AND JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Grover. Good afternoon, Chairman Katko, Ranking Member
Rice, Ranking Member Thompson, and other Members and staff. I
am pleased to be here today to discuss TSA's implementation and
oversight of PreCheck and Managed Inclusion.
Three weeks ago, during the week ending March 3, nearly
half of all U.S. aviation passengers received expedited
screening for one of three main reasons, either because they
were enrolled in PreCheck, because they were selected for one-
time PreCheck based on TSA's automated risk assessment, or
because they were randomly assigned expedited screening at the
airport through TSA's Managed Inclusion process.
My remarks today reflect the findings from GAO's recently-
issued report on expedited screening. We support TSA's move
toward risk-based screening as a way to operate more
efficiently and improve passenger experience, assuming that TSA
properly assesses and mitigates passenger risk to ensure that
security is not compromised.
In our recent report, we found that TSA uses several
methods to assess passenger risk. For PreCheck enrollees, in
some cases, TSA conducts a background check to determine low-
risk status, such as for PreCheck applicants, or accepts
passengers into PreCheck because they have already had a
similar assessment, such as eligible members of Customs and
Border Protections Trusted Traveler Programs.
In other cases, TSA enrolls passengers into PreCheck based
on their affiliation with a specific group and who may not have
had a background check. Examples of this would be members of
the Congressional Medal of Honor Society, a group whose members
have received the highest U.S. award for valor in action
against enemy forces.
In contrast to the groups enrolled in PreCheck, another
group of passengers receives PreCheck on a per-flight, one-time
basis resulting from TSA's automated risk assessment. TSA uses
information from the Secure Flight system to score each
passenger on each flight based on a set of risk rules. The
score determines the likelihood that a passenger will receive
PreCheck for that trip.
Finally, another group of passengers are randomly selected
for expedited screening at the airport through TSA's Managed
Inclusion process. TSA recognizes that these passengers are of
unknown risk, not low risk.
To use expedited screening with this population, TSA
developed a real-time threat assessment based, in part, on
behavior detection activities and explosive detection
capabilities to identify and screen out high-risk passengers.
According to TSA, the Managed Inclusion process results in a
higher level of security compared to standard security
screening.
GAO has concerns about Managed Inclusion based on our past
work. In a November 2013 report on TSA's Behavior Detection and
Analysis program, we concluded that TSA had not demonstrated
that BDOs, which are their behavior detection officers, can
reliably identify high-risk passengers by observing passenger
behaviors for those indicative of fear, stress, or deception.
In response, this past February TSA officials told us that
they had developed revised behavioral indicators for the
program and rules for using them and had started pilot testing
the new approach in a few airports.
Furthermore, TSA has not yet demonstrated that the overall
Managed Inclusion process is effective at providing the
intended level of security. TSA told us that this testing is
underway and is expected to be completed in mid-2016.
We have previously reported on challenges TSA has faced
designing studies in accordance with established methodological
standards. This is important because poorly designed studies do
not produce reliable results and are not a good use of
resources.
To ensure that TSA's planned testing yields reliable
results, we recommended that TSA ensure that its Managed
Inclusion testing adhere to established evaluation design
standards. DHS concurred and stated that TSA plans to implement
a systematic evaluation of the process.
If implemented appropriately, this would address the intent
of our recommendation and increase the likelihood that TSA's
testing would produce reliable results about the effectiveness
of the Managed Inclusion process.
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, this concludes my
statement, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Grover follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jennifer A. Grover
March 25, 2015
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to discuss our work on the
Transportation Security Administration's (TSA) efforts in implementing
expedited screening, including TSA PreCheck
TM
and the
Managed Inclusion process. In 2011, TSA began developing new security
procedures intended to strengthen security and improve the passenger
experience by shortening lines and wait times. These new procedures
applied risk-based, intelligence-driven screening concepts and enhanced
the use of technology to determine passenger risk prior to travel. The
procedures were intended to allow TSA to devote more time and resources
at the airport to screening the passengers TSA determined to be higher
or unknown risk while providing expedited screening to those passengers
determined to pose a lower risk to the aviation system. Further, TSA
developed the Managed Inclusion process, designed to provide expedited
screening to passengers not deemed low-risk prior to arriving at the
airport. In March 2015, TSA officials stated they provided expedited
screening at essentially all of the approximately 450 airports at which
TSA performs or oversees security screening, including 126 airports
where TSA offers expedited screening in dedicated TSA
PreCheck
TM
screening lanes. The 126 airports where expedited
screening is offered in dedicated TSA PreCheck
TM
screening
lanes represent about 95 percent of total air carrier enplanements
based on Federal Aviation Administration calendar year 2013 data.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ According to TSA officials, in addition to the 126 airports
with dedicated TSA PreCheck
TM
lanes, TSA offers expedited
screening at 6 airports without dedicated TSA PreCheck
TM

screening lanes. These are smaller airports where the standard
screening lane is used for both expedited and standard screening.
According to TSA officials, at airports without dedicated, TSA
PreCheck
TM
lanes, passengers with a TSA
PreCheck
TM
boarding pass can still experience expedited
screening of ``their persons'' (i.e., passengers are not required to
divest shoes, light jackets, and belts) and use a walk-through metal
detector in the standard screening lane. However, they must divest
their liquids, gels, and laptops from baggage because the screening
process used in the standard screening lanes requires that such items
be removed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
My testimony today addresses: (1) How TSA assesses the risk levels
of passengers to determine their eligibility to receive expedited
screening and (2) the extent to which TSA determined the effectiveness
of its Managed Inclusion process. This statement is based on a report
we issued in December 2014 and selected updates from March 2015.\2\ For
this report, we analyzed TSA documentation including expedited
screening and Managed Inclusion procedures, memorandums of agreement,
and decision memorandums, among other documents to gain an
understanding of how expedited screening operated, TSA's risk
assessment methodologies, and TSA's security assessment of the Managed
Inclusion process. In addition we visited six airports to observe
expedited screening and Managed Inclusion and interviewed TSA Federal
security directors (FSD) and other TSA officials about how expedited
screening and Managed Inclusion were implemented at these airports.\3\
Because we selected a nonprobability sample of airports to visit, the
information obtained cannot be generalized to all airports. However,
the site visits provided illustrative examples of how TSA
PreCheck
TM
and Managed Inclusion operate. We also reviewed
our prior work on the TSA's behavior detection and analysis program and
Advanced Imaging Technology to inform our understanding of the overall
checkpoint screening process and TSA's past experience with evaluating
and testing security-related programs.\4\ A more detailed methodology
can be found in the respective reports upon which this testimony is
based.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ GAO, Aviation Security: Rapid Growth in Expedited Passenger
Screening Highlights Need to Plan Effective Security Assessments, GAO-
15-150 (Washington, DC: December 12, 2014).
\3\ FSDs are TSA officials that provide day-to-day operational
direction for security operations at the airports within their
jurisdiction.
\4\ For example, see Aviation Security: Efforts to Validate TSA's
Passenger Screening Behavior Detection Program Underway, but
Opportunities Exist to Strengthen Validation and Address Operational
Challenges, GAO-10-763 (Washington, DC: May 20, 2010) and Aviation
Security: TSA Should Limit Future Funding for Behavior Detection
Activities, GAO-14-159 (Washington, DC: Nov. 8, 2013) on TSA's behavior
detection program, and Aviation Security: TSA Is Increasing Procurement
and Deployment of the Advanced Imaging Technology, but Challenges to
This Effort and Other Areas of Aviation Security Remain, GAO-1-484T
(Washington, DC: Mar. 17, 2010) and Advanced Imaging Technology: TSA
Needs Additional Information before Procuring Next-Generation Systems,
GAO-14-357 (Washington, DC: Mar. 31, 2014) on TSA's Advanced Imaging
Technology. TSA's behavior detection and analysis program was formerly
known as Screening of Passengers by Observation Techniques (SPOT).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The work upon which this testimony is based was conducted in
accordance with generally-accepted Government auditing standards.
background
When TSA began offering expedited screening at airports in the
summer of 2011, Transportation Security officers (TSO) initially
provided such screenings in standard lanes to passengers aged 12 and
younger, and subsequently extended expedited screening to certain
flight crew members and then to passengers aged 75 and older.\5\ In
October 2011, TSA began to expand the concept of expedited airport
screening to more of the flying public by piloting the TSA
PreCheck
TM
program. This pilot program allowed certain
frequent fliers of two air carriers to experience expedited screening
at four airports.\6\ These frequent fliers became eligible for
screening in dedicated expedited screening lanes, called TSA
PreCheck
TM
lanes, because they had opted into the TSA
PreCheck
TM
program through the air carrier with which they
had attained frequent flier status.\7\ TSA also allowed certain members
of the U.S. Customs and Border Protection's (CBP) Trusted Traveler
programs to experience expedited screening as part of the TSA
PreCheck
TM
pilot.\8\ TSA provided expedited screening in
dedicated screening lanes to these frequent fliers and eligible CBP
Trusted Travelers during the TSA PreCheck
TM
pilot program
because TSA used information available to it to determine that eligible
passengers in these groups were lower-risk. When traveling on one of
the air carriers and departing from one of the airports participating
in the pilot, these passengers were eligible to be screened in
dedicated TSA PreCheck
TM
screening lanes where the
passengers were not required to remove their shoes; divest light
outerwear, jackets, and belts; or remove liquids, gels, and laptops
from carry-on baggage.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The Known Crew Member program enables TSOs to positively verify
the identity and employment status of flight-crew members who have
joined the program and provide expedited access to the sterile area of
the airport for properly identified and verified, uniformed
crewmembers. TSOs are responsible for screening passengers and their
carry-on baggage at passenger checkpoints using X-ray equipment,
magnetometers, advanced imaging technology, and other devices. For
purposes of this report, references to TSOs include the employees of
private companies performing screening activities at airports
participating in TSA's Screening Partnership Program. See 49 U.S.C. 
44920. The sterile area of an airport is the area beyond the security
screening checkpoint that provides passengers access to boarding
aircraft and to which access is generally controlled by TSA through the
screening of persons and property. See 49 C.F.R.  1540.5.
\6\ Certain frequent fliers of Delta Air Lines were provided
expedited airport screening at Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County
Airport and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, and
certain frequent fliers of American Airlines were provided expedited
screening at Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport and Miami
International Airport.
\7\ To participate, TSA required that eligible frequent fliers opt
into the TSA PreCheck
TM
program and did not automatically
provide TSA PreCheck
TM
expedited screening to these frequent
fliers.
\8\ To become a member of one of CBP's Trusted Traveler programs
(NEXUS, SENTRI, and Global Entry) applicants submit to Federal
background checks to be approved as low-risk travelers eligible to
receive expedited processing at ports of entry. Members submit their
assigned Trusted Traveler number to be recognized as eligible for
expedited screening by the Secure Flight system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since October 2011, TSA has further expanded the known traveler
populations eligible for expedited screening. After TSA piloted TSA
PreCheck
TM
with certain passengers who are frequent fliers
and members of CBP's Trusted Traveler programs, TSA established
separate TSA PreCheck
TM
lists for additional low-risk
passenger populations, including members of the U.S. armed forces,
Congressional Medal of Honor Society Members, members of the Homeland
Security Advisory Council, and Members of Congress, among others.\9\ In
addition to TSA PreCheck
TM
lists sponsored by other agencies
or entities, TSA created its own TSA PreCheck
TM
list
composed of individuals who apply to be pre-approved as low-risk
travelers through the TSA PreCheck
TM
Application Program, an
initiative launched in December 2013. To apply, individuals must visit
an enrollment center where they provide biographic information (i.e.,
name, date of birth, and address), valid identity and citizenship
documentation, and fingerprints to undergo a TSA Security Threat
Assessment.\10\ TSA leveraged existing Federal capabilities to both
enroll and conduct threat assessments for program applicants using
enrollment centers previously established for the Transportation Worker
Identification Credential Program, and existing transportation vetting
systems to conduct applicant threat assessments.\11\ Applicants must be
U.S. citizens, U.S. nationals, or lawful permanent residents, and
cannot have been convicted of certain crimes. As of March 2015, about
7.2 million individuals were eligible, through TSA
PreCheck
TM
lists, for expedited screening. Figure 1 shows
the populations for each TSA PreCheck
TM
list.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ In March 2015, TSA officials stated that the Army, Navy, Marine
Corps, Air Force, and Coast Guard branches of the U.S. armed forces, as
well as Reserve and National Guard personnel, were eligible to
participate in TSA PreCheck
TM
by virtue of their inclusion
on a TSA PreCheck
TM
list. According to TSA officials as of
September 2014, students enrolled at the service academies were added
to the TSA PreCheck
TM
list for active-duty military members.
The service academies included the Air Force Academy, the U.S. Military
Academy, the U.S. Naval Academy, and the U.S. Coast Guard Academy. TSA
is working with the Department of Transportation to include members of
the Merchant Marine Academy in the active-duty military list.
Individuals on TSA PreCheck
TM
lists receive a Known Traveler
Number that they must submit when making travel reservations to be
identified as low-risk. See 49 C.F.R.  1560.3 (defining ``known
traveler number'' as a unique number assigned to an individual for whom
the Federal Government has conducted a security threat assessment and
determined does not pose a security threat). TSA also refers to these
lists as Known Traveler lists.
\10\ See generally 78 Fed. Reg. 72,922 (Dec. 4, 2013). According to
TSA officials, although the security threat assessment provisions
applicable to industry stakeholders do not specifically apply to
passengers, TSA applies the same principles when conducting its threat
assessments of passengers. See 49 C.F.R.  1540.201-1540.209. For
example, TSA would consider a passenger as posing a security threat if
it determines that he or she is known to pose or is suspected of posing
a threat to National security, to transportation security, or of
terrorism more generally, and disqualification criteria and checks
completed by TSA are consistent with such threat assessments. See 
1540.201(c), 1540.205. Further, TSA also recognizes the comparability
of checks completed by other Government agencies and other means. See 
1540.203(f). For example, TSA determined that the vetting process for
individuals such as Members of Congress, International Association of
Chiefs of Police, Homeland Security Advisory Council, Medal of Honor
recipients, and Homeland Security Advisors, among others, is
sufficiently comparable to the TSA threat assessment process as to
support allowing them to be issued a known traveler number and
participate in TSA PreCheck
TM
.
\11\ The Transportation Worker Identification Credential Program is
a TSA program that issues biometric security credentials to eligible
personnel who require unescorted access to secure areas of facilities
and vessels, and all mariners holding Coast Guard-issued credentials.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In addition to passengers who are included on one of the TSA
PreCheck
TM
lists, in October 2013, TSA continued to expand
the opportunities for expedited screening to broader groups of
passengers through the TSA PreCheck
TM
Risk Assessment
program and the Managed Inclusion process, both of which are described
in greater detail below. Figure 2 shows a snapshot from February 25,
2015, through March 3, 2015, of the percentage of weekly passengers
receiving non-expedited screening and expedited screening, and further
shows whether known crew members experienced expedited screening, and
whether expedited screening occurred in TSA PreCheck
TM
lanes
(for passengers designated as known travelers or through the TSA
PreCheck
TM
Risk Assessment program, or passengers chosen for
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
expedited screening using Managed Inclusion), or in standard lanes.

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

As noted in figure 2, during the week ending March 3, 2015, 28
percent of passengers Nation-wide received expedited screening were
issued TSA PreCheck
TM
boarding passes, but were provided
expedited screening in a standard screening lane, meaning that they did
not have to remove their shoes, belts, and light outerwear, but they
had to divest their liquids, gels, and laptops. TSA provides expedited
screening to TSA PreCheck
TM
-eligible passengers in standard
lanes when airports do not have dedicated TSA PreCheck
TM

screening lanes because of airport space constraints and limited TSA
PreCheck
TM
throughput.
tsa uses three methods to assess risk for participation in expedited
screening
As we found in 2014, TSA determines a passenger's eligibility for
or opportunity to experience expedited screening at the airport using
one of three risk assessment methods. These include: (1) Inclusion on a
TSA PreCheck
TM
list of known travelers, (2) identification
of passengers as low-risk by TSA's Risk Assessment algorithm, or (3) a
real-time threat assessment at the airport using the Managed Inclusion
process.
Passenger Eligibility Based on TSA PreCheck
TM
Lists of Known
Travelers
TSA has determined that the individuals included on the TSA
PreCheck
TM
lists of known travelers are low-risk by virtue
of their membership in a specific group or based on group vetting
requirements. For example, TSA determined that members of the
Congressional Medal of Honor Society, a group whose members have been
awarded the highest U.S. award for valor in action against enemy
forces, present a low risk to transportation security and are
appropriate candidates to receive expedited screening. In other cases,
TSA determined that members of groups whose members have undergone a
security threat assessment by the Federal Government, such as
individuals working for agencies in the intelligence community and who
hold active Top Secret/Sensitive Compartmentalized Information
clearances, are low-risk and can be provided expedited screening.\12\
Similarly, TSA designated all active and reserve service members of the
United States armed forces, whose combined members total about 2
million people, as a low-risk group whose members were eligible for
expedited screening. TSA determined that active-duty military members
were low-risk and appropriate candidates to receive expedited screening
because the Department of Defense administers common background checks
of its members.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ For some populations, a security threat assessment includes a
Federal background check. A typical Federal background check includes
checks against law enforcement, immigration, and intelligence
databases, including a fingerprint-based criminal history records check
conducted through the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The results are
used by TSA to decide if an individual poses a sufficiently low risk to
transportation or National security to be issued a known traveler
number.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Except for those who joined through the TSA PreCheck
TM

Application program, the TSA PreCheck
TM
lists include
populations for which TSA coordinated with a lead agency or outside
entity willing to compile and maintain the lists.\13\ TSA has entered
into separate agreements with these agencies and entities to administer
these lists. Generally, according to these agreements, Secure Flight
has responsibility for receiving and processing the lists, but the
originating agencies or entities are to maintain them by ensuring that
individuals continue to meet the criteria for inclusion and to update
the lists as needed.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Members of the list-based, low-risk populations who requested,
or were otherwise deemed eligible, to participate in TSA
PreCheck
TM
were provided a unique known traveler number.
Their personal identifying information (name and date of birth) along
with the known traveler number are included on lists used by Secure
Flight for screening. To be recognized as low-risk by the Secure Flight
system, individuals on TSA PreCheck
TM
lists with known
traveler numbers must submit these numbers when making a flight
reservation.
\14\ We did not review the extent to which agencies are maintaining
the lists.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
TSA also continues to provide expedited screening on a per-flight
basis to the almost 1.5 million frequent fliers who opted to
participate in the TSA PreCheck
TM
program pilot. According
to TSA, this group of eligible frequent fliers met the standards set
for the pilot based on their frequent flier status as of October 1,
2011. According to TSA officials, TSA determined that these frequent
fliers were an appropriate population to include in the program for
several reasons, including the fact that frequent fliers are vetted
against various watch lists, such as the No-Fly list, each time they
travel to ensure that they are not listed as known or suspected
terrorists, and are screened appropriately at the checkpoint.
Passenger Eligibility Based On TSA PreCheck
TM
Risk
Assessments
As we found in December 2014, the TSA PreCheck
TM
Risk
Assessment program evaluates passenger risk based on certain
information available for the passenger's specific flight and
determines the likelihood that passengers will be designated as
eligible to receive expedited screening through TSA
PreCheck
TM
. Beginning in 2011, TSA piloted the process of
using the Secure Flight system to obtain Secure Flight Passenger Data
from air carriers and other data to assess whether the passenger is
low-risk on a per-flight basis and thus eligible to receive a TSA
PreCheck
TM
designation on his or her boarding pass to
undergo expedited screening. In September 2013 after completing this
pilot, TSA decided to explore expanding this risk assessment approach
to every traveler. In order to develop the set of low-risk rules used
to determine the passengers' relative risk, TSA formed an Integrated
Project Team consisting of officials from the Offices of Security
Operations, Intelligence and Analysis, Security Capabilities, and Risk-
Based Security. The team used data from multiple sources, including
passenger data from the Secure Flight system from calendar year 2012,
to derive a baseline level of relative risk for the entire passenger
population. Our review of TSA's documentation in our 2014 report showed
that TSA considered the three elements of risk assessment--Threat,
Vulnerability, and Consequence--in its development of the risk
assessment. These three elements constitute the framework for assessing
risk as called for in the Department of Homeland Security's National
Infrastructure Protection Plan.\15\ We found that TSA worked with a
contractor to evaluate the data elements taken from information
available for passengers' specific flights and the proposed risk model
rules used to determine the baseline level of relative risk. In its
assessment of the algorithm used for the analysis, the contractor
agreed with TSA's analysis of the relationship between the data
elements and relative risk assigned to the data elements.\16\ TSA
officials stated that as of March 2015, the agency is continuing to
refine the algorithm to include additional variables to help determine
passenger risk.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ The National Infrastructure Protection Plan provides the
overarching approach for integrating the Nation's critical
infrastructure and key resources protection initiatives in a single
effort. For more information, see the Department of Homeland Security,
NIPP 2013: Partnering for Critical Infrastructure Security and
Resilience (Washington, DC: 2013).
\16\ As we reported in 2014, assessing the effectiveness of the TSA
PreCheck
TM
Risk Assessment algorithm was beyond the scope of
our work because our work focused on the various methods TSA uses to
assess risk and did not assess the effectiveness of each method.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As we found in December 2014, although TSA determined that certain
combinations of data elements in its risk-based algorithm are less
likely to include unknown potential terrorists, it also noted that
designating passengers as low-risk based solely on the algorithm
carries some risk. To mitigate these risks, TSA uses a random exclusion
factor that places passengers, even those who are otherwise eligible
for expedited screening, into standard screening a certain percentage
of the time. TSA adjusts the level of random exclusion based on the
relative risk posed by the combinations of various data elements used
in the algorithm. The result is that passengers associated with some
data combinations that carry more risk are randomly excluded from
expedited screening more often than passengers associated with other
data combinations. For example, TSA's assessment indicated that
combinations of certain data elements are considered relatively more
risky than other data groups and passengers who fit this profile for a
given flight should seldom be eligible for expedited screening, while
combinations of other data on a given flight pose relatively less risk
and therefore passengers who fit these combinations could be made
eligible for expedited screening a majority of the time. TSA developed
a risk algorithm that scores each passenger on each flight, and
passengers with a high enough score receive a TSA PreCheck
TM

boarding pass designation making them eligible for expedited screening
for that trip.
Passenger Eligibility Based on Real-Time Threat Assessments Using
Managed Inclusion Process
As we found in December 2014, Managed Inclusion is designed to
provide expedited screening to passengers not deemed low-risk prior to
arriving at the airport. TSA uses Managed Inclusion as a tool to direct
passengers who are not on a TSA PreCheck
TM
list, or
designated as eligible for expedited screening via the TSA
PreCheck
TM
Risk Assessments, into the expedited screening
lanes to increase passenger throughput in these lanes when the volume
of TSA PreCheck
TM
-eligible passengers is low. In addition,
TSA developed Managed Inclusion to improve the efficiency of dedicated
TSA PreCheck
TM
screening lanes as well as to help TSA reach
its internal goal of providing expedited screening to at least 25
percent of passengers by the end of calendar year 2013.
To operate Managed Inclusion, TSA randomly directs a certain
percentage of passengers not previously designated that day as eligible
for expedited screening to the TSA PreCheck
TM
expedited
screening lane. To screen passengers who have been randomly directed
into the expedited screening lane, TSA uses real-time threat
assessments including combinations of Behavior Detection Officers
(BDOs), canine teams and Explosives Trace Detection (ETD) devices to
ensure that passengers do not exhibit high-risk behaviors or otherwise
present a risk at the airport.\17\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ BDOs may be present and assessing both the standard and TSA
PreCheck
TM
lanes regardless of whether Managed Inclusion is
operational.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to TSA, it designed the Managed Inclusion process using a
layered approach to provide security when providing expedited screening
to passengers via Managed Inclusion. Specifically, these layers
include: (1) The Secure Flight vetting TSA performs to identify high-
risk passengers required to undergo enhanced screening at the
checkpoint and to ensure these passengers are not directed to TSA
PreCheck
TM
expedited screening lanes, (2) a randomization
process that TSA uses to include passengers into TSA
PreCheck
TM
screening lanes who otherwise were not eligible
for expedited screening, (3) BDOs who observe passengers and look for
certain high-risk behaviors, (4) canine teams and ETD devices that help
ensure that passengers have not handled explosive materials prior to
travel, and (5) an unpredictable screening process involving walk-
through metal detectors in expedited screening lanes that randomly
select a percentage of passengers for additional screening.
Managed Inclusion Process
When passengers approach a security checkpoint that is operating
Managed Inclusion, they approach a TSO who is holding a randomizer
device, typically an iPad that directs the passenger to the expedited
or standard screening lane. TSA officials stated that the randomization
layer of security is intended to ensure that passengers cannot count on
being screened in the expedited screening lane even if they use a
security checkpoint that is operating Managed Inclusion. FSDs can
adjust the percentage of passengers randomly sent into the Managed
Inclusion lane depending on specific risk factors. Figure 3 illustrates
how these layers of security operate when FSDs use Managed Inclusion
lanes.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

According to TSA, it designed the Managed Inclusion process to use
BDOs stationed in the expedited screening lane as one of its layers of
security when Managed Inclusion is operational to observe passengers'
behavior as they move through the security checkpoint queue. When BDOs
observe certain behaviors that indicate a passenger may be higher-risk,
the BDOs are to refer the passenger to a standard screening lane so
that the passenger can be screened using standard or enhanced screening
procedures. In our November 2013 report on TSA's behavior detection and
analysis program, we concluded that although TSA had taken several
positive steps to validate the scientific basis and strengthen program
management of behavior detection and analysis program, TSA had not
demonstrated that BDOs can reliably and effectively identify high-risk
passengers who may pose a threat to the U.S. aviation system. Further,
we recommended that the Secretary of Homeland Security direct the TSA
administrator to limit future funding support for the agency's behavior
detection activities until TSA can provide scientifically validated
evidence that demonstrates that behavioral indicators can be used to
identify passengers who may pose a threat to aviation security. The
Department of Homeland Security did not concur with this
recommendation, in part, because it disagreed with GAO's analysis of
TSA's behavioral indicators. In February 2015, TSA officials told us
that they had revised the behavioral indicators, were conducting pilot
tests on the use of new BDO protocols, and anticipated concluding the
testing at 5 airports in late 2015. At that time, TSA plans to make a
determination about whether the new protocols are ready for further
testing, including an operational test in 10 airports to determine the
protocols' effectiveness, which has an estimated completion date in the
latter half of 2016.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ TSA officials stated that they also plan to conduct a study on
the use of the new protocols at 50 airports to examine disparity
questions regarding racial, ethnicity, and religious garb demographics.
According to these officials, this study will require 12 to 18 months
of data collection and it is not expected to be completed until 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to a TSA decision memorandum and its accompanying
analysis, TSA uses canine teams and ETD devices at airports as an
additional layer of security when Managed Inclusion is operational to
determine whether passengers may have interacted with explosives prior
to arriving at the airport. In airports with canine teams, passengers
must walk past a canine and its handler in an environment where the
canine is trained to detect explosive odors and to alert the handler
when a passenger has any trace of explosives on his or her person. For
example, passengers in the Managed Inclusion lane may be directed to
walk from the travel document checker through the passageway and past
the canine teams to reach the X-ray belt and the walk-through metal
detector. According to TSA documents, the canines, when combined with
the other layers of security in the Managed Inclusion process provide
effective security.\19\ According to TSA, it made this determination by
considering the probability of canines detecting explosives on
passengers, and then designed the Managed Inclusion process to ensure
that passengers would encounter a canine a certain percentage of the
time.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ GAO-14-159 and GAO-10-763.
\20\ TSA's ability to use canines is limited by various factors,
including the availability of canine teams at airports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our prior work examined data TSA had on its canine program, what
these data showed, and to what extent TSA analyzed these data to
identify program trends. Further we analyzed the extent to which TSA
deployed canine teams using a risk-based approach and determined their
effectiveness prior to deployment. As a result of this work, we
recommended in January 2013, among other things, that TSA take actions
to comprehensively assess the effectiveness of canine teams. The
Department of Homeland Security concurred with this recommendation and
has taken steps to address it.\21\ Specifically, according to TSA
canine test results, TSA has conducted work to assess canine teams and
to ensure they meet the security effectiveness thresholds TSA
established for working in the Managed Inclusion lane, and the canines
met these thresholds as a requirement to screen passengers in Managed
Inclusion lanes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ For more information see GAO, TSA Explosives Detection Canine
Program: Actions Needed to Analyze Data and Ensure Canine Teams Are
Effectively Utilized, GAO-13-239 (Washington, DC: Jan. 31, 2013) and
Explosives Detection Canines: TSA Has Taken Steps to Analyze Canine
Team Data and Assess the Effectiveness of Passenger Screening Canines,
GAO-14-695T (Washington, DC: June 24, 2014).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In those airports where canines are unavailable or not working, TSA
uses ETD devices as a layer of security when operating Managed
Inclusion. TSOs stationed at the ETD device are to select passengers to
have their hands swabbed as they move through the expedited screening
lane. TSOs are to wait for a passenger to proceed through the Managed
Inclusion queue and approach the device, where the TSO is to swab the
passenger's hands with an ETD pad and place the pad in the ETD device
to determine whether any explosive residue is detected on the pad.\22\
Once the passenger who was swabbed is cleared, the passenger then
proceeds through the lane to the X-ray belt and walk-through metal
detector for screening. TSA procedures require FSDs to meet certain
performance requirements when ETD devices are operating, such as
swabbing passengers at a designated rate, and TSA data from January 1,
2014, through April 1, 2014, show that these requirements were not
always met. Beginning in May 2014, TSA's Office of Security Operations
began tracking compliance with the ETD swab requirements and developed
and implemented a process to ensure that the requirements are met. In
March 2015 TSA officials confirmed this process was still in place.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Additionally, at airports with explosives detection systems,
ETD devices are used in conjunction with these systems to screen
checked baggage for explosives. At these airports, if an explosives
detection system alarms--indicating that checked baggage may contain an
explosive or explosive device that cannot be cleared--ETD devices are
used as a secondary screening. In July 2011, we recommended that TSA
develop a plan to ensure that screening protocols are in place to
resolve detection system alarms if these systems are deployed and ETD
devices are used to resolve explosives detection system screening
alarms. TSA has taken steps to address this recommendation.
Specifically, in November 2013, TSA developed a plan that outlined a
strategy to ensure that the explosives detection capability of ETD
devices were consistent with the detection systems. See GAO, Aviation
Security: TSA has Enhanced Its Explosives Detection Requirements for
Checked Baggage, but Additional Screening Actions Are Needed, GAO-11-
740 (Washington, DC: July 11, 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to TSA, it uses unpredictable screening procedures as an
additional layer of security after passengers who are using expedited
screening pass through the walk-through metal detector. This random
selection of passengers for enhanced screening occurs after they have
passed all security layers TSA uses for Managed Inclusion, and provides
one more chance for TSA to detect explosives on a passenger.
tsa has not tested the overall effectiveness of the managed inclusion
process
As we reported in December 2014, according to TSA, it designed the
Managed Inclusion process using a layered approach to security when
providing expedited screening to passengers via Managed Inclusion.
Specifically, the Office of Security Capabilities' proof of concept
design noted that the Managed Inclusion process was designed to provide
a more rigorous real-time threat assessment layer of security when
compared to standard screening or TSA PreCheck
TM
screening.
According to the design concept, this real-time threat assessment,
utilizing both BDOs and explosives detection, allows TSA to provide
expedited screening to passengers who have not been designated as low-
risk without decreasing overall security effectiveness. While TSA has
tested the security effectiveness of each of these layers of security,
TSA has not yet tested the security effectiveness of the overall
Managed Inclusion process as it functions as a whole.
Conducting Effectiveness Testing of the Managed Inclusion Process in
Accordance with Evaluation Best Practices Would Enhance
Reliability of the Process
As we reported in December 2014, TSA officials stated that they
tested the security effectiveness of the individual components of the
Managed Inclusion process before implementing Managed Inclusion, and
determined that each layer alone provides an effective level of
security. For example, TSA tested the threat detection ability of its
canines using a variety of variables such as concealment location and
the length of time the item was concealed prior to the encounter with
the canine team. TSA determined through the initial testing of the
Managed Inclusion layers that Managed Inclusion provides a higher level
of security than TSA baseline security levels. In addition, according
to TSA standard operating procedures, Managed Inclusion passengers are
more likely than other passengers to be screened for explosives. We did
not evaluate the security effectiveness testing TSA conducted on the
individual layers of the Managed Inclusion process. However, we have
previously conducted work on several of the layers used in the Managed
Inclusion process, including BDOs, ETD, and canine teams and raised
concerns regarding their effectiveness and recommended actions to
address those concerns.\23\ For example, in our November 2013 report we
recommended that the Secretary of Homeland Security limit future
funding support for TSA's behavior detection activities until TSA could
provide scientifically-validated evidence that demonstrates that
behavioral indicators can be used to identify passengers who may pose a
threat to aviation security. As discussed earlier in this statement,
TSA has made progress in addressing those recommendations but they have
not yet been fully implemented. TSA officials stated that they have not
yet tested the security effectiveness of the overall Managed Inclusion
process as it functions as a whole, as TSA has been planning for such
testing over the course of the last year. TSA documentation shows that
the Office of Security Capabilities recommended in January 2013 that
TSA test the security effectiveness of Managed Inclusion as a system.
We reported in 2014 that according to officials, TSA anticipated that
testing would begin in October 2014 and estimated that testing could
take 12 to 18 months to complete. In March 2015, TSA officials provided
us a schedule for the development and completion of BDO and Canine
testing supporting the Managed Inclusion process. TSA scheduled a pilot
for testing BDOs which was set to begin October 2014 and run through
May 2015. Further, the schedule TSA provided indicates that a proof of
concept for Canine Covert Testing was scheduled for November 2014 and
that operational testing of canines was scheduled to begin in June 2015
and be completed in March 2016. Testing the security effectiveness of
the Managed Inclusion process is consistent with Federal policy, which
states that agencies should assess program effectiveness and make
improvements as needed.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ GAO-14-159, GAO-10-763, GAO-13-239, GAO-14-695T, and GAO-11-
740.
\24\ See Executive Order 13450--Improving Government Program
Performance, 72 Fed. Reg. 64,519 (Nov. 15, 2007).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have previously reported on challenges TSA has faced in
designing studies and protocols to test the effectiveness of security
systems and programs in accordance with established methodological
practices. For example, in our March 2014 assessment of TSA's
acquisition of Advanced Imaging Technology, we found that TSA conducted
operational and laboratory tests, but did not evaluate the performance
of the entire system, which is necessary to ensure that mission needs
are met.\25\ A key element of evaluation design is to define purpose
and scope, to establish what questions the evaluation will and will not
address.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ See GAO-14-357. We recommend that TSA better measure the
effectiveness of its entire AIT system. TSA concurred with the
recommendation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further, in November 2013 we found methodological weaknesses in the
overall design and data collection of TSA's April 2011 validation
comparison study to determine the effectiveness of the behavior
detection and analysis program.\26\ For example we found that TSA did
not randomly select airports to participate in the study, so the
results were not generalizeable across airports. In addition, we found
that TSA collected the validation study data unevenly and experienced
challenges in collecting an adequate sample size for the randomly
selected passengers, facts that might have further affected the
representativeness of the findings. According to established evaluation
design practices, data collection should be sufficiently free of bias
or other significant errors that could lead to inaccurate
conclusions.\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ See GAO-14-159. We recommended that future funding for the
program be limited until TSA provided scientifically validated evidence
on the effectiveness of behavioral indicators to identify passenger
threat. TSA did not concur with the recommendation to limit program
funding.
\27\ GAO, Designing Evaluations: 2012 Revision, GAO-12-208G
(Washington, DC. Jan. 31, 2012). This report addresses the logic of
program evaluation design, presents generally accepted statistical
principles, and describes different types of evaluations for answering
varied questions about program performance, the process of designing
evaluation studies, and key issues to consider toward ensuring overall
study quality. This report is one of a series of papers whose purpose
is to provide guides to various aspects of audit and evaluation
methodology and indicate where more detailed information is available.
It is based on GAO reports and program evaluation literature. To ensure
the guide's competence and usefulness, drafts were reviewed by selected
GAO, Federal and State agency evaluators, and evaluation authors and
practitioners from professional consulting firms. This publication
supersedes Government Operations: Designing Evaluations, GAO/PEMD-
10.1.4 (Washington, DC: May 1, 1991).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In our December 2014 report we concluded that ensuring the planned
effectiveness testing of the Managed Inclusion process adheres to
established evaluation design practices would help TSA provide
reasonable assurance that the effectiveness testing will yield reliable
results.\28\ The specific design limitations we identified in TSA's
previous studies of Advanced Imaging Technology and behavior detection
and analysis program may or may not be relevant design issues for an
assessment of the effectiveness of the Managed Inclusion process, as
evaluation design necessarily differs based on the scope and nature of
the question being addressed. In general, evaluations are most likely
to be successful when key steps are addressed during design, including
defining research questions appropriate to the scope of the evaluation,
and selecting appropriate measures and study approaches that will
permit valid conclusions. As a result, we recommended that to ensure
that TSA's planned testing yields reliable results, the TSA
administrator take steps to ensure that TSA's planned effectiveness
testing of the Managed Inclusion process adheres to established
evaluation design practices. DHS concurred with our recommendations and
began taking steps to ensure that its planned effectiveness testing of
the Managed Inclusion process adheres to established evaluation
practices. Specifically, DHS stated that TSA plans to use a test and
evaluation process--which calls for the preparation of test and
evaluation framework documents including plans, analyses, and a final
report describing the test results--for its planned effectiveness
testing of Managed Inclusion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ GAO-12-208G.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Katko, Ranking Member Rice, and Members of the
subcommittee, this completes my prepared statement. I would be pleased
to respond to any questions that you may have at this time.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Grover, for your testimony. We
appreciate your participation here as well today, as well as
the entire panel's.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
I am going to concentrate my questions on one area and
possibly two. The first area is Managed Inclusion. As you heard
from the testimony today so far, Managed Inclusion is one of
the exceptions, if you will, to the PreCheck program. I don't
know if ``exception'' is a proper term to use, but it is one of
the ways that it is added to the PreCheck program.
As a preliminary matter, I will note that the PreCheck
program is something that people pay for. They pay for it, and
it is a service as well as a risk-based security method. The
fundamental premise of PreCheck is that it allows TSA to better
focus on the higher-risk travelers by getting the ones that are
lower-risk in the PreCheck program. But the fact remains that
people are paying for that service, if you will, and the
service is quicker access into the secure area of an airport.
So, with that overview, I want to talk a little bit about
Managed Inclusion. To start with, if you could just briefly,
Mr. Fletcher, give us a very basic reason that TSA went to
Managed Inclusion to start with.
Mr. Fletcher. So I think the genesis of Managed Inclusion
was really the Super Bowl in New Orleans. We were anticipating
significant crowds and actually wound up with significant
crowds.
I think they more than doubled their peak volume of
passenger traffic through the airport the day after the Super
Bowl, so the airport was resource-constrained. The challenge
really becomes: How do you eliminate the risk of this large
crowd of people being an attractive target for a suicide
terrorist attack?
So there was a lot of internal discussion. The idea of
doing a real-time threat assessment on passengers, a
combination of explosive detection screening with passenger
screening canine teams and behavioral detection, would provide
sufficient value to be able to provide those travelers with an
expedited screening process, that proved to be a very
successful endeavor.
As we looked at the success of that, the question became is
there a way that we can systematically expand that concept to
improve the efficiency. At that time, we had a very low volume
of TSA PreCheck passengers. I think today we are at about 48 to
50 percent. At that point, we were at 3 or 4 percent of volume,
as I recall.
So we had a lot of inefficiencies in the process where we
had dedicated TSA PreCheck lanes at many of our larger
airports, but the staff was significantly underutilized and the
wait times in the standard screening lane were becoming
excessive.
So we began expanding Managed Inclusion as a way of
conducting a one-time real-time threat assessment of the
passengers, again, explosive screening and behavioral
observation, to afford them an expedited screening experience
as a way of managing wait times as well as improving the
efficiency of the process.
Mr. Katko. Thank you.
A couple of things here I want to touch upon. You mentioned
one of the things being resources and reducing the risk that
there is an attractive target by having a large crowd in a
nonsecure area of the airport. Correct?
Mr. Fletcher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. Now, if we expand the PreCheck program through
better marketing of it and it is growing on its own merit
anyhow, does that change the calculus for wanting to use
Managed Inclusion?
Mr. Fletcher. It actually does.
Mr. Katko. It does or does not? I am sorry.
Mr. Fletcher. It does change the calculus. That is
ultimately our goal. We want to dramatically expand the
application program.
Mr. Katko. So do we.
Mr. Fletcher. As I indicated in my statement, we believe
that the potential is upwards of 36 million travelers that
could benefit. So we are targeting those travelers that are
really taking three or more trips by air each year, and we
think that that is a good value proposition. Even at an $85
cost, the per-screening experience for the expedited process
that they go through is worth them spending the money.
It is a challenge. Marketing and communications and
promotion is, quite frankly, not something the Government does
well in many instances. So it is a marketing challenge. We have
engaged a professional marketing firm to help us with our brand
positioning, with creative content. We have been broadly
expanding our partnerships across the travel and tourism
industry.
But our goal is to dramatically improve the number of
travelers. So my calculation is that, to sustain a 50 percent
expedited screening throughput rate with an entirely enrolled
population, we need 25 million Americans enrolled in TSA
PreCheck.
Today, combined with our existing low-risk populations--
military, Members of Congress, et cetera--our own application
program, and Customs and Border Protection's Trusted Traveler
Programs, we have about 6.5 million.
So we need to quadruple the number of individuals. That
will take us a bit of time to do, but that ultimately is our
goal. We would like to be able to significantly dial back on
both Managed Inclusion and risk assessment rules and replace
that current volume with an enrolled population.
Mr. Katko. Thank you.
I know I am a little over time here, but I just want to
follow up briefly on that. Two things.
From a resource standpoint--I know that is one of the
genesis for the Managed Inclusion program--is it fair to say,
though, that there is a significant number of TSA employees who
work on a part-time basis?
Mr. Fletcher. I believe that percentage is about 23 percent
of the total TSO population is part-time employees.
Mr. Katko. If you could just briefly address the fact that
you know when the high-peak hours and high-peak traffic is
going to be.
Isn't it possible for TSA to better utilize the part-time
employees to deal with the high-traffic areas and not resort to
Managed Inclusion?
Mr. Fletcher. I think we are doing a very credible job of
managing those part-time resources. Again, like everything that
TSA has been trying to do, it is taking a balanced and measured
approach.
I cannot afford--for example, in my experience when I was
at Chicago O'Hare International Airport, it is difficult for me
to work a 20-hour-a-week part-time employee 2 hours in the
morning to cover my a.m. peak and then have them off and bring
them back for 2 hours in the afternoon. That is an unreasonable
human expectation for an employee that is working a part-time
position.
So there is a balance between the use of part-time
employees and having them at the checkpoint when the passenger
volume requires it and the needs of the operation versus the
needs of the individual. I believe we do a credible job. We
have actually--I believe we do a credible job today. I am not
sure there is much more we can get in that regard.
Mr. Katko. Thank you very much.
The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member of
the subcommittee, Miss Rice, for 5 minutes for questions.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Fletcher, I am going to direct my questions to you.
I think it is really important for us to--especially in
light of your comment that you would like to take the universe
of people that go through TSA PreCheck lines pursuant to either
Managed Inclusion or the risk assessment rules--you would like
to decrease that number and increase the actual number of
people who go through the PreCheck process.
Can you succinctly tell us what that process is from a
person applies to they are approved?
Mr. Fletcher. Today the individual applies either on-line
or at one of the 320-some-odd enrollment centers. They provide
a set of biographic information. They provide a photographic
ID, proof of identity, and proof of citizenship. They provide
their fingerprints.
We do a security threat assessment against them for
criminal disqualifiers, for immigration. Are they a U.S.
citizen? Are they a lawful permanent resident? We do a threat
assessment. Are they listed in the terrorism database? They get
their known traveler number.
I think we say that that will typically happen in 2 weeks.
My understanding is that it typically happens within 3 or 4
days that the individual has been vetted and approved. We mail
them their own traveler number. They can also go on a secure
website and retrieve that electronically. So it is a relatively
painless process, if you will.
Miss Rice. What would disqualify someone from obtaining
PreCheck status?
Mr. Fletcher. So there is a list of criminal disqualifiers
that are permanent, and then there is a list of, I will say,
interim disqualifiers. So a criminal conviction within 7 years
might be a disqualifier until that time frame had elapsed.
But there are disqualifiers, criminal convictions, that are
permanently disqualifying. An example of that I think you have
alluded to in your opening statement: Conviction of a
terrorism-related offense; espionage against the Government;
treason. Those would be permanent disqualifiers. I have a list.
I can certainly provide that to the committee.
Miss Rice. Are there any obstacles that you encounter as an
agency during this PreCheck application process with getting
relevant information from other agencies, whether it be FBI,
you know, watch lists? Are there any impediments or obstacles
that you have encountered in getting----
Mr. Fletcher. I don't think there is impediments with the
way the process is currently designed. I believe that there are
opportunities to improve the process.
So today we do not do, for example, recurrent vetting for
criminal disqualifiers. We vet perpetually for the individual
being added to a terrorism database, but we don't continually
vet for criminal disqualifiers.
We have been working very closely with the FBI on an
initiative that they have recently fielded the capability for
that will allow us to do that, but we don't have either the
legal authority to do that today on our own accord because, in
this instance, we are not a law enforcement agency from this
perspective.
So we can't run our own NCIC checks, as Customs can do as
an investigative law enforcement agency, but we believe that
that is an important enhancement to the program as we move
forward.
Miss Rice. Well, that goes into my next question I was
going to ask you: Do you have a plan in place--and you have
already answered this--for recurrent vetting?
So what we would have to do is either qualify you as a law
enforcement agency or you would do what it appears that you are
doing now with the FBI in partnering with another agency that
would actually carry out the recurrent vetting?
Mr. Fletcher. That is correct.
Miss Rice. Then share the information with you?
Mr. Fletcher. That is correct, ma'am. I will say that that
is not without cost. So the FBI is a fee-reimbursed program for
that particular service. So there is some cost associated with
that that would----
Miss Rice. Well, it all comes out of the same pot. Right?
Mr. Fletcher. Well, in this instance, the entire TSA
PreCheck application program is fee-funded with the exception.
Miss Rice. Right. That is true.
Mr. Fletcher. So those costs would have to be absorbed by
the individual applicant.
Miss Rice. Well, I am talking about in terms of BDOs and
TSA officers. I mean, there is already a built-in cost
structure there. I don't think that is going to break the bank,
a recurrent background check that the FBI could do.
But very quickly--because my time is almost up--so recently
there was a report that, since 2007, when the training for
BDOs, Behavioral Detection Officers, was put into place, to the
present day, there were approximately 30,000 people that were
pulled out of the line based on observations of the Behavioral
Detection Officer.
It is further understood that, of those 30,000 people that
were taken out of the line, of that universe, less than 1
percent of them actually had an instance where it resulted in
an arrest.
So my question is: Do you think that the training for the
BDOs is sufficient, given that kind of empirical data, that
maybe they are not looking at the right things by maybe missing
people who truly do represent a danger?
Mr. Fletcher. So I will say that the recommendations over
the last several years from both the GAO and the inspector
general have been very helpful in us revamping our BDO program.
As Ms. Grover indicated, we have just completed, I will
say, a research foundation analysis for each of the revised
indicators. We are in the process of doing a comprehensive
evaluation of those new indicators. We have completely revamped
the training program for the BDOs over the last several years.
So if I go back to 2007, I would absolutely agree with your
position, but I believe we have taken significant strides. In
fact, my understanding is that, with the exception of two
recommendations, one that we defund the BDO program and the
other, the most recent one, about taking a holistic view of
Managed Inclusion and the use of BDOs, that all of the
recommendations for both the DHS IG and GAO have been closed.
Miss Rice. So, Mr. Fletcher, first of all, that was not an
attack question at all. That was just----
Mr. Fletcher. I understand, ma'am.
Miss Rice. I am one of those people who like to be--if you
implement a plan, you have to review it to see if it is
actually achieving the stated goals.
So I appreciate your openness and your willingness to take
recommendations about how the BDO--I don't think it necessarily
has to be scrapped altogether, but I appreciate the fact that
you are willing to take these recommendations of how it can be
better. Thank you.
Mr. Fletcher. If I can just add, we have actually
established a coalition with private-sector privacy groups that
signed a nondisclosure agreement that allow them to gain access
to information that will help us inform the program and make
sure that we are achieving the right balance between what we
believe is an essential layer of our security regime and
concerns about civil rights and civil liberties.
Miss Rice. Thank you, Mr. Fletcher.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Miss Rice.
The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Minority Member of
the full committee, Mr. Thompson, for questions.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I ask unanimous consent that Ms. Jackson Lee be allowed to
sit on the panel and ask questions today.
Mr. Katko. So approved.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Fletcher, in the Managed Inclusion program and, more
specifically, BDOs, how many do we have in the BDO program, how
many BDOs?
Mr. Fletcher. Congressman Thompson, I don't have that exact
number. I know we have about 11 percent fewer BDOs today than
we did 2 years ago. So that number has reduced. I believe it is
around 3,100 total across the system, but I don't have that
exact number.
Mr. Thompson. Okay. You talked about a process.
Are you aware of any scientific data that say that the BDO
program is successful?
Mr. Fletcher. I know we have established a scientific
foundation behind each of the indicators. I am not personally
aware of the scientific data that answers your specific
question.
Mr. Thompson. Ms. Grover, you looked at it. Are you aware
of any?
Ms. Grover. No, sir. I am aware that TSA has taken another
look at the literature that is underlying each of the
indicators that they are using.
They are in the process of testing the use of the new
indicators and the new rules for using them at airports right
now, and we are awaiting the results of those tests to see what
TSA learns about how they are actually being applied in
practice.
Mr. Thompson. So as of this hearing, you are not aware of
any data that would say that that program or, from a scientific
standpoint, that it works?
Ms. Grover. Yes, sir. As of this hearing, I have not
reviewed evidence from TSA demonstrating that the behavioral
indicators are working in practice as they intend.
Mr. Thompson. Let me go on the record, too, Mr. Chairman
and Ranking Member. I support the PreCheck program, too, but I
want it to have sound science behind it and not just the
ability to look at somebody who hasn't been vetted, look at
someone who hasn't gone through a database from a background
standpoint, and say ``You get into the PreCheck line.''
I think part of why we are trying to have this hearing is
to make sure that those individuals who are in the PreCheck
line--that there is some science behind getting them there as
well as some vetting of who they are.
More specifically, we talked about this whistle-blower who
said they saw and knew someone in line that was a domestic
terrorist, had a conviction, went to jail.
Can you provide me, Mr. Fletcher, with whether or not there
is authority--if a TSO sees an individual of that description,
that they have the authority to say ``You need to go back for
further vetting, for enhanced screening.''
Mr. Fletcher. Congressman Thompson, TSOs have had that
authority, that discretion, to deny an individual access to the
PreCheck lane and send them through the standard screening
process that existed on that day.
Back in 2008, I believe, we started training our TSOs in
critical thinking skills. In response to the IG's
investigation, we reiterated that guidance and are currently
reviewing our standard operating procedures.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Roth, do you want to comment?
Mr. Roth. When we engaged in this inquiry after receiving
the whistle-blower complaint, the TSO did not feel empowered to
make that decision on his or her own self and checked with the
supervisor.
My understanding is our recommendations to TSA were to
clarify exactly what authority the TSO has so, in fact, they do
have that empowerment when they see a situation that they
believe is unsafe.
Mr. Thompson. So when they checked with the supervisor,
what did the supervisor say?
Mr. Roth. According to our investigation, the supervisor
ordered that person to go through the PreCheck lane.
Mr. Thompson. So, basically, we let a domestic terrorist
get on a plane that, if that person had applied through
PreCheck, that person would have--well, if that person who
traveled had applied through the regular PreCheck program, what
would that person's status have been?
Mr. Roth. That person had several disqualifying criminal
offenses which would have prohibited that person from being a
member of PreCheck.
Mr. Thompson. So, Mr. Fletcher, can you share with the
committee what orientation TSOs are going through now so that
they do feel empowered that, when those situations exist, they
can, in effect, stop it at that point?
Mr. Fletcher. So, Congressman, immediately the head of our
Office of Security Operations issued written guidance to the
field that clarified and reinforced the discretion in critical
thinking skills that had been built in the program over the
previous several years.
That was followed up by information in a National shift
briefing that went to the entire front-line uniformed workforce
over the next several weeks to ensure that every individual TSO
was hearing that consistent message.
As I indicated, I think we are currently in the process of
reviewing our standard operating procedures to make sure that
any language about discretion and critical thinking is clear
what our intent is so that the TSO doesn't feel inhibited or a
lack of empowerment to be able to exercise that discretion.
That is absolutely the key. One of the keys to aviation
security, in my view, is the individual TSO to use their
experience and judgment and exercise some level of
individualized discretion.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I think the traveling public feels that
some system of vetting has occurred for every person who is on
that plane. I think to whatever extent we can provide that we
should.
So I would encourage you to look at what you are doing so
that the end result is that there are no anomalies in the
system that would allow someone with an obvious criminal record
that would have been disqualified is on that plane without the
knowledge of the people who are traveling.
Mr. Fletcher. So, Congressman, as you know, we rely very
heavily on information from the National law enforcement and
National intelligence community. So every passenger is vetted
against terrorism databases and watch lists and identified
initially as either inhibited and not allowed to fly, a no-fly,
designated for enhanced screening, or prevented from being
eligible for expedited screening through TSA PreCheck.
In this specific instance, this individual was not and is
not in the National Terrorist Screening Database. So that is a
discussion that is on-going between TSA and the Terrorist
Screening Center because this is an intelligence and an
information-based aviation security regime and we have to have
confidence that, if there is a domestic terrorism suspect, that
they have been appropriately identified and watch-listed.
In this case, that is the glitch in the system. If that
individual had been watch-listed, they would not have been
allowed to be designated as eligible for expedited screening.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Thompson.
The Chairman will now recognize other Members of the
subcommittee for 5 minutes each for questions they may wish to
ask the witnesses. After we have exhausted the questions from
each of the subcommittee Members, we will allow Ms. Jackson Lee
5 minutes' time for questions as well.
In accordance with our committee rules and practice, I plan
to recognize Members who were present at the start of the
hearing by seniority on the subcommittee. Those coming in later
will be recognized in the order of their arrival.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Rogers for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Rogers. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to talk some more about this Managed Inclusion
program.
Tell me, what was the objective when you all set that up?
What were you trying to accomplish with this?
Mr. Fletcher. So, Congressman Rogers, I think there was
really multiple objectives. In the first instance, it was
improving the--I will say one objective was to improve the
efficiency of the TSA PreCheck lane.
In the second instance, it was really about, how do we do a
much more effective job of managing the wait times and standard
screening, reducing that risk that that becomes the attractive
target for a terrorist attack?
Mr. Rogers. Well, did TSA conduct a comprehensive analysis
on the impact of the entire screening process, which basically
is reducing it to PreCheck vetting by the flip of a coin?
Mr. Fletcher. Congressman, I don't believe it is PreCheck
vetting by a flip of a coin.
Mr. Rogers. Taking somebody that hasn't been screened
through the PreCheck program and just sending them through that
line every once in a while?
Mr. Fletcher. So the opportunity, we believe, and--as we
looked at the individual component parts and are in the process
of looking at Managed Inclusion in total as a system, we
believe that it provides a better security proposition. It is
more effective security than standard screening based on the
analysis that we have done to date.
Mr. Rogers. Maybe I am confused.
My understanding of the way Managed Inclusion works is you
have got somebody with an iPad that taps it and it randomly
sends somebody up through the PreCheck line that has not gone
through the application and screening process that the people
who paid to be in the PreCheck line went through. Is that not
correct?
Mr. Fletcher. Well, that is part of it. Certainly there is
a random----
Mr. Rogers. Isn't that taking a high risk by sending
somebody through the PreCheck line? They are no longer going
through the AIT machine that we told everybody in the world was
so necessary. They are just going through a magnetometer, and
they didn't go through the vetting process that the people in
the PreCheck line paid to go through.
Mr. Fletcher. They are exposed at a significantly higher
rate to explosives screening, 100 percent of the passengers, if
we are using passenger screening canine teams, a significant
percentage of passengers that are ETD screened prior to that
random selection process at the travel document check position,
and they are also subject to additional unpredictable screening
through ETD and now I think at more than 65 TSA PreCheck
screening lanes with random selection for AIT as part of the
prescreening process.
Mr. Rogers. How do you think folks feel that paid for the
PreCheck status about individuals who didn't pay for it and
didn't go through the vetting being allowed to get in line with
them?
Mr. Fletcher. I have heard negative complaints from the
traveling public about the Managed Inclusion process. Part of
our desire to dial these tools back so they become a
significantly less contributor to the overall expedited
screening process and replace them with an enrolled population
is both because of the pushback that we have gotten, in some
instances, from travelers, but also because it moves those
passengers--the enrolled passenger--provides a lower-risk
proposition than somebody who does go through Managed Inclusion
or through risk assessment rules.
Mr. Rogers. You know, you mentioned explosive detection
canines. Obviously, you know something about me or else you
wouldn't have brought that up.
If, in fact, we had enough of those assets so that they
were in all these lines, I wouldn't have a problem with this.
But, as you know, we have very limited numbers of those canine
teams and not because I haven't been trying to change it. I
intend to get a lot more of them in there before I leave this
place. But currently we don't have anywhere near close to
enough of them.
In my opinion, this Managed Inclusion program is a reckless
practice to take people who have not been through the proper
vetting and put them into a lane that requires a lower level of
screening because the people who are in that lane have paid to
be vetted through a system that makes them less of a risk.
So I hope that you all will rethink this program because it
is reckless and I think the public would view it very dimly if
they knew more about it.
Mr. Fletcher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Rogers. With that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Rogers. I appreciate it.
Ms. Jackson Lee, I believe you are next up.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Chairman and Ranking
Member for their courtesies. This is a committee that I hold
very dear as a very important responsibility. I thank both of
you for your very, very astute leadership on this hearing and
the hearing that we may have afterwards, which I hope I will be
able to attend after another hearing.
Let me also thank the witnesses for their service,
certainty the representative from the GAO, for constantly
providing us a flashlight to be able to ensure and to correct
and to keep the American people secure.
Let me thank all of those who are part of the Homeland
Security team, Transportation Security Administration. Many of
you know my great admiration for the thousands upon thousands
of TSO officers that put their lives on the line in the
Nation's airports to save our lives. So I want them to know how
much I appreciate them.
I want to acknowledge the shooting and the loss of life of
the TSO officer in Los Angeles. We went out to Los Angeles in
the last session.
Let me offer my concern and best wishes for a speedy
recovery for the TSO officer at the Louis Armstrong Airport in
New Orleans.
So, let me proceed with a series of points, and maybe I
will--let me just make this point, and then my colleagues
should hear my point. This is a team effort when we talk about
securing the airport. I am constantly frustrated, and I
understand local government, but I do believe this is going to
require a Federal sort-of engagement and setting protocols.
There is not enough coverage of the TSOs officers of armed
personnel which in this instance, are our local law enforcement
as hired or dictated to by the local airports.
The first news report came out that it was a TSO officer,
you might have heard it, that shot the perpetrator at New
Orleans who had a machete and something else, endangering the
lives of passengers. Not understanding what their intent was,
not knowing whether to classify them as a terrorist or deranged
individual. It was the brave acts of a local law enforcement,
so I believe, and will be raising this question, of the
protocols to be established in airports across America, there
is not enough coverage. The airport management, they save
money. Cities save money by not having the appropriate armed
law enforcement present.
Let me ask the question to Mr.--if I might--to Mr.
Fletcher. Are your TSOs armed?
Mr. Fletcher. No, Congresswoman, they are not.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Approximately how many do we have across
America, just approximately?
Mr. Fletcher. I believe somewhere full-time, part-time
total, about 48,000.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank you for that, because I am
much happier and feel much safer in spite of some of these
downfalls, than I was in pre-9/11. So I appreciate that. So,
they are not armed, but they are monitoring some of the world's
largest airports, is that not correct?
Mr. Fletcher. That is correct, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We, I believe without giving any
Classified information, knowledge is, that still one of the
more attractive targets of terrorists are airplanes, airports,
and transportation modes. Is that a general assessment one can
make?
Mr. Fletcher. That is an accurate assessment, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So in America, with our effort to secure,
we have TSOs. We don't have any consistent understanding of
what the armed presence is. When I use the word armed, I am
going to be very careful to make sure that I am talking about
local law enforcement, and not military.
So, let me jump to this point of the situation of going
with the TSO that knew that there was a person that was
convicted of domestic terrorism. What was the basis of the
supervisor who the TSO came to saying, it is all right, let him
through?
Mr. Fletcher. I don't have an answer to that, ma'am. I will
have to go back and I know our security operations did an
inquiry. I believe they have that answer. I just don't know
that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So. I would make this point: Training has
to be crucial. If the TSO had the authority, you seem to
suggest that person did, they didn't use it. Then you have a
training problem. One, in terms of the TSO's knowledge of what
their opportunities and obligations and authority is, and then
the supervisor, rightly so, that was approached by the TSO,
gave the approval of them going through. I don't know, is it in
the Inspector General's report as to why the supervisor, if you
will, allowed the person to go forward? Anyone?
Mr. Roth. The TSA has a rule that the TSOs may increase the
level of screening a passenger receives at a checkpoint based
on a particular belief that can be put into words and explained
to others that is based on observations that suggest an
individual or----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Right, but that is an increase. This
person decreased it by telling the TSO, let him walk on
through. Let me finish because my colleagues have been very
generous in their time. I want to emphasize that we have a
double issue here in protecting the perimeter of the security
checkpoint, where a person may need to be stopped, and may be
agitated, and I am not suggesting a pouncing of law enforcement
on our travellers. Let me be very clear. But I am suggesting
that we need to protect our TSO officers. We have been very
fortunate. We have one too many incidences, and if the reports
are accurate, and I think you announced this report, the number
of guns that are stopped at the security checkpoints are more
than we might imagine. So, I think that is something else that
we need to complement the issues of training.
The other thing that I would like to offer to my colleagues
is that I have introduced the No Fly for Foreign Fighters
legislation which would appropriately be in this committee. I
would like to have that bill presented to both the Chairman and
Ranking Member of this committee to give you extra help on a
list that is extremely screened or scrubbed to make sure that
you have the most current individuals on that No-Fly list,
particularly those who are foreign fighters. I hope that the
agency will review my legislation because I am looking for
tools that will help TSO officers do their job. I think there
are two elements of weaknesses. One, when a TSO attempted to do
the right thing, and a supervisor pushed him on, and then the
issue of security around the perimeter.
So, I thank you very much. If I might, I thought I had the
bill to put into the record, but I see that I don't. But I also
will just get this in writing. I understand that we moved to
expand TSA PreCheck and we used a pay process. Of course, they
are vetted, but you allow people to pay for that. I would like
to get a report on whether or not our vetting is extensive on
the paid process, more extensive. I yield back, and I thank the
Chairman and Ranking Member.
[The information follows:]
Submitted for the Record by Sheila Jackson Lee

114TH CONGRESS

1ST SESSION

H.R. 48

To require a review of the completeness of the Terrorist Screening
Database (TSDB) maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
the derivative terrorist watchlist utilized by the Transportation
Security Administration, and for other purposes.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

January 6, 2015

Ms. Jackson Lee introduced the following bill; which was referred to
the Committee on the Judiciary

A BILL

To require a review of the completeness of the Terrorist Screening
Database (TSDB) maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
the derivative terrorist watchlist utilized by the Transportation
Security Administration, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ``No Fly for Foreign Fighters Act''.

SEC. 2. REVIEW OF THE COMPLETENESS OF THE TERRORIST SCREENING DATABASE
(TSDB) MAINTAINED BY THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION AND THE DERIVATIVE TERRORIST
WATCHLIST UTILIZED BY THE TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION.

(a) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment
of this Act, the Attorney General, acting through the Director of the
Terrorist Screening Center, shall complete a review, in coordination
with appropriate representatives from the Department of Homeland
Security and all other relevant Federal agencies, of the completeness
of the Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB) and the terrorist watchlist
utilized by the Administrator of the Transportation Security
Administration to determine if an individual who may seek to board a
United States-bound flight or a domestic flight and who poses a threat
to aviation or national security or a threat of terrorism and who is
known or suspected of being a member of a foreign terrorist
organization is included in such Database and on such watchlist.
(b) Report.--Not later than ten days after the completion of the review
under subsection (a), the Director of the Terrorist Screening Center
shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of
Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental
Affairs of the Senate a report on the findings of such review.

Mr. Katko. Thank you, Ms. Jackson Lee for being here,
showing an interest in the subcommittee's work and for your
thoughtful comments and input. The Chairman now recognizes Mr.
Ratcliffe for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I very much
appreciate you holding this hearing on the issue of security in
our airports. As you know, I am a former terrorism prosecutor,
a United States attorney that served after 9/11 and, you know,
very much believe in the mission of the TSA and believe--and I
am grateful for the testimony of the witnesses today to inform
the opinions of this subcommittee.
I am also, I will say, someone that goes through our
airports through the TSA PreCheck program and so you know, I am
very familiar with that.
Based on the testimony that I was able to review, the one
thing that I am concerned about, is some of the TSA's more
flexible programs that allow for real-time assessments of
potential risks as opposed to the TSA PreCheck, which allows
travellers like me who qualify and submit to a background check
to get through more expeditiously. I know, Mr. Roth, you
commented on that in your March 16 report and talked about the
incident involving a convicted felon who was improperly cleared
under one of these more flexible programs.
So, I guess let me just start there. I want to ask this
question of you, Mr. Fletcher is, you know, why is the TSA
using methods like Managed Inclusion and risk assessment to
expedite the TSA PreCheck line when individuals who opted in
the PreCheck program go through a more rigorous procedure to
gain the benefits of the program, what it offers?
Mr. Fletcher. Well, Congressman Ratcliffe, we talked a bit
about Managed Inclusion. We believe it has security value, but
we haven't spent a lot of time talking about risk assessment
and so in partial response to your question, risk assessment,
you know, one of the underlying principles behind TSA's risk-
based security approach, is that the vast majority of Americans
simply want to get from their destination--to their destination
as quickly, and as efficiently as possible and represent
essentially no threat to aviation. So, our bias has been
identifying ways to expedite the flow of legitimate travellers
and reducing that burden.
So, there is a balance that we have tried to take to, and a
measured approach that we have tried to take to all of our
programs. So, we look at an initiative like Managed Inclusion
or when we look at an initiative like risk assessment rules, we
consider the security effectiveness of the proposition. We
consider the operational efficiency impacts. We look at what
the impact on the passenger is. We look at what the impact on
industry may be, and then we consider the fiscal implications
and the policy implications. Is this the right public policy
for the agency to adopt? Is it going to be politically
acceptable by you, Members of our Oversight Committee? Is it
going to be politically palatable or socially palatable to the
American people?
So, when we look at risk assessment rules we take a
thoughtful approach to that. The underlying basis of our rules
is the age, gender, and itinerary information today that we
have been collecting since we implemented Secure Flight fully
in 2010.
We started that at the very beginning of the program with
the small slice of frequent fliers that we extended eligibility
for. But that is not the only review that we have done. We had
an independent analysis of that approach that was completed by
one of the Federally-funded research and development
corporations, Metron in 2012--or in 2013. We worked very
closely with the Civil Aviation Threat Working Group. These are
intelligence analysts from across 13 different intelligence
agencies, headed by the National counterterrorism. We have had
a review in 2014 by the Homeland Security Studies and Analysis
Institute. So there is--all of those independent reviews have
validated the fundamental principles behind that. They have
identified some opportunities for improvement, as has the
Inspector General and as has GAO. But, we believe very strongly
that the independent reviews that we have conducted, provide a
good security and a good value proposition for the American
people. So we have taken a thoughtful and measured approach to
both of those programs; much more so on risk assessment rules
than perhaps we have on Managed Inclusion, because we haven't
done as much of the external independent validation on that
initiative.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Fletcher. I see that my time
is expired, so I would love to ask a question of the Inspector
General, but I will yield back.
Mr. Katko. Thank you, Mr. Ratcliffe. We are going to have a
brief second round of questions here so you will have an
opportunity to have some follow-ups in a moment.
I now recognize myself for some follow-up questions, and I
apologize for the somewhat rapid-fire manner of these
questions, but these are questions I was hoping someone else
would ask. Since they didn't, I want to follow up with them.
First of all, on the convicted felon issue, just so that I am
clear, the convicted felon that was cleared, is there any doubt
in your mind that that was--let me rephrase the question.
Were they in error when they cleared that convicted felon
for that--to do a PreCheck?
Mr. Fletcher. Mr. Chairman, I believe the error was if they
presented a risk to aviation, if they were a convicted
terrorism operative, then they should have been appropriately
watch-listed as a domestic terror subject in the terror
screening database.
Mr. Katko. Okay, so obviously, this person would not have
passed the PreCheck status, correct?
Mr. Fletcher. Would not have been accepted through the
application enrollment program, yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. So it becomes self-evident that the risk
assessment approach and the Managed Inclusion approach aren't
as thorough and good as doing the PreCheck background check?
Mr. Fletcher. I would agree with that, yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Now, shifting gears for a moment here.
From a pure marketing standpoint, and PreCheck--part of
PreCheck is, indeed, marketing. It is fair to say, is it not,
that PreCheck, when someone has paid for PreCheck and they paid
for a product and they see people being taken out of other
lines that haven't paid for the product going into the line,
sometimes ahead of them, that is not good marketing from a
purely marketing standpoint?
Mr. Fletcher. Well, I look at it to a certain extent as a
free sample that you would get. So, it is a--and we know from
interviewing travellers that many of them that have had the
opportunity to experience expedited screening through Managed
Inclusion and risk assessment rules, have subsequently applied
and enrolled in the program. So, there is some benefit. It is
not all negative.
Mr. Katko. That is a fair point, but let's face it, though,
for the people who have paid for the program, it is a negative.
Mr. Fletcher. There are negative sentiments when I paid my
money and others are getting it for free, yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. Now, I want to ask this question only because I
have experienced it the last two times I have been at Kennedy
Airport and I am trying to get home, and there is a long line,
and there is no PreCheck line open.
So, the question I have for you is, how come PreCheck isn't
always open when they sell a product that people have paid for?
Mr. Fletcher. It is a matter of resource efficiency. There
are times of day at large airports, and many more times at
small airports where we simply don't have the passenger volume,
where we are not running Managed Inclusion operations, where we
can't sustain the dedicated TSA PreCheck lane.
One of the things we did in 2013 is we gave the Federal
security directors the flexibility to be able to shift standard
screening lanes to expedited screening lanes when the expedited
screening volume is there, and then you convert those lanes
back to standard screening lanes. So, we are trying to be good
stewards of the resources we have available to us. But in many
of those instances, we just simply don't have the volume to
sustain the expedited screening lane as a dedicated
proposition.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Mr. Roth, and Ms. Grover, I haven't
forgotten about you two and you will be actively participating
in the closed portion of this hearing. Trust me.
But I do want to ask you this, either one of you. Miss Rice
asked some very good questions about recurrent vetting, and Mr.
Fletcher talked about there is a cost associated with that. Do
you have any idea how costly it would be to do recurrent
vetting?
Mr. Roth. I don't have that answer for you, Congressman.
Ms. Grover. No, sir, but that is a potential vulnerability
that we have identified in our previous reports also, the
importance of recurrent vetting.
Mr. Katko. I think--I am very trained in asking questions
and not pontificating because, for 20 years, the judges would
kill me if I did that. But I will tell you that recurring
vetting, to me, is an important and serious issue. I would ask
either Mr. Roth or Ms. Grover or direct us to the appropriate
entity that can try and give us an idea of what that cost might
be, because I think that is an important factor to enter into
these things.
I think that recurrent vetting is, as this program matures
and it is certainly a program that is going to be around for a
while, as it matures and more time takes place between when
they are initially vetted and up to the present time, I think
that there is more opportunity for people to go bad, if you
will. Recurrent vetting might catch that. That is an important
part of that.
Also, Mr. Fletcher, let me just ask you as long as we are
on the subject, briefly, the question recurrent vetting, is it
fair to say that there is a science of developing with
algorithms, that can be designed, that might be able to do some
of this recurring vetting absent a criminal history check on a
regular basis without a lot of costs once the algorithm has
been established?
Mr. Fletcher. We have been working with several private-
sector companies, and DHS Science and Technology Directorate,
on evaluating risk algorithms that are not necessarily directly
related to criminality. But, we do believe, from my personal
discussions with the National Association of Professional
Background Screeners that--and in discussions with some
private-sector data brokers, that they can do a very effective
job of identifying criminality through publicly-available
electronic information without having to go through the
traditional fingerprint based NCIC check.
Mr. Katko. Thank you. A couple more quick questions and
then we will be able to wrap up with this portion of the
testimony. First of all, a straightforward question here. On
December 22, 2014 there was a Request for Proposal issued for
TSA PreCheck application expansions. That RFP sought private-
sector implication capabilities to expand the public's
enrollment access to PreCheck. The solicitation was taken down
on February 7, 2015. The question I ask is: Why?
Mr. Fletcher. There was at least one provision, Mr.
Chairman, in there that should not have gone out in the
original solicitation that we were concerned about. We are
currently working with the Department to go through that entire
RFP to make sure we get it right. I believe that that is our
best opportunity to shut down, dial back on Managed Inclusion
and risk assessment rules is third-party. But we have to get it
right in the first instance.
Mr. Katko. Do you have any idea what our time frame is
before that RFP will be back up and running?
Mr. Fletcher. Acting Administrator Carraway in his
testimony last week indicated perhaps as early as the end of
this week or next. I am hoping it will be soon.
Mr. Katko. Excellent. The last question I wanted to--series
of questions about marketing and enrollment for PreCheck. I
have talked to airport operators and they have expressed a
strong interest in providing kiosks, even at their own costs,
so people can come and sign up for PreCheck in their airports.
They have also offered to provide space in their airports to do
the follow-up vetting from a PreCheck at their facilities. To
me, that sounds like no-brainers. We have--every single airport
in the country should have the option of being able to do one
of those--have one of those kiosks to sign up.
What I would envision would be a kiosk where they come in,
they sign up, somebody is manning the kiosk. They pay the fee.
They fill out the form. It goes to TSA and then they do their
work. What do you think about that?
Mr. Fletcher. I think those are options we are hoping--
innovative solutions we are hoping to get in response to the
RFP when we get that reposted. Right now, our exclusive
contract with Morpho Trust. It is really the relationship
between the airport and our contractor that manages the
existing enrollment application.
Many airports have been very generous with space. Some of
our major airlines have leased space on Morpho Trust's behalf
to facilitate the enrollment process. Other airports have been
resistant and are waiting for opportunities to be more directly
involved as they have reviewed our proposals.
Mr. Katko. Just so I am clear, though, so you are saying
though, that you have a contract with a vendor that is kind-of
preventing from you developing this program further?
Mr. Fletcher. Right now the application program that exists
today is through a single vendor, Morpho Trust, that runs all
of our vetting application programs. The intent of third-party,
the RFP, is to broadly expand that to be able to take advantage
of those other opportunities that you just discussed and we are
not there yet.
Mr. Katko. Is there anything in that contract with that
vendor that prevents--that would prevent these airports from
opening these kiosks and collecting these applications?
Mr. Fletcher. We actually had that discussion this morning
about what changes to the contract that we can make to--I will
say loosen some of the contractual restrictions or provide more
latitude for the contractor to move forward. Today there is
nothing to prevent an airport from entering into an agreement
with Morpho Trust. Many of them--I think 35 or more already
have.
Mr. Katko. Excellent. Okay, thank you.
I want to also note that from a convenience standpoint for
passengers, the PreCheck is not exactly where it should be.
Now, I will give you an example. My understanding from the
PreCheck process in Syracuse is that if you want to get
screened, do the follow-up in-person interview, you have to
drive to Oswego, New York to get the interview.
To me, that is wildly inconvenient, and I would like to see
a process whereby passengers can get the follow-up interviews
at the airports. Because the idea is, if you have frequent
travellers, and those are the ones you want to target for
PreCheck and there are millions of frequent travellers in this
country, why not make it as absolutely convenient and user-
friendly as possible? They can sign up at the airport. They can
do the follow-up interview at the airport while they are
waiting for a plane or getting off a plane. That makes much
more sense than driving 45 minutes to an hour north to Oswego,
and if you know Oswego in the wintertime, you think Syracuse
gets a lot of snow. They get a lot more snow than that, so it
is not always a good idea to drive up there. So, I just want to
let you know, we going to be looking into that as well.
Mr. Fletcher. Yes, sir.
Mr. Katko. Okay. Do you have any questions?
Miss Rice. The rest of my questions are going to be at our
closed-door session, if that is okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Katko. I ask unanimous consent that the remainder of
the hearing be closed to the public under rule XI, clause
(2)(g)(2) of the Rules of the House because disclosure of such
testimony, evidence, or other matters would endanger National
security or compromise sensitive law enforcement information.
Is there any objection to the motion to close the hearing?
Hearing none, the motion is agreed to and the subcommittee
will recess briefly to move to a secure location to continue
its business.
[Whereupon, at 3:30 p.m., the subcommittee proceeded in
closed session, and was subsequently adjourned at 5:55 p.m.]

[all]
