- COMBATTING TERRORIST TRAVEL: DOES THE VISA WAIVER PROGRAM KEEP OUR NATION SAFE?

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

COMBATTING TERRORIST TRAVEL: DOES THE VISA WAIVER PROGRAM KEEP OUR
NATION SAFE?

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
BORDER AND
MARITIME SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 17, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-8

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

94-579 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2015
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi       Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Filemon Vela, Texas
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Curt Clawson, Florida                Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Katko, New York                 Norma J. Torres, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON BORDER AND MARITIME SECURITY

Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Filemon Vela, Texas
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Loretta Sanchez, California
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Brian Higgins, New York
Will Hurd, Texas                     Norma J. Torres, California
Martha McSally, Arizona              Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Michael T. McCaul, Texas (ex             (ex officio)
officio)
Paul L. Anstine, Subcommittee Staff Director
Deborah Jordan, Subcommittee Clerk
Alison Northrop, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Candice S. Miller, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Michigan, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Border and Maritime Security...................................     1
The Honorable Filemon Vela, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Texas, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Border and
Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Dr. Marc E. Frey, Senior Director, Steptoe and Johnson, LLP:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mr. Roger J. Dow, President and Chief Executive Officer, U.S.
Travel Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Dr. Steven P. Bucci, Director, The Douglas and Sarah Allison
Center for Foreign and National Security Policy, The Heritage
Foundation:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Mr. Brian Michael Jenkins, Senior Adviser to the RAND President,
The RAND Corporation:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    22

For the Record

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
H.R. 48........................................................    35

COMBATTING TERRORIST TRAVEL: DOES THE VISA WAIVER PROGRAM KEEP OUR
NATION SAFE?

----------

Tuesday, March 17, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Border and Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:00 a.m., in
Room 311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Candice S. Miller
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Miller, Barletta, Hurd, McSally,
Vela, Jackson Lee, and Torres.
Mrs. Miller. The Committee on Homeland Security, our
Subcommittee on Border and Maritime Security, will come to
order. The subcommittee is meeting today to examine the Visa
Waiver Program and its effect on terrorist travel.
We are pleased today to be joined by Dr. Marc Frey of the
Steptoe Johnson law firm, Mr. Roger Dow of the U.S. Travel
Association, Dr. Steven Bucci of the Heritage Foundation, and
Mr. Brian Michael Jenkins of the RAND Corporation. I will
formally introduce them in just a moment. But I would like to
make my opening statement first, myself and the Ranking Member.
Over the past year, the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant or ISIL and several other extremist groups have
attracted tens of thousands of young men and women to join
their ranks; many of whom hold passports in France, the United
Kingdom, Belgium, Canada, and other Western nations, including
United States. Many foreign fighters could be just one flight
away, bringing with them the skills, training, ideology, and
commitment to killing Americans that they have learned
overseas.
The threat that these foreign fighters pose is significant
and growing in large part because the terrorists with Western
passports are eligible for visa-free travel to the United
States through the Visa Waiver Program. If we do not have good
intelligence on the travel of these fighters or our allies in
the Visa Waiver Program are not appropriately sharing what they
know, then U.S. citizens could be at risk.
Last year, this subcommittee held a hearing on the Visa
Waiver Program, where we heard from Government witnesses. We
have called this hearing today to get an independent look at
this program from outside experts. The Visa Waiver Program was
designed to facilitate travel, to reduce the burden on the
State Department, and to help encourage travel to the United
States. However, after the tragic events of September 11, 2001,
the program evolved to be a significant counterterrorism tool
by simultaneously facilitating legitimate trade and travel.
Now, let me just state from the outset that I believe that
this program is very effective at both facilitating travel and
increasing our National security. Through the addition of the
Electronic System for Travel Authorization--that we call ESTA--
the information that CBP knows about a traveler before they get
on a plane significantly increases our security.
Some of my colleagues have called for the Visa Waiver
Program to be canceled or suspended. I personally think that is
misguided. Millions of travelers fly using VWP every year, and
stopping this program would bring cost to our economy and CBP
would lose an important source of information for screening
travelers entering the United States. In addition, information-
sharing agreements, which are a prerequisite for membership,
are also a key part of the intelligence that keeps Americans
safe.
Make no mistake, terrorists are indeed looking for
weaknesses in our defenses, and we have to prevent them from
succeeding. Rather than end this valuable program, we need to
continually evaluate the program to make sure it adequately
balances our economic and security needs, especially in the
light of the growing threat of foreign fighters entering the
United States. Expansion of the program should only be done
when it aligns with the security and economic interests of the
United States, once a viable biometric exit system is in place,
which can lead to more accurate reporting of visa overstay
rates by our country.
To that end, I continue to call on this administration to
publically release visa overstay rates, which are currently
obtained through the flawed biographic system. While I am not
surprised by the administration's lack of transparency on this,
I am disappointed. The visa overstay report was promised to
this Congress by Secretary Napolitano. While complete, the
report continues to be held up by the White House. I urge the
release of this report. The delay only serves to reinforce our
belief that a biometric system would produce more timely and
accurate results and could lead to expansion of this program
for some of our Nation's most trusted allies.
Earlier this year, I introduced H.R. 158, the Visa Waiver
Program Improvement Act that I believe will help to minimize
the ability of terrorists to exploit the program. The bill
allows the Secretary of Homeland Security to suspend
participation of countries in the VWP if they do not share
critical terrorism and foreign traveler data with the United
States consistent with the program's underlying agreements.
This bill also requires the Department of Homeland to
consider collecting additional pieces of information on ESTA
applications to better screen foreign travelers, and requires
an annual intelligence assessment conducted by the director of
national intelligence and DHS to assess airport, passport, and
travel document standards. This sounds like common sense. I
think it is. Was very pleased that Secretary Johnson also
called for adding of additional data elements to the ESTA
application in November after this bill was initially
introduced that called for a look at additional data elements
to be considered.
Although CBP continuously vets all visa and ESTA applicants
against our terrorist holdings, that information is imperfect
if we do not have a complete picture of an individual's travel
route. Collecting more information up-front will be helpful to
do just that. Critical information sharing, especially with our
European allies, is vital to help combat the threat of foreign
fighters bound for the United States.
Unfortunately, Europe as a whole has been reluctant
sometimes to share certain passenger name record data or PNR
data with the United States, and such a gap puts United States
citizens at risk. We recently learned that it was only after a
prominent terrorist attack overseas that a Visa Waiver country
provided the Department of Homeland Security names of
individuals which pose a terror concern. Some of the names
shared were not even on our radar screen previously.
Unfortunately, this demonstrates that we still have an
information-sharing problem with some of our closest allies.
Our bill gives the Department of Homeland the leverage it needs
to make sure the information critical to our homeland security
is being shared appropriately. As we have noted on many
occasions, the 9/11 Commission was crystal-clear on this point
when they said for terrorists, travel documents are as
important as weapons.
So I certainly look forward to hearing from our witness
today on the value of the Visa Waiver Program and what further
changes we should look at to strengthen the Visa Waiver Program
to combat the threat of foreign fighters. This subcommittee has
a long record of interest and oversight when it comes to visa
and travel document security. The reason for that, obviously,
is very clear. Many terrorist plots and attacks have been
successful or nearly successful because of holes in our visa
and border security defenses. Defeating terrorists' ability to
move internationally has long been a focus area for this
subcommittee. There certainly is more that we can do and need
to do to prevent attacks and limit terrorist mobility. That is
the purpose of our hearing today.
The Chairman now recognizes the Ranking Minority of this
subcommittee, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Vela. Let me just
mention that I am very, very delighted to have him serve as the
Ranking Member. I certainly am looking forward to working very
closely with him as we go through the 114th Congress on issues
of bipartisan concern. There is nothing more concerning,
certainly, than providing for the common defense, which is
actually in the preamble of our Constitution, and is a
principle reason for this committee. Thank you.
Mr. Vela. I agree, Chairman Miller, that this issue is one
that has bipartisan support, because we all know how important
it is to protect our country against terrorism. I want to thank
you for holding today's hearing regarding the security of Visa
Waiver Program.
As Chairman Miller and I both represent border districts
with maritime interests, albeit on different borders, I believe
we have many areas of mutual interest and concern to address in
our work as this subcommittee moves forward.
Today, we are focusing on a border security issue of a
different kind than what we are used to discussing; the
security of a program that facilitates the travel of millions
of visitors to this country each year, the Visa Waiver Program.
In fact, with 38 countries currently participating in the
program, about 40 percent of all overseas visitors enter the
United States without a visa pursuant to the Visa Waiver
Program.
Unfortunately, there is a growing concern that the Visa
Waiver Program could be exploited by terrorists, and
particularly those holding Western passports, who could attempt
to travel to this country under this program.
With direction and support from Congress, in recent years
the Department of Homeland Security has worked to strength the
security of the Visa Waiver Program through the Electronic
System for Travel Authorization and its other predeparture
passenger screening programs. These programs complement and are
supported by information-sharing agreements with Visa Waiver
Program partnerships--partners that provide Department of
Homeland Security with data to vet travelers more effectively.
With thousands of foreign fighters traveling to and from
Syria, some of whom hold Western passports, concerns about the
security of the Visa Waiver Program are not entirely unfounded.
I hope our witnesses can share with us their perspectives on
whether the Visa Waiver Program is secure or if Congress and
the Department of Homeland Security need to do more to shore up
this very important program.
As a Member representing a border district, I am keenly
aware of the importance of international travel and trade to
our Nation and its economy. I believe I join many of my
colleagues in the hope that we can find a way to ensure the
security of the Visa Waiver Program, while continuing to
welcome visitors under the program to the United States.
Again, I thank the witnesses for joining us. I look forward
to our discussion today and to a productive Congress for this
subcommittee.
[The statement of Ranking Member Vela follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Filemon Vela
March 17, 2015
Thank you for holding today's hearing regarding the security of the
Visa Waiver Program (VWP).
As Chairman Miller and I both represent border districts with
maritime interests, albeit on different borders, I believe we have many
areas of mutual interest and concern to address in our work.
Today, we are focusing on a border security issue of a different
kind than what we are used to discussing--the security of a program
that facilitates the travel of millions of visitors to this country
each year, the Visa Waiver Program (VWP).
In fact, with 38 countries currently participating in the program,
about 40 percent of all overseas visitors enter the United States
without a visa pursuant to the VWP.
Unfortunately, there is growing concern that the VWP could be
exploited by terrorists, and particularly those holding Western
passports, who could attempt to travel to this country under program.
With direction and support from Congress, in recent years DHS has
worked to strengthen the security of the VWP, through the Electronic
System for Travel Authorization (ESTA) and its other pre-departure
passenger screening programs.
These programs complement and are supported by information-sharing
agreements with VWP partners that provide DHS with data to vet
travelers more effectively.
Still, with thousands of foreign fighters traveling to and from
Syria, some of whom hold Western passports, concerns about the security
of the VWP are not entirely unfounded.
I hope our witnesses can share with us their perspectives on
whether the VWP is secure, or if Congress and DHS need to do more to
shore up this important program.
As a Member representing a border district, I am keenly aware of
the importance of international travel and trade to our Nation and its
economy.
I believe I join many of my colleagues in the hope that we can find
a way to ensure the security of the VWP while continuing to welcome
visitors under the program to the United States.

Mrs. Miller. Thank you very much.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
March 17, 2015
I would also like to thank the witnesses for appearing today to
testify about the Visa Waiver Program (VWP) and its implications for
our Nation's security. Since its establishment in the wake of the
terrorist attacks of 9/11, this committee has been actively engaged in
helping to address the threat of terrorist travel. Our focus has
included addressing the potential security vulnerabilities of the VWP
and ways to prevent terrorists from exploiting the program.
For example, as Chairman I authored a key provision of the 9/11 Act
requiring the implementation of an Electronic System for Travel
Authorization (ESTA) to provide DHS with more information about VWP
travelers prior to their departure for the United States.
From the inception of the ESTA program in August 2008, CBP has
approved over 80 million ESTAs but denied over 4,300 applications as a
result of vetting against the Terrorist Screening Database. Also, CBP
has denied over 35,000 applications for individuals who applied for an
ESTA using a passport reported lost or stolen.
Recently, the VWP has been the subject of renewed attention due to
concerns about the potential threat posed by foreign fighters with the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), and particularly those
holding Western passports who could attempt to travel under the VWP.
In response to this foreign fighter threat, late last year DHS took
the step of enhancing the ESTA program by requiring travelers to
provide additional data elements on their ESTA applications. This
additional data allows DHS to better vet VWP travelers prior to
departure to the United States, in turn better securing the VWP. It is
imperative that DHS and their Federal partners continue to work with
Congress to identify and address any new or outstanding vulnerabilities
within the VWP. At the same time, it is important not to focus
exclusively on Western foreign fighters and the VWP such that we lose
sight of other individuals who may seek to do us harm via othermeans.
Finally, we should remain mindful that the overwhelming majority of
travelers to the United States, whether under the VWP or otherwise, are
legitimate travelers coming to this country for business or pleasure.
About 19 million people from VWP countries visited the United States in
fiscal year 2012, accounting for 40 percent of all international
visitors. We welcome their visits, embrace the cultural exchange, and
recognize their important contributions to America's economy.
Today, I look forward to hearing from the witnesses about their
perspectives on VWP as it currently exists, and whether the program can
be made more secure while continuing to allow us to welcome visitors
from around the world.

Mrs. Miller. Again, as I mentioned, we are pleased to be
joined by four distinguished witnesses to discuss today's very
important issue.
First of all, Dr. Marc Frey is a senior director in the
Washington office of Steptoe and Johnson, which is an
international law firm. Prior to joining Steptoe, Dr. Frey held
several senior positions at the Department of Homeland
Security, including the director of the Visa Waiver Program
from 2007 to 2010. In that role, he oversaw the development and
implementation of the VWP and directed the successful effort to
enhance its security futures. Dr. Frey also serves as a senior
associate with the Center for Strategic and International
Studies and is a member of the American Council on Germany and
the Atlantic Council of the United States. We welcome you, sir.
Mr. Roger Dow is the president and CEO of the U.S. Travel
Association, the National association representing all segments
of travel if the United States. In this role, Mr. Dow leads
U.S. travel efforts to advocate for improved travel
facilitation and visa reform and to provide travel research and
analysis. We welcome you, sir.
Dr. Steven P. Bucci is the director of the Doug and Sarah
Allison Center for Foreign and National Security Policy Studies
at the Heritage Foundation, a position that he has held since
2012. Prior to working at the Heritage Foundation, Dr. Bucci
spent many years in the military, including service as the
commander of the 3rd Battalion, 5th Special Forces. In 2001, he
assumed his position as military assistant to Secretary Donald
Rumsfeld in the Pentagon, where he was stationed on the
terrorist attacks of September 11. We welcome you. Thank you
for your service to this Nation.
Mr. Brian Michael Jenkins is a senior adviser to the
president of the RAND Corporation and author of numerous books,
reports, and articles on terrorism and terrorism-related
topics. Mr. Jenkins is also a decorated combat veteran, having
served with the 5th Special Forces Group in Vietnam. Welcome
home. In 1996, Mr. Jenkins was appointed to the White House
Commission on aviation safety and security. From 1999 to 2000,
he served as adviser to the National Commission on Terrorism.
In 2000, was appointed to the U.S. Comptroller General's
Advisory Board. So our witnesses' full statement will appear in
the record.
The Chairman now recognizes Dr. Frey for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF MARC E. FREY, SENIOR DIRECTOR, STEPTOE AND
JOHNSON, LLP

Mr. Frey. Thank you, Chairman Miller. Good morning. It is
my pleasure to be here this morning to talk about the Visa
Waiver Program and be part of this distinguished panel.
I think to start off, what I would like to say is--and I
guess this is a good way to start off--is to agree with you and
agree with the Ranking Member to answer the question that the
hearing's title posed, does the Visa Waiver Program keep us
safe? I think answer to that is unequivocally yes. It is a
critical counterterrorism and security tool for the United
States that also facilitates travel. I would like to spend a
little bit of time this morning talking specifically about why
that is.
Because as you also mentioned, this is a timely hearing.
Given the threats we are facing today from foreign fighters in
particular, it is our responsibility to continue to evaluate
programs like the VWP to continue to ensure that they are
meeting the current threat environment. The good news with
respect to the VWP in particular is there is a history of
Congress and the Executive branch doing just that; working
together to periodically reform and modernize the program to
adapt to current threats. The most significant reform, and the
one that is the basis for most of what we will be talking about
today, was the reforms implemented in 2007 under the 9/11
Commission Act, which produced ESTA, produced information-
sharing agreements and other things we will go into.
But before doing that, I would like to, you know, take a
little bit of time just to talk about what the Visa Waiver
Program is and, perhaps equally important, what it isn't.
Because there does seem to be a perception, as I think you also
said, Chairman Miller, that these people are just one flight
away. In one sense that is, of course, true. But a statement
like that obscures all of the work and all of the screening
that DHS in particular and CBP and other agencies in the U.S.
Government do to make sure that we are vetting Visa Waiver
Program travelers appropriately.
So when the Visa Waiver Program waives the consular
interview portion, it makes up for it with a whole host of
other security requirements. One of these, of course, is ESTA,
the Electronic System for Travel Authorization, which we have
talked about, which does individualized prescreening and
vetting of Visa Waiver Program travelers. That vetting is
recurrent. So it is not that you get your ESTA and then you are
good for the eligibility period. It is that ESTA continually
vets applicants' data against lists and derogatory information,
and ESTAs can can be revoked if new information comes to light.
The second piece of the Visa Waiver Program that is
important in this context is the information-sharing and
intelligence-sharing agreements that we talked about. Those are
particularly important because the benefit or the information
that the United States Government receives from those
agreements, is fed into the ESTA vetting process. So that
ensures to the extent we can that we have as much information
on bad actors in foreign countries that we need to do our
screening.
But there are two other parts that I think are also worth
mentioning as to why the Visa Waiver Program helps keep us safe
and is a key security program. The first of these is secure
passports. The Visa Waiver Program mandates that travelers
travel on electronic passports. These are passports that
contain the biometric chip that also have the information, a
digital paragraph, increasingly fingerprints, that matches the
bio page. These are much, much harder to forge and to use
fraudulently than regular passports. It is only within the
context of the VWP that travelers are required to use these. So
we have a much better confirmation of identity.
The other piece that I think is worth talking about are the
regular DHS-led audits of Visa Waiver Program countries. It is
a pretty--having led and participated in a number of these
audits, it is a pretty remarkable tool that allows a team of
DHS experts, supplemented by personnel from other agencies as
appropriate, to visit a country and spend up to a week or 10
days or so reviewing security standards, border security
standards, aviation security standards, passport standards,
talking to their counterterrorism and security and law
enforcement officials, and really giving U.S. Government
visibility into the security practices of these countries.
To the extent the Department finds particular issues or
items that are not up to our standards, mitigation measures can
be both recommended and, in certain cases, insisted upon. It is
a collaborative effort. But it is one where we have a
remarkable insight into how other countries do their security,
including in this context how other countries are able to both
identify and track potential radicalized individuals who may
become foreign fighters.
So in that sense, it is a very powerful tool. Those four
elements really do work together to make the Visa Waiver
Program important and an important security tool. That said, it
can be evaluated. It should be evaluated, as we are doing
today. So I think this hearing serves an excellent purpose. I
think some of the reforms in the Visa Waiver Improvement Act of
2015 meet that objective. As you said, they are sensible
reforms. They are things DHS should be looking at. In some
cases, they are things that DHS is doing already. I think that
should be encouraged.
I look forward to answering more of your questions going
forward about the program and about the H.R. 158, the Visa
Waiver Improvement Act, in particular. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Frey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Marc E. Frey
March 17, 2015
Thank you Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Vela, and Members of the
subcommittee, for this opportunity to testify on the Visa Waiver
Program (VWP) and its important role in keeping our Nation safe and
secure. My name is Marc Frey. I am a senior director at Steptoe &
Johnson LLP, an international law firm. Prior to joining Steptoe I
served in several positions at the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS), including as director of the Visa Waiver Program. In that role I
oversaw the successful effort to enhance the security of and expand the
VWP and managed the security assessments of member countries.
The unequivocal answer to the question posed by in the title of
this hearing is ``Yes.'' The Visa Waiver Program enhances U.S. security
and is a critical element of the layered border security approach the
United States has implemented since September 11, 2001. The VWP helps
to ensure that our country remains open for travel and trade while
preventing terrorists and criminals from crossing our border.
Following the terrorist attacks in Paris earlier this year
commentators have speculated on the possibility of an attack on U.S.
soil by terrorists possessing passports from France or other VWP
countries. Many in the media and elsewhere labor under the
misapprehension that security standards are looser for VWP travelers
than for those traveling with a visa, and that this poses a threat to
U.S. security. Concerns have been raised, for example, about the
ability of foreign fighters with ``Western'' passports to enter the
United States under the VWP by circumventing the consular interview.
Under the VWP, DHS waives the ``B'' nonimmigrant visa requirement
for aliens traveling from the 38 approved countries, permitting stays
of up to 90 days for business or tourism. A consular interview is not
required. But, that does not mean that DHS waives security requirements
for these travelers. To the contrary, the Department mandates
additional, more stringent security requirements, for both the
individual traveler and his or her home country. The result is a system
that today provides as much security against terrorist or criminal
travelers as the visa system.
Like any successful security program, VWP has been closely reviewed
over the years, periodically undergoing reform and modernization to
ensure that it responded to emerging threats and challenges. In the
face of today's complex and persistent threat environment, we can and
should identify ways to ensure the VWP's security standards remain
robust. The ``Visa Waiver Program Improvement Act of 2015'' (H.R. 158)
includes a number of provisions that further this objective.
evolution of the vwp
Since its inception in the late 1980s, the VWP has evolved into an
essential tool for increasing global security standards, advancing
information sharing, strengthening international relationships, and
promoting legitimate trade and travel to the United States. Over the
past decade in particular, Congress and the Executive branch have
worked together to implement a number of enhancements to the VWP to
address evolving threats to international travel and to the United
States homeland. Therefore, although critics of the VWP often continue
to cite the example of the ``Shoe Bomber'' Richard Reid, who as a
British citizen traveled under the VWP in December 2001, the measures
put in place over the past dozen years have successfully addressed this
risk to date.
For example, in 2003 new requirements were put in place to tighten
passport security standards for VWP travelers and to increase the
frequency with which countries are formally reviewed for their
designation status. Furthermore, in order to align with the
recommendations of the 9/11 Commission, Congress mandated additional
security requirements to VWP, including standards for secure travel
documents, individualized pre-screening of travelers, bilateral
information-sharing arrangements, prompt reporting of lost and stolen
passports, and a threat assessment conducted by the director of
national intelligence. Appropriately, these changes were enacted as
part of the Secure Travel and Counterterrorism Partnership Act of 2007.
key security components of the vwp
As described below, the VWP enhances U.S. security in four mutually
reinforcing ways:

It enables individualized and recurrent screening of
travelers against law enforcement and security databases;

It mandates bilateral and multilateral information and
intelligence sharing;

It requires secure passports to confirm identity; and

It permits regular audits of the security standards of
participating countries.
First, the VWP screens all travelers against multiple law
enforcement and security databases, including the Terrorist Screening
Database, before they depart for the United States. Using the on-line
Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA), a VWP traveler is
required to provide biographic information (including name, date of
birth, and passport number) as well as his or her destination address
in the United States. The traveler is also required to answer questions
regarding communicable diseases, arrests, convictions for certain
crimes, and past history of visa revocation or deportation. In November
2014, DHS expanded the personal data required for an ESTA application,
to include national identity numbers for those who have them and data
from a second passport if that passport is not from a VWP country,
among other data elements. As a result, ESTA functions as a powerful
screening tool, enabling recurrent, individualized vetting of
travelers. Travelers without an ESTA approval cannot board a flight to
the United States.
Second, the VWP mandates robust information and intelligence
sharing between the United States and its VWP partners, including
agreements to share information on known or potential terrorists and
criminals and to report lost and stolen passport (LASP) data to
INTERPOL. Supplementing the U.S. Government's ``watch lists'' and other
databases with these three pieces of information from a traveler's home
government greatly enhances DHS's ability to identify and stop
travelers who pose a threat. Likewise, information the United States
provides VWP member countries under these agreements helps their
governments identify and disrupt terrorist and criminal travel to,
from, and within their own borders.
Third, all VWP travelers must use secure travel documents that meet
internationally recognized standards, which allows for easier detection
of forged or fraudulent passports. The majority of VWP travelers are
required to use electronic passports (e-passports), which have an
embedded chip that includes the bearer's biometric information.\1\ At
the port of entry, the biographic and biometric data contained in the
electronic chip is compared to both the traveler and the travel
document being presented. There are many other layers of technical
security in the e-passport production process and the document itself
that make duplication or forgery much less likely.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ All passports issued after October 26, 2006, presented by
aliens entering under the VWP must be electronic passports.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Lastly, VWP countries are required to undergo periodic eligibility
reviews designed to ensure that VWP membership does not compromise U.S.
security, law enforcement, and immigration enforcement interests. These
comprehensive assessments are conducted by DHS, with the assistance of
other U.S. Government agencies as appropriate. Critically, these
reviews involve a site visit during which a team of U.S. Government
subject-matter experts examines the country's security and law
enforcement capabilities and procedures. Among other issues, a site
visit focuses on the existence of radicalized groups in the country and
the government's efforts to address this concern. The findings from the
site visit form the core of the comprehensive DHS evaluation of a
country's fitness to continue participating in the VWP. Should DHS
identify any issues or concerns during the course of its review, it can
flag them for follow-up and/or propose and insist on mitigation
measures.
To complement these reviews and to ensure recommended mitigation
measures are carried out, DHS has developed a vigorous monitoring
process to ensure awareness of changing conditions in VWP countries.
This monitoring process includes regular consultation with U.S. law
enforcement and intelligence agencies, as well as frequent
communication with U.S. embassies abroad and foreign embassies in
Washington for updates on law enforcement or security concerns related
to the VWP. Overall, no other program provides the U.S. Government with
the opportunity to conduct as far-reaching and consequential audits of
foreign security standards, ensuring alignment with our high standards
for managing risk.
Under current law, DHS has the authority to immediately terminate a
country's membership if an emergency occurs in the country that
threatens the law enforcement or security interest of the United
States. The director of national intelligence is also able to recommend
immediate suspension to DHS if any current and credible threat poses an
imminent danger to the United States or its citizens and originates
from a country participating in the VWP. H.R. 158 helpfully supplements
these authorities by providing explicitly for program suspension should
DHS, in consultation with the State Department, determine that a member
country is not meeting its information-sharing obligations.
That the modernized VWP enhances U.S. security is widely recognized
by security experts across the political spectrum. The last three
secretaries of homeland security, for example, have praised the
program's contribution to U.S. and international security. Indeed, for
precisely that same reason, both the Bush and Obama administrations
have added countries to the VWP. The VWP's security components make so
much sense, in fact, that they are setting global standards for
countering terrorist travel. A September 2014 U.N. Security Council
Resolution on security measures to better track and deter terrorist
travel activity reflects practices the VWP has enforced for member
countries since 2008.
the vwp and u.s. border security
Because of its strong security components, the VWP has become an
integral part of the U.S. Government's ability to identify security or
other risks associated with travelers at the earliest possible point
and push-out our ``virtual'' border. In particular, the VWP helps
answer the three key questions necessary to implement an effective
risk-based border screening system:

``Who is a threat?''--U.S. officials need to identify known
and suspected terrorists as well as other individuals who may
pose a threat.

``Is the person coming to the United States?''--U.S.
officials need to know, as early as possible, if the traveler
should be examined more closely.

``Is the person really who he says he is?''--U.S. officials
determine if the traveler is presenting fraudulent documents.
Who Is a Threat?
The U.S. Government collects and maintains an array of information
designed to identify those associated with terrorism or other illicit
activities. These ``watch lists'' use identifiers--primarily
biographic-based, but increasingly incorporating biometrics--to support
border-screening protocols and procedures. However, when it comes to
identifying dangerous individuals from abroad, the U.S. Government is
not the only, or necessarily the best, source of information. In fact,
if you wanted to identify potentially dangerous individuals from a
particular country, say the United Kingdom, your first stop would not
be Washington; it would be London. Many European countries have rapidly
growing ethnic and religious immigrant communities, a small minority of
which has the potential to become radicalized. It makes sense then that
the person's home country is the best source of information about which
of its citizens or residents is most likely to pose a risk to the
United States. This kind of unprecedented bilateral and multi-lateral
information sharing mandated by the VWP, along with the routine audits
and inspections made possible by the program improves the U.S.
Government's overall ability to identify bad actors and activity.
Is the Person Coming to the United States?
DHS begins the screening process well before a potentially risky
traveler reaches the U.S. border; in fact, DHS begins the process
before the traveler even arrives at an airport through ESTA. In
addition to the ESTA requirement for VWP travelers, DHS requires
airlines to provide a copy of their passenger manifests and data from
their reservation files. This information--which applies to all
travelers and is provided to DHS a minimum of 72 hours in advance--
helps the agency determine who to allow on-board a U.S.-bound plane,
who requires further screening and investigation upon arrival, and who
should be turned away and referred to appropriate law enforcement
personnel. These advance-screening measures give DHS a better, more
informed understanding of who is coming to the United States.
Is the Person Really Who He Says He Is?
No amount of ``watch listing'' and passenger screening will detect
terrorists if they are able to travel on an assumed identity with
fraudulently obtained or fake documents. In order to verify that people
are who they say they are when they travel, DHS insists on high
standards for documents acceptable for entry to the United States.
These standards are highest for VWP travelers. For example, the
electronic passports mandated by the VWP enable DHS to incorporate
biometric verification--digital photographs and, increasingly,
fingerprints--in the screening process to confirm that the person
presenting the document is the person that the document describes. And,
DHS routinely audits the document production and issuance process in
VWP countries to ensure standards are being met. In other words, VWP
makes it harder to enter the United States using fraudulent documents
and forged identities.
These three elements--who's risky, who's coming here, and who's
who--work together both prior to take-off and at the port of entry to
help U.S. officials identify terrorists and criminals and prevent them
from traveling here.
strengthening the vwp
It is essential that we continually look to identify possible
enhancements to the VWP in the face of current threats, much like DHS
continually evaluates participating countries and recommends
improvements to their security postures. In addition to program
suspension authority, the Visa Waiver Program Improvement Act of 2015
proposes other sensible ways to strengthen the program and build on its
successes, such as requiring an evaluation of ESTA and making a handful
of discretionary considerations mandatory. However, any measure that
would curtail the program even temporarily would be damaging and
wrongheaded. Rather than enhance U.S. security, such a step would
undermine it, resulting in the loss of significant leverage over the
security standards of both current and prospective members, to say
nothing of the severe economic and diplomatic consequences.
For current VWP members, suspension of the program would undermine
current information and intelligence-sharing mechanisms and deprive the
United States of visibility into their security practices, including
those to prevent radicalization and identify and track foreign
fighters. It would also undermine relationships with our closest allies
in the face of common threats ranging from ISIS to a resurgent Russia.
For prospective members, the disappearance of the program would remove
a powerful and proven incentive to elevate security standards and to
enhance cooperation with the United States on security matters.
While emotional responses often occur in times of heightened
security concerns, any discussion of the VWP and U.S. security must
remain focused on the facts. And the facts are that the VWP has proven
to be an effective leverage point for raising and maintaining security
standards while providing unprecedented levels of information sharing
and access, allowing the United States to better manage risk. To return
to the question posed in the hearing's title, the Visa Waiver Program
undoubtedly has helped to keep our Nation safe. Implementing sensible
enhancements, such as those proposed by H.R. 158, can ensure that it
will continue to do so.
Again, thank you for inviting me to testify today. I look forward
to answering any questions the subcommittee may have.

Mrs. Miller. Thank you.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Dow for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF ROGER J. DOW, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, U.S. TRAVEL ASSOCIATION

Mr. Dow. Thank you. That is very nice of you. Thank you.
The travel industry's top priority is ensuring that
travelers are safe and secure. Without security, there is no
travel. If travelers don't feel safe, they will stay home. The
economic benefits of travel are well-documented. Since
submitting my written testimony, I have now received the
numbers for 2014. Direct travel spending in the United States
was $927 billion. That generated $2.1 trillion in economic
output and more than $141 million in tax revenue. Travel
directly employed 8 million Americans is and a top-10 employer
in 49 States and the District of Columbia.
In-bound long-haul or overseas international travel is an
extremely lucrative segment for the United States. The Visa
Waiver Program is the largest source of overseas visitors--20.3
million, or 60 percent, of all overseas visitors arrived
through the Visa Waiver Program in 2014. Last year, they
generated $190 billion in economic output and supported nearly
1 million good American jobs.
Expansion of the Visa Waiver Program has yielded
substantial economic benefit. Following the recent admissions
of Taiwan and Chile, travel from there rose sharply. This is no
surprise, given the staggering increase of visitors from South
Korea since its inclusion in 2008. In 2014, a record number of
South Korean visitors, 1.5 million, visited the United States,
which is a 91 percent increase since they entered the program.
They spend $5.1 billion, which is 64 percent higher than 2008,
and supported 43,000 good American jobs. Travel is the largest
export now from South Korea, constituting 11 percent of the
total exports to that country.
When countries enter the Visa Waiver Program, they add
billions of dollars to the economy and tens of thousands of
good American jobs. Speaking of jobs, the travel industry was
hit hard by the economic downturn. But we are a very resilient
industry. We helped lead the recovery by expanding employment
36 percent faster than the rest of the economy. Largely as a
result of the Visa Waiver Program, travel is our Nation's No. 1
services export, generating $76 billion in 2014.
While these economic figures are very positive, they only
tell half the story. International travel is equally critical
to our National security. Through travel, we foster closer
relationships with visitors that protect us over the long term.
Simply said, the more they know us, the more they like us.
Beyond public diplomacy, the protocols demanded by the--
mandated by the Visa Waiver Program has significantly enhanced
our National security, particularly since Congress amended the
program in 2007.
Visa Waiver partner nations, while they are strong allies,
must still meet rigorous counterterrorism, border security,
aviation security, and document security standards, as well as
participate, as has just been said, in intelligence and
information-sharing arrangements with the United States. Visa
Waiver countries must also issue ICAO-compliant electronic
passports to their citizens and report all lost and stolen
passports immediately to the United States through Interpol.
Plus, each Visa Waiver traveler must obtain permission to board
a flight to the United States through the electronic system of
travel authorization.
Finally, the Visa Waiver Program provides the U.S.
Government with the authority to regularly audit, just as my
colleague has said. The Visa Waiver Program enables us to
better detect, apprehend, and limit the movement of terrorists,
criminals, and other dangerous travelers, and to shift the
limited visa screening resources we have to higher-risk
countries. That is why National security experts across the
political spectrum, including every Secretary of Homeland
Security, agree; the Visa Waiver Program is essential and an
essential secure tool.
While the Visa Waiver Program helps keep us safer, we
should never stop improving it. We believe that any changes
should first elevate security, be based on fact not hearsay,
minimize disruption of legitimate travelers. That is why U.S.
Travel supports H.R. 158. It would upgrade threat assessment
and explicitly define the U.S. authority to suspend or revoke
Visa Waiver status.
By contrast, proposals to terminate or suspend the Visa
Waiver Program would do incalculable harm to both the National
and economic security. It would cause mayhem to the visa
process that would have to take up all the slack and result in
reciprocity against Americans who want to travel abroad. In
fact, to improve security, we should expand the Visa Waiver
Program, not curtail it, as representatives Joe Heck and Mike
Quigley have proposed.
For U.S. Travel, nothing matters more than the safety of
our Nation and our travelers. We appreciate your holding this
hearing to explore how the Visa Waiver Program protects our
homeland while facilitating trade and travel and how the Visa
Waiver Program can perform both these twin missions even
better. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dow follows:]
Prepared Statement of Roger J. Dow
March 17, 2015
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Vela, and Members of the
subcommittee: I am pleased to offer testimony on behalf of the U.S.
Travel Association (U.S. Travel), the National non-profit organization
representing all sectors of America's travel community.
I've testified numerous times over the years on the economic impact
of travel and tourism and the critical importance of promoting travel
and trade. Typically I have been asked to document the significance of
the Visa Waiver Program (VWP) to America's economic competitiveness.
Overall, the evidence is clear: The Visa Waiver Program is essential to
the economic security of the United States.
Today, after briefly reviewing that evidence, I'd also like to
focus on the travel industry's top priority: Ensuring that travelers
are safe and secure. Without security there is no travel. If travelers
don't feel safe, they stay home.
The travel community supports travel policies and programs--like
the VWP--that ensure a strong and secure Nation, supported by a
resilient and robust economy. We also support continuous oversight of
these programs, as the subcommittee is conducting today--and if needed,
effective reforms, such as those proposed in H.R. 158, the Visa Waiver
Improvement Act and in the JOLT Act.
And if at all possible, we support changing the name of the
program. Half of its problem is that the phrase ``visa waiver'' makes
it sound like security is shortchanged--when the truth is that the
program significantly enhances National security.
travel and economic security
It is difficult to overstate the benefits of travel, especially
international travel, to the economic security of the United States. In
all 50 States, travel provides good domestic jobs that cannot be
outsourced. In 2013, direct travel spending in the United States
totaled $888 billion, which generated a total of $2.1 trillion in
economic output and more than $134 billion in tax revenue. Travel also
directly employed 7.9 million Americans and was among the top 10
employers in 49 U.S. States and the District of Columbia. In every
region of America, travel expenditures and the taxes they generate help
pay the salaries of police, firefighters, and teachers without creating
much new demand for those public services.
The most lucrative segment of this sector is ``long-haul'' or
overseas travel to the United States. The overseas traveler stays
longer and spends more while here--an average of 17.5 nights and nearly
$4,700 per trip. For every 34 overseas travelers who decide to visit
the United States, an additional American job is created. The VWP is
the largest source of in-bound overseas travel to the United States
providing reciprocal 90-day, visa-free travel for citizens of the 38
countries that currently qualify. More than 19.5 million travelers, 61
percent of all overseas visitors to the United States, arrived in 2013
through the VWP. While here, they generated $190 billion in economic
output for the U.S. economy and supported nearly 1 million jobs.
Largely as a result of the VWP, travel is our Nation's No. 1 services
export, generating a trade surplus of $75.6 billion in 2014.
Recent rounds of VWP expansion have demonstrated substantial
economic benefits. Following the recent admissions of Taiwan and Chile,
travel demand rose sharply. This is no surprise, given the example of
the staggering increase in visitors from South Korea since its
inclusion in VWP in late 2008. In 2013, a record 1.4 million visitors
from South Korea arrived in the United States, growing by 79 percent
since 2008. In 2013, South Korean visitors spent $4.5 billion while
traveling in the United States--52 percent higher than in 2008--and
supported 39,000 American jobs. Travel (including education/health
care-related travel) is now the largest U.S. industry export to South
Korea, constituting 11 percent of total U.S. exports of goods and
services to South Korea.
The travel industry was not spared by the economic downturn, but we
are a resilient industry. From 2010 to the end of 2014, we have added
833,000 jobs, restoring employment to pre-recession levels. We helped
lead the recovery by expanding employment at a 36 percent faster pace
than the rest of the economy. And these are jobs with significant
opportunity for upward mobility, compounding the benefits of this surge
in job growth over time.
Finally, while the word ``travel'' frequently connotes tourism,
business travel accounts for 30 percent of all travel spending. In
2013, business travel generated an estimated $267 billion in direct
spending--3 percent higher than the previous year. Totaling the deals
done, products sold and opportunities created at industry conferences
and trade shows, business travel directly supports 2.3 million American
workers.
In addition, at a time when Congress and the Obama administration
are considering an important trade agenda with Europe and Asia,
ensuring smooth movement of business travelers will ensure that visa
barriers do not undermine the full benefits of trade liberalization. A
study conducted in 2010 by Oxford Economics found that foreign
exhibition and buyers spent on average, more than $36,100 each and
$13,600 each, respectively while attending U.S. exhibitions.
travel and national security
These economic figures--as positive as they are--only tell half of
the travel story. International travel is equally critical to our
National security. Through travel, we forge new or strengthen existing
relationships and alliances and we foster a common understanding that
protects our long-term interests. The most effective ambassadors of
American values are ordinary Americans. Overseas travelers form life-
long impressions of American society based on their visits to
destinations, large and small, across America. From our National parks
to our ballparks to our theme parks, the heartland of our great Nation
reflects the best of the United States to foreign visitors. The more
they know us, the better they like us.
Surveys have shown that foreigners who have the opportunity to
visit the United States are 74 percent more likely to have a favorable
view of our country; and that 61 percent are more likely to support the
United States and its policies. Travel has demonstrated significant
public diplomacy value as a ``soft power'' tool that complements our
formal foreign policy mechanisms.
By strengthening our alliances and enhancing our Nation's global
image, travel has helped to keep us safer. Travel programs can also
contribute directly to our National security. The VWP provides an
excellent illustration. Since its creation in the 1980s, the Visa
Waiver Program has evolved into an invaluable instrument of U.S.
National security and public diplomacy. In particular, Congress re-
shaped the VWP in 2007 so that it significantly enhances U.S.
counterterrorism efforts and strengthens international partnerships.
VWP partner nations are, by definition, strong security allies who
meet rigorous conditions in order to be part of the program. For
example, VWP countries must meet strict counter-terrorism, border
security, aviation security, and document security standards, as well
as participate in intelligence- and information-sharing arrangements
with the United States. VWP countries must issue International Civil
Aviation Organization-compliant electronic passports to their citizens
and report information on all lost and stolen passports to the United
States through INTERPOL. In addition, each VWP traveler must also
obtain permission to board a flight to the United States through the
Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA). Finally, the VWP
provides the U.S. Government the ability to regularly audit these
security requirements to ensure compliance. In short, the VWP enables
us to better detect, apprehend, and limit the movement of terrorists,
criminals, and other dangerous travelers--and to shift limited visa
screening resources to higher-risk countries.
National security experts from across the political spectrum agree
that the VWP is a tried and tested security tool. The last three
Secretaries of Homeland Security have praised the program's
contribution to U.S. and international security. Former Secretary
Chertoff recently captured this consensus stating, ``I think the Visa
Waiver Program is a plus-plus for our National security and for our
economic security. I think that we have constructed a program that
makes a reduction in vulnerabilities very powerful.''
Travel is a perception business where facts can often be distorted
by fear and rumor. In the context of the recent terrorist attacks in
France, a Visa Waiver Program nation, some mistakenly believe that bad
actors could use VWP to board planes to the United States without
thorough security checks. The travel industry is committed to educating
stakeholders--including Congress--about the fundamental security
rationale for the VWP. It is imperative that policymakers and the
public understand the current security protocols within VWP and how the
program is part of a layered approach to protect the United States and
the traveling public.
Along those lines, it is very important to remember that over the
past decade, the United States has constructed a significant new
capability to screen all travelers, whether they hold a visa, are
traveling under the VWP, or are returning U.S. citizens, against up-to-
date watch lists. This real-time check allows law enforcement to
utilize the most recent intelligence prior to boarding an international
flight, and is a critical layer in securing travel, no matter how a
traveler was originally authorized to travel to the United States.
the future of the vwp
We should never stop assessing and improving the programs that
safeguard National security. While we believe the VWP helps to keep us
safer, U.S. Travel can support sensible reforms that further buttress
security. In our view, any such changes should:

Offer elevated levels of personal and National security
while;

Focusing on areas of concern that are based on fact, not
merely hearsay; and

To the extent possible, minimizing disruption to legitimate
travelers.
The proposals contained in H.R. 158 meet these criteria. The bill
would significantly upgrade reporting on potential visitors from
overseas, threat assessments; and explicitly define U.S. authority to
suspend or revoke a country's VWP status. Accordingly, the travel
industry supports this legislation--and stands ready to work with you
to see it enacted into law.
U.S. Travel also believes it is important for our National and
economic security, to expand the VWP to a select group of countries.
For precisely that reason, U.S. Travel also supports the JOLT Act,
legislation introduced by Representatives Joe Heck and Mike Quigley
that would add more layers of security while also giving the Secretary
of Homeland Security greater flexibility to expand the program to
countries that meet the appropriate security criteria.
By contrast, proposals to terminate or suspend the VWP would do
incalculable harm to both our National and economic security. Shutting
down programs like the VWP that not only facilitate travel but also
provide valuable information to our counterterrorism and law
enforcement officials is not a formula to keeping us safe. Lastly, any
rollback of visa waiver privileges will cause the partner country to
reinstate visa requirements for U.S. citizens traveling abroad, to
their inconvenience and to the detriment of international trade.
It is the incentive to participate in the VWP that has pushed all
38 VWP to improve their security posture. A number of countries, for
example, have unilaterally upgraded their passports so as to be
eligible for the VWP. Likewise, several prospective members have signed
the information-sharing agreements and otherwise increased law
enforcement and security-related cooperation with the United States in
the hopes of meeting the program's requirements. These actions provide
tangible security benefits to the United States and to the
international traveling public.
For U.S. Travel, nothing matters more than the safety of our Nation
and travelers. We appreciate your holding this hearing to explore how
the Visa Waiver Program advances the critical mission of protecting our
homeland while also facilitating trade and travel--and how VWP could
perform that mission even better.
Again, thank you Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Vela, and all
Members of the subcommittee for inviting me to testify today. I look
forward to answering your questions.

Mrs. Miller. Thank you very much, Mr. Dow. The Chairman now
recognizes Dr. Bucci for his testimony.

STATEMENT OF STEVEN P. BUCCI, DIRECTOR, THE DOUGLAS AND SARAH
ALLISON CENTER FOR FOREIGN AND NATIONAL SECURITY POLICY, THE
HERITAGE FOUNDATION

Mr. Bucci. Madam Chairman, Members, my name is Steven
Bucci. I am the director of the Allison Center at Heritage. The
views I express in this testimony are my own and should not be
construed as representing any official position of the Heritage
Foundation.
I spent a majority of my life in the military. I retired as
an Army colonel, having served as a defense attache in several
embassies and having served as a commander in special forces
fighting terrorism. I also served as the deputy assistant
secretary of defense for homeland defense for several years.
I will focus on two aspects of the VWP; the security and
foreign policy pieces. News of European passport holders
joining ISIS created concern about radicalized Western fighters
abusing the program to engage in terrorism. This is a poor
reason to scale back or end this program. The VWP promotes
security. The ISIS threat only emphasizes the importance of its
intel-sharing requirements.
Currently, the nations participating are required to share
intelligence about known or suspected terrorists, exchange
biographic, biometric, and criminal data, share information on
lost and stolen passports, increase airport security, and
provide reciprocal travel without a visa.
I have included a graphic in my written testimony. It shows
side-by-side the ways a VWP traveler interfaces with the U.S.
Government systems and the way a non-VWP traveler does. The
bottom line is there are only two steps that are differences of
note, two things that are skipped by a VWP traveler. The first
is the face-to-face interview with Consular Services. The
second is the pre-travel input of biometric data.
While I am not here to criticize the fine young folks who
work at the consular desks in our embassies, but I have been
there in several of them. About 25 percent of those face-to-
face interviews are done by first-tour foreign service officers
right out of training. They are not intel or law enforcement
experts. The remaining 75 percent of the face-to-face
interviews are done by foreign service nationals, local hires
under the general supervision of our consular personnel.
In the VWP, we lose that step. But in return, we get the
enhanced information sharing with the host nation law
enforcement and intel services and access to their databases of
potentially dangerous persons. As a former HUMINT collector and
Green Beret, I am pretty comfortable saying that we get a lot
more protection and security from that info sharing than we do
from those face-to-face interviews, an incomparably greater
amount of protection and security.
The second skipped step, frankly, is also a wash. We lose
the pre-travel biometric input. But in return, as mentioned,
all the VWP travelers have to travel with a machine-readable,
biometrically-tagged passport, which is checked at their
arrival point so we basically make up for that lost step. In
short, the VWP gives us better security, not less.
With regard to foreign policy, we have treaty allies right
who are not allowed into the VWP because they have not reached
the 3 percent or less visa refusal rate and DHS no longer has
the authority to waive it up to 10 percent. This is mistake.
Given the many benefits of the VWP, the United States should be
examining how to increase the membership judiciously. DHS
should be allowed to waive the 3 percent limit, and Congress
should add a low visa overstay rate, a better metric, which
uses the country's overstay rates as a measure of how their
citizens respect the terms of their entry into the United
States.
While such permanent reform would be ideal, Congress could
at least seek to return the waiver authority to DHS on a short-
term or one-time basis, allowing the Secretary to accept treaty
allies such as Poland into the VWP as long as their visa
refusal rate were below that 10 percent mark. Such an action
would help the United States economically, improve security,
and remind our allies, especially those like Poland that face
an ever-more aggressive Russia, that the United States stands
with them.
The administration should be asked to provide the committee
a list of countries that are in that category and whose general
behavior and cooperation warranted for inclusion in the VWP. It
should be done quickly and should be heralded as just what it
is; a reward for positive behavior. But it is a reward that
also benefits the United States greatly. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bucci follows:]
Prepared Statement of Steven P. Bucci
March 17, 2015
My name is Steven Bucci. I am director of the Douglas and Sarah
Allison Center for Foreign and National Security Policy in The Heritage
Foundation's Davis Institute for National Security and Foreign Policy.
The views I express in this testimony are my own, and should not be
construed as representing any official position of The Heritage
Foundation.
I have spent the majority of my life as a military officer; I
retired from the Army as a colonel, having served as a defense attache,
a human intelligence collector working in embassies for Defense
Intelligence Agency (DIA), and as a Special Forces operator and
commander of the 3d Battalion, 5th Special Forces Group, fighting
terrorism. I also served as the deputy assistant secretary of defense
for homeland defense, DOD's representative to the Interagency for
Counter Terrorism domestically.
vwp and the threat of terror
The Visa Waiver Program (VWP) is a valuable tool supporting U.S.
tourism and trade, public diplomacy, and National security. The VWP
allows residents of member countries to visit the United States without
a visa for up to 90 days in exchange for security-cooperation and
information-sharing arrangements and reciprocal travel privileges for
U.S. residents.
News of European passport holders joining the Islamic State in Iraq
and al Sham (ISIS), however, have created concerns about radicalized
Western fighters abusing the VWP to engage in terrorism here in the
United States. These concerns, however, are not a good reason to end
the VWP. The VWP promotes security and the ISIS threat only emphasizes
the importance of the VWP's intelligence-sharing requirements and
adding appropriate nations to the program.
vwp basics and benefits
In order to become a VWP member, a country must:

Demonstrate a non-immigrant-visa refusal rate (the
percentage of visa applicants denied by the State Department
for a particular nation) of no more than 3 percent;

Issue all its residents secure, machine-readable biometric
passports; and

Present no discernable threat to U.S. law enforcement or
U.S. National security.
Currently, 38 nations are participating in the VWP.\1\ As required
by the VWP and certain laws, these nations have also agreed to various
stipulations and obligations, including requirements to:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, ``U.S.
Visas: Visa Waiver Program,'' http://travel.state.gov/content/visas/
english/visit/visa-waiver-program.html (accessed March 12, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Share intelligence about known or suspected terrorists with
the United States (per Homeland Security Presidential Directive
6 (HSPD-6));

Exchange biographic, biometric, and criminal data with the
United States (automated, via Preventing and Combating Serious
Crime (PCSC) agreements);

Share information on lost and stolen passports (LASP
agreements);

Increase their own airport security requirements; and

Provide U.S. citizens with a reciprocal ability to travel to
that country without a visa.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Alison Siskin, ``Visa Waiver Program,'' Congressional Research
Service Report for Congress, February 12, 2014, http://fas.org/sgp/crs/
homesec/RL32221.pdf (accessed March 12, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These features greatly enhance security by providing U.S. law
enforcement and security agencies with more information and
intelligence on potential terrorists and other bad actors. The VWP
makes it easier for U.S. officials to know whether an individual
presents a security threat. The VWP also allows the State Department to
focus its consular and visa resources on those countries and
individuals about which less is known and are higher risks to U.S.
security.
Furthermore, the VWP includes robust screening and security
procedures. Every traveler to the United States from a VWP country must
be pre-screened through the Electronic System for Travel Authorization
(ESTA). ESTA data is then checked against multiple databases including
Custom and Border Protection's (CBP) Automating Targeting System (ATS)
and TECS system. The ATS is run by the National Targeting Center and
checks a variety of databases including the Terrorist Screening
Database (TSDB) and Interpol's data on lost and stolen passports. The
ATS gives each individual a risk-based score that determines whether or
not the individual should receive additional scrutiny or inspection.
TECS queries various databases for information about the person's
eligibility for travel to the United States and whether he or she is a
known security risk.\3\ TECS also checks against the TSDB, which is
maintained by the FBI for law enforcement use in apprehending or
stopping known or suspected terrorists.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Lisa Seghetti, ``Border Security: Immigration Inspections at
Ports of Entry,'' Congressional Research Service Report for Congress,
January 26, 2015, pp. 9-10, http://fas.org/sgp/crs/homesec/R43356.pdf
(accessed March 12, 2015).
\4\ Timothy J. Healy, ``Statement Before the House Judiciary
Committee,'' Federal Bureau of Investigation, March 24, 2010, http://
www.fbi.gov/news/testimony/sharing-and-analyzing-information-to-
prevent-terrorism (accessed March 12, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, when individuals buy their tickets, that information
is forwarded from the airlines to the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) and checked through multiple systems. The Transportation Security
Administration's Secure Flight program collects passenger data and
compares it against the TSDB's No-Fly and Selectee lists. CBP's Advance
Passenger Information System (APIS) collects the Passenger Name Record
and other information about travelers and forwards the information to
the Arrival and Departure Information System (ADIS) to help combat visa
overstays, and also to the National Targeting Center and the ATS to
detect high-risk travelers.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Seghetti, ``Border Security: Immigration Inspections at Ports
of Entry.''
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Upon landing in the United States, individuals must provide
biographic and biometric information that is checked against additional
sets of biometric databases controlled by DHS (Automated Biometric
Identification System or IDENT) and the FBI (Integrated Automated
Fingerprint Identification System or IAFIS). The individual is once
again checked through TECS, the ATS, and the APIS and undergoes
additional inspection if necessary. At any point in this process,
security officials can prevent an individual from entering the United
States if they are deemed a security risk or ineligible for travel to
the United States. While no system is without flaws, this is a robust
screening process.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Ibid., pp. 10-11.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The main differences between this screening process and the
traditional visa screening process are that a traditional visa
applicant must have an in-person interview at a U.S. consulate and
provide biometric data prior to obtaining a visa. This allows biometric
checks to occur prior to travel. The traditional visa process, however,
does not have the same information-sharing arrangements that are
required to be a part of the VWP that provide the United States with
data on known and suspected terrorists and serious criminals.
Since the VWP was created in 1986, tourism and related expenditures
in the United States have dramatically increased. From 2000 to 2013,
the number of visitors to the United States increased by 18.6 million,
a 36 percent increase, to a record number of 69.8 million, with
approximately 40 percent of all visitors entering the United States
through the VWP.\7\ As a result, the VWP has helped the United States
maintain a trade surplus in tourism since 1989, with visitors spending
$180.7 billion in 2013, supporting the travel and tourism industries
that constitute 2.8 percent of U.S. gross domestic product, including 8
million jobs, as well as many other sectors of the U.S. economy, such
as restaurant and consumer-good businesses.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Siskin, ``Visa Waiver Program,'' and U.S. Department of
Commerce, Office of Travel and Tourism Industries, ``International
Arrivals to U.S. by Region and Country of Residency: Historical
Visitation 2000-2006,'' http://travel.trade.gov/outreachpages/
download_data_table/Historical_arrivals_2000_2006.pdf (accessed March
12, 2015).
\8\ International Trade Administration, National Travel and Tourism
Office, ``Fast Facts: United States Travel and Tourism Industry 2013,''
http://travel.trade.gov/outreachpages/download_data_table/
Fast_Facts_2013.pdf (accessed March, 2015).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The VWP is also an important tool of foreign policy and public
diplomacy. Allowing individuals to visit the United States and enjoy
our country can improve the foreign public's understanding and
appreciation for America and our culture. By extending the privilege of
the VWP to other nations, we deepen diplomatic ties with friendly
governments and allies, as well. A graphic depiction of these processes
is attached to this submission, showing a side-by-side comparison of
the interaction of a VWP traveler and a non-VWP traditional traveler
with the various parts of the U.S. systems.
improvement and expansion
While the VWP boosts security, diplomacy, trade, and tourism, there
are areas for improvement, including information-sharing arrangements
and metrics for visa overstays.
As mentioned, VWP participants must enter into various information-
sharing arrangements with the United States, as mandated by the 9/11
Commission Act of 2007. In 2012, the U.S. Government Accountability
Office's (GAO's) Acting Director of Homeland Security and Justice
Rebecca Gambler testified that many nations had not finalized these
agreements or begun sharing information. According to GAO data as of
January 2011, only 19 of the 36 VWP nations had agreed to share
terrorist-watch-list information and only 13 were actually sharing
information. Worse yet, only 18 of 36 nations had agreed to share PCSC
crime information, and no information-sharing arrangements were fully
automated as required.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Rebecca Gambler, ``Visa Waiver Program: Additional Actions
Needed to Mitigate Risks and Strengthen Overstay Enforcement,''
Government Accountability Office, GAO-12-599T, March 27, 2012, http://
www.gao.gov/assets/590/589621.pdf (accessed March 12, 2015), and
Jessica Zuckerman, ``The Visa Waiver Program: Time for Nations to Bear
the Consequences of Non-Compliance,'' Heritage Foundation Issue Brief
No. 3565, April 12, 2012, http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/
2012/04/visawaiver-program-consequences-of-non-compliance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since then, however, action on information sharing has dramatically
improved: The Congressional Research Service reported that nearly all
VWP members had agreed to share information as of February 2014,\10\
and, according to a DHS legislative affairs official, as of September
2014 all nations are now sharing information on terrorists, serious
criminals, and lost or stolen passports. DHS is, however, still working
to automate PCSC data sharing for all VWP participants.\11\ Congress
should ensure that progress on these agreements continues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Siskin, ``Visa Waiver Program.''
\11\ Gambler, ``Visa Waiver Program,'' and phone conversation
between David Inserra and DHS official, DHS Office of Legislative
Affairs, September 10, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the many benefits of the VWP, the United States should also
examine how to increase VWP membership judiciously. The requirement for
a biometric visa-exit system, which is not a cost-effective tool for
stopping terrorism or illegal immigration, currently stands in the way
of most nations joining the VWP.\12\ DHS should be allowed to waive the
3 percent limit on non-immigrant visa-refusal rates, and Congress
should add a requirement for low visa-overstay rates instead. The visa-
refusal metric is susceptible to subjective decisions by different visa
consular officers in different countries that can affect the number of
visas refused and granted. A better metric would be to use countries'
visa-overstay rates as a measure of how a country's citizens respect
the terms of their entry into, and time in, the United States. While
such reform would be ideal and more permanent, Congress could also seek
to return waiver authority to the DHS Secretary on a short-term basis,
allowing the Secretary to accept treaty allies such as Poland into the
VWP, so long as their visa-refusal rate was less than 10 percent. Such
action would help the United States economically, improve security and
screening of individuals coming to the United States, and would remind
our allies, especially those like Poland that face an increasingly
aggressive Russia, that the United States stands by them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Steven P. Bucci and David Inserra, ``Biometric Exit
Improvement Act: Wrong Solution to Broken Visa and Immigration
System,'' Heritage Foundation Issue Brief No. 4064, October 8, 2013,
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2013/10/biometric-exit-
improvement-act-and-the-broken-visa-and-immigration-system, and Jessica
Zuckerman, ``Taiwan Admitted to the Visa Waiver Program,'' Heritage
Foundation Issue Brief No. 3747, October 3, 2012, http://
www.heritage.org/research/reports/2012/10/taiwan-admitted-to-the-visa-
waiver-program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additional measures, to strengthen the ESTA application or to
provide DHS with reasonable tools to ensure member countries are
abiding by their agreements, could also be worthwhile reforms.
Countries that do not meet the terms of the VWP should face
consequences, but full expulsion from the program should not be used
lightly.
conclusion
With many benefits, the VWP is more valuable than ever. The threat
of ISIS and radicalized Westerners is real and the United States should
be using all the intelligence tools at its disposal to find and stop
these terrorists. The VWP is one of those tools, and to stop it now
would make the United States less secure, less prosperous, and less
engaged with friends and allies. Instead, we should be looking to
improve and expand the program.

Mrs. Miller. Thank you very much, Doctor.
The Chairman now recognizes Mr. Jenkins.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN MICHAEL JENKINS, SENIOR ADVISER TO THE RAND
PRESIDENT, THE RAND CORPORATION

Mr. Jenkins. Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Vela, and
distinguished Members of the committee, thank you very much for
the opportunity to address this important subject.
The testimony I have already submitted addresses two
fundamental questions. One is the threat posed by Western
fighters who have joined Jihadist fronts in Syria and Iran. No.
2, how can the United States enhance its ability to identify
and intercept returning foreign fighters with passports from
countries currently covered by the Visa Waiver Program?
You know, one of the advantages of going fourth here is
that you can revise your order of remarks along the way. What I
am about to do is just toss my oral remarks completely. Let me
just underscore a few points that have already being touched
upon.
First of all, the threat. This is serious. The continuing
civil war in Syria, ISIL's military victories, and its claimed
re-creation of the caliphate has created a great deal of
excitement and has attracted foreign fighters from around the
world. The numbers are constantly on the move. But we are
looking at in excess of 20,000 foreign fighters who have now
gone to Syria. Most of these are from Arab countries, but more
than 3,000 are from Western countries, primarily Europe.
The bombing campaign by the coalition does not appear to
have stopped this flow yet. In fact, just last week the Prime
Minister of France said that they could expect 10,000 European
fighters in Syria and Iraq by the end of this year. That is--
now, this is a dangerous bunch. I mean, ISIL recruits people
who are not simply--not only not repelled by images of
beheadings and burning people alive and crucifixions and mass
executions, that is its recruiting poster. It is gathering,
assembling people who are looking for opportunities to
participate in that.
Its al-Qaeda counterpart remains dedicated to attacking the
far enemy; that is us. Right now, ISIL is not so concerned with
launching attacks abroad. But under pressure, that strategy
could change. If ISIL is defeated, then we could see the
proliferation of small groups on the run bent upon revenge. So
the threat is serious.
Visa Waiver Program. Look, our allies here understand they
have got a major problem in Europe. The recent terrorist
attacks underscore that. So they are taking a number of steps
now to improve intelligence, to increase their criminal
penalties. This allows us some real opportunities to work with
them. One of the things that they are doing, for example, is
adding elements to the PNR. We can use that information if it
is shared with us in conjunction with the information that we
get through ESTA in order to create new kinds of profiles that
will identify these people coming in.
We are gonna have to shift our thinking here. The problem
was overstay. The issue now is intercept. So the challenge for
us is how we can take things like ESTA, PNR data, intelligence
data, prescreening processes which are being extended abroad,
as well as arrival procedures by customs and immigration
officials, and knit them together into a National strategy.
So the point is this isn't just about Visa Waiver. Visa
Waiver is a component of a larger necessary effort which is
gonna have to go on for a long time because we are going to be
dealing with the effluent of the fighting in Syria and Iraq for
the foreseeable future. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Jenkins follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brian Michael Jenkins \1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ The opinions and conclusions expressed in this testimony are
the author's alone and should not be interpreted as representing those
of RAND or any of the sponsors of its research. This product is part of
the RAND Corporation testimony series. RAND testimonies record
testimony presented by RAND associates to Federal, State, or local
legislative committees; Government-appointed commissions and panels;
and private review and oversight bodies. The RAND Corporation is a
nonprofit research organization providing objective analysis and
effective solutions that address the challenges facing the public and
private sectors around the world. RAND's publications do not
necessarily reflect the opinions of its research clients and sponsors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
March 17, 2015
containing middle east terror measures to reduce the threat posed by
foreign fighters returning from syria and iraq \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ This testimony is available for free download at http://
www.rand.org/pubs/testimonies/CT427.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Miller, Ranking Member Vela, distinguished Members of the
subcommittee, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to address
this important subject.
My testimony will address two fundamental questions:
(1) What is the threat posed by Western fighters who have joined
jihadist fronts in Syria and Iraq?
(2) How can the United States enhance its ability to identify and
intercept returning foreign fighters with passports from
European and other countries that are currently covered by the
Visa Waiver Program?
Let's begin with the threat.
Over the past 8 months, my colleagues at RAND have had several
opportunities to offer Congressional committees their assessments of
the evolving threat posed by jihadist groups in the Middle East and
North Africa.\3\ While the focus of my colleagues and their
interpretations of the evolving threat vary, I regard my own testimony
to be the latest installment this continuing body of work.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See Seth Jones, Jihadist Sanctuaries in Syria and Iraq:
Implications for the United States, testimony presented before the
House Homeland Security Committee, Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and
Intelligence on July 24, 2014; Ben Connable, Defeating the Islamic
State in Iraq, testimony presented before the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee on September 17, 2014; and Rick Brennan Jr., The Growing
Strategic Threat of Radical Islamist Ideology, testimony presented
before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on February 12, 2015.
\4\ This testimony also builds on my recent previous research, as
reported in The Dynamics of Syria's Civil War, Santa Monica, Calif.:
RAND Corporation, 2014; Brothers Killing Brothers: The Current
Infighting Will Test al Qaeda's Brand, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND
Corporation, 2014; and When Jihadis Come Marching Home: The Terrorist
Threat Posed by Westerners Returning from Syria and Iraq, Santa Monica,
Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Syria's civil war, Assad's brutal repression, the spread of
jihadist ideology, the growing sectarianism of the conflict in Syria
and Iraq, the military victories achieved by the Islamic State of Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), and, perhaps above all, ISIL's announced re-
creation of the Caliphate have galvanized would-be jihadist warriors
throughout the world.
According to the latest reported intelligence estimate, 20,000
foreign fighters have traveled from other countries to join the fight
in Syria and Iraq.\5\ Most are believed to have joined ISIL.
``Estimate'' is the operative word here, but if the number is close to
correct, this would mean that foreign fighters now comprise a large
portion of ISIL's total strength--estimated to be as many as 31,000
fighters--and enough to influence its trajectory. Most of the
volunteers come from other Arab countries, but the National
Counterterrorism Center (NCTC) has estimated 3,400 have come from
Europe and other Western countries and are therefore theoretically
eligible to enter the United States without a visa. Most of these
Western volunteers are believed to have joined ISIL, which now calls
itself the Islamic State.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Nicholas J. Rasmussen, Director of the National
Counterterrorism Center, Current Terrorist Threat to the United States,
testimony before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, February
12, 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The coalition bombing campaign--which was intended to: (1) Contain
ISIL by supporting partners on the ground, such as the Kurdish
Peshmerga, who are reclaiming territory lost earlier to ISIL; (2)
prevent ISIL from being able to move freely in Syria and Iraq; (3)
disrupt and degrade its command and control; (4) reduce its logistical
capabilities; and (5) target key leaders where possible--has taken a
toll on ISIL's operational capabilities. But it does not appear to have
significantly reduced the flow of Western fighters to Syria and Iraq:
The reported numbers have continued to increase since the bombing
campaign began in September 2014. In part, the growing numbers may
reflect a time lag as authorities learn about those who departed before
the bombing campaign began. However, there is evidence that the flow of
recruits continues. France's prime minister recently forecast that by
the end of this year, as many as 10,000 Europeans may join the jihadist
front in Syria and Iraq.
isil's recruiting attracts the violence-prone
ISIL operates a sophisticated recruiting program, which includes
its highly-publicized victories and its equally well-recorded
atrocities. Its message is disseminated through its official outlets on
the internet and reinforced by a distributed recruiting campaign by its
own members using social media. ISIL appeals to potential recruits'
sense of religious duty--faith undeniably plays a role in recruitment,
even though volunteers may not possess a profound knowledge of Islam.
Like all true believers, recruits may be attracted by a simple black-
and-white, us-versus-them belief system. Poverty and oppression may
explain why people in some countries embrace violent extremism, but it
does not explain the flow of Western volunteers. Individual biographies
of those who have gone to participate in jihad or have attempted to go
suggest a variety of personal motives--alienation, perceived insults,
personal crises, dissatisfaction with empty spiritual lives, adolescent
rebellion, or other discontentment.
ISIL is a dangerous group. It distinguishes itself from other
jihadist groups by continuing to publicize its limitless violence. This
attracts a self-selecting assembly of individuals who are not repelled
by graphic images of mass executions, beheadings, crucifixions, and
burnings and who indeed may be attracted by opportunities to
participate in such atrocities. They exult in violence. Gathering as a
group in Syria and Iraq, they may reinforce each other's savagery,
creating a constituency within ISIL that supports escalating violence.
This dynamic is present in most terrorist groups. For the
ideologues who initiate terrorist campaigns, violence is instrumental--
a means to achieve an end. Violent campaigns attract others who
subscribe to the ideology but actually seek membership in a terrorist
group as a source of status. For a third cohort, the prospect of
violence is the principal attraction--ideology offers a license to
kill.
Over time, the harder members of a group dominate decision making.
Their argument is always the same--if the group is not doing well, it
must become more ruthless. If the group is doing well, escalation will
accelerate progress. Hardliners cannot easily be reined in, even if the
leaders want to restrain them. Commanders who counsel moderation risk
being branded as traitors and eliminated, or hardliners may break off
to form their own groups. This is not to say that we have any evidence
at all of attempts by ISIL's leaders to moderate the group's
activities; instead, they appear to encourage barbarity. Still, there
must be some tension between those who want to build a state and those
whose increasing barbarity makes them appear determined to trigger its
destruction.
Transgression demonstrates conviction and binds the perpetrator to
the cause. ISIL seems determined to separate its fighters from normal
society. There are reports that the group forces recruits to commit
atrocities to ensure their loyalty and reduce chances that they can
ever return home.
The accumulation of atrocity increasingly precludes any resolution
other than continuing warfare or death. For the group as well as for
the individual, having crossed the line into nihilism, there is no way
back.
isil's calculated ruthlessness--strategic calculation or collective
madness?
To the outside world, ISIL's escalating murder and destruction is
incomprehensible. Rational explanations are required.
We invent strategic calculations (or miscalculations) that make
mayhem logical. Analysts posit that ISIL's leaders intend its
atrocities to provoke the rage that draws in foreign ground forces,
where casualties and captures will erode resolve and impose a time
limit on foreign military achievement, will incite responses that
divide the coalition, or will precipitate action before ISIL's foes are
fully prepared to take it on.
Continuing warfare changes the individual outlooks of those
involved. Armed conflict can brutalize its participants. Violence, not
just on the battlefield but in executions, torture, and mistreatment of
prisoners, hostages, and the civilian population, becomes matter-of-
fact. Atrocities become routine. This has effects on the mental
condition of both the individual and the collective. A gathering of
violent zealots can lead to collective madness in which sadistic
cruelty becomes an end in itself, requiring no strategic explanation.
It may be unpleasant to contemplate, but we cannot dismiss the
power of belief. ISIL has attracted the most fervent disciples to an
extreme (many would say discredited) version of Islam, recruits who
believe in the imposition of the cruelest form of Islamic law without
compromise. This belief system may include apocalyptic thinking; the
idea that escalating violence will hasten the final confrontation
between true believers and the forces of evil. There is a fierce debate
over whether ISIL represents or perverts Islam, but the fact that
ISIL's theological pretensions are widely rejected by Muslim clerics,
both militant and centrist, is not the point here. Polling data and a
continuing flow of recruits from Europe indicate that ISIL's
religiously justified violence resonates with some.
There will be Caligulas. To possess unchallenged power over other
human beings, beyond the reach of retribution, immune from any
restraining moral authority, allows license and cruelty.
Through its strategy of terror, exaltation of violence as a
recruiting theme, attraction to and assembly of the most fervent and
most ruthless followers, and deliberate rejection of any constraints,
ISIL is creating a dangerous population that cannot be easily pacified
or reabsorbed into normal life.
there are scenarios of immediate concern
A long-term terrorist threat that survives the destruction of ISIL
warrants our attention, but there also are several scenarios of
immediate concern. These include the following:

A 9/11-like scenario in which foreign volunteers on their
way to the front lines in Syria or Iraq are instead recruited
and supported to carry out a major terrorist strike in the
United States. This is the 9/11 scenario, where the attackers
were on their way to an active combat zone when they were
instead diverted to a terrorist mission. It seems unlikely that
in today's more vigilant environment, terrorists could mount an
operation of that scale without being detected.

A shoe-bomber or underwear bomber scenario in which a single
volunteer is recruited and equipped for a suicide mission.
There were reports in 2014 of such plotting by al-Qaeda's
Khorasan cell, a group of veterans sent from Afghanistan to
Syria to recruit and deploy fighters with Western passports.

7/7 scenarios, named after the 2005 bombing of public
transport in London, in which Westerners are provided with
specialized training and dispatched to the West without further
support.

Low-level attacks carried out based on individual
initiative. These could involve returning foreign fighters or
home-grown terrorists responding to calls by ISIL or al-Qaeda's
affiliates to carry out attacks. These might include active-
shooter attacks and hostage situations as we have seen in
Ottawa, Paris, Sydney, and Copenhagen.
isil is not yet committed to attacking western foes on their own
territory, but its containment could change its strategy
There is no indication yet that ISIL has initiated a terrorist
campaign aimed at directly attacking its Western foes on their own
territory. It has taunted and threatened the West in widely-
disseminated videos showing gruesome murders of Western nationals. It
has called upon its supporters abroad to carry out similar acts of
terrorism and has praised those who have done so.
However, unlike al-Qaeda, which continues to follow a strategy of
attacking the ``far enemy,'' ISIL appears more focused on the expansion
and defense of the territory it controls as the Islamic State. This
reflects necessity. With an economy based on plunder and an army of
fanatics, it is doubtful that the Islamic State could survive as a
normal state within static borders even if its enemies were to allow it
to try. It must continue to expand or it will consume itself.
Squeezed by ground offensives supported by foreign airpower, ISIL
may at some point alter its strategy and carry out attacks abroad in an
effort to break the coalition's political resolve. If ISIL does decide
to launch attacks abroad, it will be able to draw upon its substantial
financial resources and a deep bench of Western volunteers from among
its existing fighters.
The defeat of the Islamic State could turn into a scenario of
slaughter, as victims of its cruel occupation and even its one-time
Sunni allies turn against it if only to preempt Shi'a retribution. But
its destruction could also shatter the enterprise into a host of small,
desperate groups, on the run, bent upon revenge.
If the Islamic State is brought down, where will its foreign
fighters go? Facing a hostile reception if they had returned home,
foreign volunteers who went to Afghanistan to fight Soviet invaders in
the 1980s gathered under al-Qaeda's banner. Some ISIL veterans will
migrate to other fronts in Afghanistan, where ISIL has already set up
shop; to the Caucasus, from which a large number of its foreign
fighters, including a number of its commanders, come; or to Libya,
where ISIL has found new allies. Some Western volunteers, disillusioned
by their experience and with nowhere else to go, will simply want to
come home. Others will direct their wrath toward the West.
Most face arrest if they return to their home countries, although
European countries are divided on how to deal with returning fighters.
Instead of prison, some countries want to offer rehabilitation and
reintegration into society, at least to some returnees. It will likely
be hard to determine the degree of individual participation in
atrocities. Given ISIL's record, ``re-humanization'' may be a
prerequisite to rehabilitation. Clearly, there are some advantages to
offering a way back if it requires an open declaration of return and
willingness to cooperate with authorities.
But rehabilitation programs have had mixed results, and resources
for surveillance are already stretched by the number of people going to
or returning from jihadist fronts. Authorities may not have the
resources needed to effectively monitor significant numbers of
individuals at large. This clearly was France's problem in dealing with
the rapid rise in the number of persons going to Syria or contemplating
going there. And jihadists have shown remarkable persistence, which
means they may have to be monitored in some fashion for years.
I think it is safe to assume that foreign fighters from other
countries seeking to enter the United States are more likely to have
malevolent intentions than returning Americans. Their capabilities for
putting together large-scale terrorist operations here may be limited,
but not their intentions. ISIL's fighters have set a new benchmark for
brutality. They have rejected all arguments to curb their enthusiasm
for bloodshed, whether from Islamic theologians or even al-Qaeda's own
leaders.
the american experience
Although the numbers continue to grow, the number of individuals
from the United States going to jihadist fronts is, fortunately, not
anywhere near the number that have gone from Europe. The most recent
estimate puts the total of American volunteers at 150, including those
who went for reasons related to the conflict in Syria but not to join
jihadist fronts, those who attempted to go and were arrested on the
way, and those who have gone and been killed while fighting for ISIL or
other jihadist groups.
The historical experience of Americans going to other jihadist
fronts (in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia, and Yemen) indicates that,
of 124 publicly-identified Americans who went or tried to go abroad to
join such fronts between 9/11 and the end of 2014, approximately one-
third were arrested on the way. Of those who managed to connect with
jihadist groups abroad, 24 were killed (six in suicide bombings), 13
were arrested while abroad, and 13 more are still at large. Of the 35
who returned, 9 were involved in subsequent terrorist plots. Only 3
home-grown jihadist attacks in the United States resulted in
fatalities. These were carried out by individuals who are not known to
have received any terrorist training abroad.\6\ (These figures
represent only the publicly-identified would-be jihadists; they do not
include the total number of those who reportedly traveled to Syria or
Iraq.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Jenkins, When Jihadis Come Marching Home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Returning American fighters add a layer of threat, but--given their
still-modest numbers--it is a threat that I believe is manageable
within existing laws and resources. More-effective leveraging of local
police can provide needed reinforcements.\7\ As our focus here is on
the Visa Waiver Program (VWP), returning Americans are a separate
problem. Nevertheless, dealing with that problem should be viewed as
part of an overall strategy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Brian Michael Jenkins, Andrew Liepman, and Henry H. Willis,
Identifying Enemies Among Us: Evolving Terrorist Threats and the
Continuing Challenges of Domestic Intelligence Collection and
Information Sharing, Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation, 2014. See
also Business Executives for National Security, Domestic Security:
Confronting a Changing Threat to Ensure Public Safety and Civil
Liberties, Washington, DC, 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
there are several u.s. lines of defense
There are several potential lines of defense, each of which offers
opportunities to identify and intercept foreign fighters before they
are able to carry out acts of terrorism in the United States.

1. The first line of defense consists of all international efforts
to reduce the number of volunteers going to jihadist fronts.
While such efforts depend nearly entirely on foreign actions,
the United States can nonetheless encourage and support them.

2. The United States could push for broader international efforts
to intercept returning fighters, primarily efforts by Turkey
and the European Union--especially front-line countries, such
as Bulgaria and Greece, whose land borders returning fighters
may try to cross. However, foreign fighters may deliberately
take roundabout routes to evade detection. Right now, Turkey,
as the entry and exit point for virtually all foreign fighters,
is key to stemming the flow.

3. Intelligence sources may identify groups engaged in planning
terrorist attacks against the West and disrupt their activities
or specific plots while the would-be attackers are still
abroad. The U.S. bombing of suspected Khorasan cells in Syria
is an example of such an effort.

4. The Terrorist Identities Datamart Environment (TIDE), No-Fly
List, and other databases derived from intelligence sources are
currently the primary mechanism for identifying returning
foreign fighters. The question is how much they could be
improved by better sharing arrangements with foreign partners
in VWP countries.
Intelligence-sharing arrangements are complicated and beyond the
scope of my testimony. An agreement is in place that allows
E.U. countries to share Passenger Name Record (PNR) information
with the United States. In the wake of the recent terrorist
attacks in Paris, E.U. interior ministers have proposed a
Europe-wide plan that would require passengers to provide
additional information, which would remain available to
terrorism-related investigations for up to 5 years. The
collection and sharing of additional data would provide
additional confidence that authorities in the European Union
and the United States will be able to accurately identify
returning fighters. There is, however, strong opposition from
civil libertarians. Meanwhile, 14 E.U. countries are setting
their own PNR protocols.
America's VWP partners clearly share our interests and will look
for ways to enhance their own security at the same time. In the
wake of recent terrorist attacks, European countries have taken
steps to reduce radicalization, improve intelligence, increase
criminal penalties, impose administrative measures to prevent
travel, and enhance information collection and sharing.

5. The Electronic System for Travel Authorization (ESTA) is now in
place and has recently been enhanced. It offers the rough
equivalent of a visa application, and information obtained
through ESTA is checked against the terrorism databases, which
are managed by the National Counterterrorism Center (NCTC).
Matches have been found, preventing potential terrorists from
entering the United States. How could ESTA be further enhanced?

6. Pre-boarding passenger screening offers a number of
possibilities. Computer-Assisted Passenger Pre-Screening
(CAPPS) was a program implemented on the recommendation of the
White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security in 1997.
Using PNR information, CAPPS reportedly identified 9 of the 19
hijackers on 9/11, although by that time the system had been
effectively disconnected from the security checkpoint. CAPPS
II, an improved version, was abandoned as unworkable. It was
replaced by Secure Flight, which relies primarily on matching
names with current watch lists.
Israel has historically relied heavily on pre-boarding interviews
to screen passengers. The approach, however, is labor-intensive
and is more difficult to apply to passenger loads more diverse
than those flying on El Al, although in 2001, ICTS, a private
security company contracted to interview passengers on U.S.-
bound flights using the Israeli approach, correctly identified
Richard Reid, the Shoe Bomber, as a person warranting further
questioning.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has spent nearly a
billion dollars to train and deploy behavioral-detection
officers in an effort to identify high-risk passengers, but the
approach remains controversial. Many regard behavioral
detection as bogus science, although it may have value as a
deterrent. The criticism that behavioral techniques have not
led to the apprehension of any terrorists is misleading. In
fact, none of the security measures in effect at U.S. airports
have led to the apprehension of any terrorists here, and
insofar as I can recall, only one terrorist was actually
intercepted at a checkpoint abroad. A number of new
technologies based on detecting subtle physiological responses
to questions or images are in development. We still have no
``X-ray'' for a person's soul.
Screening programs like TSA's Automated Targeting System (ATS) aim
at flagging those who may pose a higher risk. An alternate
strategy is to identify populations of passengers unlikely to
pose any risk, thereby allowing security officials to more
efficiently focus their efforts. An example is TSA's Pre-Check
program for trusted frequent fliers. It may be possible for
U.S. officials to develop algorithms aimed at identifying
travelers entering the United States under the VWP who
similarly are likely to pose little risk. The NCTC now works
with the State Department and Customs and Border Protection
(CBP) to establish screening rules that narrow the screeners'
field of view so that they can concentrate on those they should
be most worried about.

7. Pre-clearance procedures are being extended to a number of
foreign airports. These allow passengers to complete
immigration and customs formalities before boarding, but they
also provide opportunities for interviews and behavioral
observation.

8. Arrival screening and secondary interviews by U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and CBP offer the final line of
defense before entry into the United States. It has already
been recommended by a number of intelligence practitioners and
experts that both agencies expand and enhance their
intelligence capabilities.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Jenkins, Liepman, and Willis, Identifying the Enemies Among Us;
and Business Executives for National Security, Domestic Security:
Confronting a Changing Threat to Ensure Public Safety and Civil
Liberties.

If all else fails, domestic intelligence efforts, which have
already detected terrorist plots by foreigners coming here intending to
carry out attacks, may thwart future terrorist plots. Arriving
terrorists would still have to acquire weapons or explosives, which
would increase their risks of exposure.
I, personally, have not done any research to determine precisely
how each of these lines of defense might be improved. No doubt, some of
the elements mentioned are already being examined by those in
Government, but from the perspective of Congressional oversight, it is
worth asking whether such examinations are in fact occurring. The
challenge will be to integrate them into a National and international
strategy aimed at intercepting foreign fighters before they enter the
United States and before they return to VWP as well as non-VWP
countries
The VWP offers considerable commercial, diplomatic, and cultural
benefits. Abandoning the program could overstretch consular office
resources and would not necessarily offer improved security. In fiscal
year 2012, nearly 19 million people entered the United States under the
VWP; in fiscal year 2013, approximately 11 million residents of non-VWP
countries applied to enter the United States on non-immigrant visas, of
which 9 million were approved and 2 million were refused entry.\9\ The
application and review process requires extensive documentation by the
applicant and extensive investigation by U.S. authorities, including an
in-person interview with a consular official. Abandoning the VWP would
more than double the current workload. The VWP is not perfect, but
neither are non-VWP procedures. The objective should be a level of
security higher than the level we had before the VWP was initiated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ U.S. State Department, ``Worldwide NIV [Non-Immigrant Visa]
Workload by Visa Category FY 2013,'' 2013 (http://travel.state.gov/
content/dam/visas/Statistics/Non-ImmigrantStatistics/NIVWorkload/
FY2013NIVWorkloadbyVisaCategory.pdf). See also Alison Siskin, Visa
Waiver Program, Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service,
February 12, 2014.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The conflicts in Syria and Iraq will continue for the foreseeable
future. We will be dealing with their effluent for many years. It is
therefore incumbent upon us to develop effective means for preventing
the spillover of terrorist violence.

Mrs. Miller. Thank you very much. I certainly would agree
that Visa Waiver is a component and as we look at the thing in
the overall. However, I think because of the evolving threat,
the changing circumstances, that really, as I say, has
necessitated this hearing today and has certainly been the
impetus for many Members of Congress speaking out about this
particular program if we try to examine where we have
vulnerabilities.
Some--you know, and I appreciate their concern--have
actually suggested eliminating this program. I am not in that
posture. Although we are trying to understand how necessary the
program is for us economically and what we need to do to make
sure that we don't have vulnerabilities that we are not really
looking at.
I just was trying to take some notes during your testimony.
Mr. Dow, you were suggesting in the case of South Korea, for
instance, some of the numbers that you were citing were
remarkable in the increase of travel that has happened there
since they have been a participate in the Visa Waiver. As you
mentioned, 23 million travelers last year through the Visa
Waiver countries. Those are some really amazing numbers,
really.
Also, Dr. Bucci, as you were saying, that we should ask the
administration for a list of countries to actually expand the
Visa Waiver Program. We may take you up on that. I think that
is a very good suggestion. You were talking a bit about Poland,
for instance. As I was listening to you, I think you were
talking more in bringing them on-board in terms of
geopolitical--as a motivator, rather than economic. Although
economic certainly, as well.
I guess I would just ask perhaps Mr. Dow or Mr. Bucci, I
don't know if you want to suggest any other countries, other
than Poland. But what are your thoughts on something like that,
of actually using that as a--excuse me--as Dr. Bucci was
talking about in regards to Poland. As you were saying,
particularly because of what is happening in Russia. To me, I
think that is an extremely powerful motivator. More than the
economics, quite frankly. But Mr. Dow?
Mr. Dow. I totally agree with Dr. Bucci as far as giving
the flexibility to Homeland Security to increase, as they did,
to 10 percent. That is how we added 8 Visa Waiver countries
that have been very safe. Countries that we would consider
important are--in addition to Poland--would be Brazil, Israel,
Croatia, Argentina, Bulgaria, Panama, Romana, and Uruguay.
There are 9 countries that are very close to those numbers that
we are looking at, and a slight change would enable us to look
at them.
If you just took Brazil, Poland, and Israel and Croatia and
added them, immediately, within 1 year, I guarantee you would
have a million new visitors to the United States who would
spend $11 billion and 61,000 jobs. So this is a great
opportunity. But we have got to have the strict standards you
talk about, improve the program as you said, and then look at
adding Visa Waiver--to countries the Visa Waiver Program, which
would actually increase our security.
Mrs. Miller. Anybody else want to comment on that?
Mr. Bucci. Just that any of the countries with which we
have treaty alliances, that we are willing to fight together
with against a common enemy, should at least be considered for
this program. They should meet the standards and preferably
have the waiver ability to the higher standard. Because we
think that visa refusal rates is not necessarily the best
measure of it. We think having a accurate overstay rate metric
would be better. Not--and I know the committee really likes the
biometric exit thing. We would love to see biometric exit, if
we could get the administration to start counting the overstay
rate at all, even with the current methodologies, then the
expense of a biometric exit would be I think worthwhile.
Right now, until we can get them to do that, adding the
biometric requirement, it would be another really expensive
program that the administration wasn't using. So I like the
idea. But we have got to get the administration to actually do
the overstay counting and enforce it. If we could add those
things, I think there are several countries that we could get
in here that would have great benefit geopolitically in
addition to the security.
I love the economic part. But you know what, if it really
hurt the security, I would say bag the economics. They agree
with me. But it is--right now, it actually helps security. So
we should--you know, you don't often get those two coming
together. It is nice to utilize it when it does.
Mrs. Miller. Dr. Frey, it looks like you want to jump in
here.
Mr. Frey. I do, yes.
Mrs. Miller. But I have one other question for you, as
well.
Mr. Frey. Okay. Well, let me make a brief point----
Mrs. Miller. Okay.
Mr. Frey [continuing]. About--just because it is a perfect
follow-up from Dr. Bucci's comment.
Security does have to be paramount. In that context, it is
worth noting that for potential countries, the Visa Waiver
Program has served as a tremendous incentive to raise security
standards and begin to cooperate on these issues. To cite just
two examples of the countries named, both Poland and Croatia,
for example, have already signed and are implementing the
information-sharing agreements that we are talking about in
anticipation of being qualified for VWP when and if the time
comes.
So we are reaping benefits from a security perspective just
by holding the carrot out to these countries and saying here
are your target, you might as well start meeting it now. These
countries have generally done so.
Mrs. Miller. But what do you make of the fact I mentioned
in my opening state that after a recent terrorist attack in
Europe, all of a sudden we received quite a bit of information
of names that had previously not been on our radar screen here
from some of the Visa Waiver countries? You were talking a
little bit about these audits that the Department does and that
you have been personally involved in. Maybe you can flesh that
out a bit. What is your thought on that?
Mr. Frey. Yes, thank you, Chairman Miller.
I think that as you have said and others have said,
information sharing and intelligence sharing is the cue to
this. To the extent countries are not meeting their obligations
or we are finding out after the fact they are not meeting their
obligations, there should be measured consequences for doing
so. I was not aware of this particular issue. I do know from
conversations with former colleagues at DHS and elsewhere that
we are getting a number of names.
I heard a--I think a statistic last week during testimony
that there were something like 5,500 names provided--known and
suspected terrorists provided to DHS via the so-called HSPD6,
Known and Suspected Terrorist Information-Sharing Agreement. Of
those 2,500 or so were new, folks that were not on our radar.
The other 3,000 or so provided additional amplifying data,
maybe another name, an alias, a phone number to information we
already had.
So I can't speak to this particular example. But as a
general matter, yes, countries have signed up to a certain
standard of information sharing with respect to both terrorists
and criminals, and they ought to be held to that standard. If
DHS finds out that they are not or it turns out that there is a
gap, then that gap ought to be addressed.
Mrs. Miller. Really in my last question, a comment really I
guess, is that is part of our legislation, of course; is that
we do give the Department of--the Secretary of Department of
Homeland Security--tools is really what we are looking for. If
we find that some of the Visa Waiver countries are not sharing
information in the form that we need to be--to have our comfort
level where it needs to be, that he has the ability to suspend
these countries.
I don't know if any of you have any thought about that
portion of our bill. Dr. Bucci.
Mr. Bucci. Yes, ma'am. I think that is a great idea. They
should have that tool. Countries measure their interests in
different ways at different times, and they sometimes shift. We
saw an explosion of information sharing post-9/11. Everybody
realized holy smoke, we really need to get on this. It got much
better. Didn't get perfect. After the Charlie Hebdo attacks in
France, several of our allies, maybe we should be sharing a
little more than we were. They are. That will continue.
But I think having the Secretary of DHS, having that
ability to have a stick in addition to a carrot is useful. Used
wisely, should keep that level of information sharing high.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you.
Chairman recognizes my Ranking Member.
Mr. Vela. Thank you, Chairman Miller.
Dr. Frey, I suppose that the reason the travel industry
likes the Visa Waiver Program is because it just makes it more
efficient for travelers coming over. Can you explain to me
exactly what is it that a person traveling from a non-Visa
Waiver Program has to go through that makes it more difficult?
Mr. Frey. Thank you. I think--well, my colleague, Dr.
Bucci, has already addressed part of that question. But the
main inconvenience factor, if that is what you mean by makes it
more difficult, is that if you don't have Visa Waiver status--
or, frankly, and it is important to clarify that even under
Visa Waiver Program status, we are talking about travel to
United States under one particular category of visa, the so-
called B visa for short-term stays up of to 90 days for tourism
or business travel purposes.
So even if you are a Visa Waiver country, citizens from
that country who are coming over here to work, to study, or for
any purpose longer than 90 days still has to go through the
visa process. So we are talking about a subset of travel, not
the entire visa system. But certainly for a non-Visa Waiver
country, a citizen would have to go make an appointment at the
embassy or consolate, fill out the visa application form,
submit to an interview, present biometrics, a digital
photograph, and fingerprints. Then there is vetting done. That
person is ultimately issued a visa.
I think it is worth making a couple of points in that
respect, as well. The vetting done under the Visa Waiver
Program is precisely the same as the vetting done under the
visa program. The additional questions on the visa application
relate much more to economic status and whether you have a job
to come home to or property that you own rather than are you a
security threat. So we can do sufficient vetting based on the
information provided by ESTA. So the databases that the--either
the State Department or CBP runs the information against are
the same and return the same results.
It is also worth pointing out, of course, that for a number
of these countries, the United States issues 10-year, multiple-
entry visas. So even if you have an interview the first time,
you have a 10-year period under which that interview is
increasingly out-of-date. Now, the State Department does
vetting, recurrent vetting on visa applicants, just as DHS does
recurrent vetting on ESTA approvals. So you do have that
backstop.
But if someone is putting quite a lot of weight on the
interview, even if you accept that it adds security value--and
I would agree with my colleagues that compared to all the other
benefits of the Visa Waiver Program, it more than makes up for
what is in the interview. But even that interview has a
fleeting value. Because it is once, the first time, and then
you have potentially a 10-year, multi-entry visa.
But just going to make an interview appointment, waiting in
potential line at the consulate, et cetera, is what is the
inconvenience factor associated with the visa travel for not
much more, if any, security benefit. As a matter of fact, I
would say not additional security benefit at all.
Mr. Vela. Mr. Dow, I looked at the list of participating
countries, and I didn't see Mexico on it. Is Mexico a
participating country or not?
Mr. Dow. We work with Mexico already and have the visa
situation--visa--they have to have visas in Mexico.
Mr. Vela. Okay. So they don't participate in the program?
Mr. Dow. Right.
Mr. Vela. Okay. Mr. Jenkins, you mentioned that in the
future what we are expecting is about 10,000 European fighters
going into the Middle East. What is your best estimate as to
what we should do to--how do we track them, how do we make sure
that when they leave the Middle East and go back to Europe that
they are monitored and that for sure we do everything we can to
prevent them from coming here?
Mr. Jenkins. So this is--this relates to the previous
issue, and in terms of intelligence sharing. The problem that
the Europeans--not that I am here to defend Europeans. I mean,
intelligence exchange arrangements are very, very complicated.
Over a period of time, they also tend to become a bit routine.
If it is not a front-burner issue, it takes a while to get
lists updated.
I think the avalanche of names seen after the Charlie Hebdo
attacks in Paris reflects not simply their increased
willingness to share with us, but also their realization that
their compilation of those lists and sharing with one another
was not at a level where it should be. We are going to depend
primarily on them to help us keep track of those names. That
is, those are their nationals. We can assist them in this. But
we ultimately depend on their ability to do that. So we want to
make sure that they have the very best list.
The other areas where we can provide some assistance is on
ground borders. Right now, everyone thinks that these people
will return via airliners, which is--which has been true thus
far. But right now, Turkey is a key to this thing. Because
people are coming back from the Middle East into Turkey, and
then crossing land borders into Greece or Bulgaria. These are
countries--especially Bulgaria, it is a member of NATO, it
needs resources. It can use some help in strengthening that
land border. So we can help reinforce some of the priorities
that the Europeans have already addressed.
Mr. Vela. One last quick question. Of the current 3,000 or
the expected 10,000 European fighters, can we tell what
percentage of those are from Visa Waiver Program participating
countries and which are not?
Mr. Jenkins. By the way, let me clarify here that the
10,000 is not my guess. The 10,000 is a guess by French
officials as to what may happen. The number could be less, it
could be greater than that. I expect to see these numbers will
be on the move. Every revision we have seen, there have been
dramatic increases every time.
The bulk of those going from Europe are going from France,
Belgium, the United Kingdom, Germany. Less--far less--smaller
numbers going from Eastern European countries. So the bulk are
going from a handful of Western countries. France recently
revised its total up to 1,400 now that are believed trying to
go or who have already departed for the Middle East. So it is
primarily a handful of Western European nations.
Mr. Vela. Thank you.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you.
The Chairman now recognizes and welcomes to the committee
Mr. Hurd, Will Hurd from Texas, who--the gentleman has spent
over a decade as a covert officer in the CIA. We certainly with
your background welcome you so much as a new freshman to our
committee.
Mr. Hurd. Madam Chairman, thank you. Ranking Member, it is
always a pleasure.
One of my jobs when I was in--as an undercover officer in
the CIA was--my cover job was stamping visas. So I am very
familiar with this program. I would like to--you know, my
denial rate was pretty high. So I was pretty tough.
One of the purposes of this hearing is to examine the
programs and mechanisms that are in place of the Visa Waiver
Program and which strengthens homeland security and help us us
identify foreign fighters. My first question is to you, Mr.
Frey. You talked about these DHA audits. What other controls
are there to determine that the countries participating in this
are following, you know, the rules and regulations of the
Electronic System for Travel Authorization?
Mr. Frey. Thank you for that question, Congressman. I think
there are two--it is helpful to think about the Visa Waiver
Program operating on two levels; the individual level, and the
country level.
To talk about the individual level, that is where ESTA, the
Electronic System for Travel Authorization, is coming in. An
applicant must go on-line to get authorization to travel, puts
in biographic data. Just as recently as November, DHS added
additional biographic data that they are collecting. They
should be encouraged to continue to evaluate ESTA to look for
additional information that will be helpful for a vetting
process.
Then that--the traveler will get a red light or a green
light as to whether or not they have an ESTA approval. If they
do not have a green light, the airline will not board them for
a flight.
Mr. Hurd. So to be clear, you can't just wake up--I am a
Frenchman, I wake up one day, I want to go to New York City. I
just can't go to the airport and jump on a plane?
Mr. Frey. That is right. That is precisely right. Prior to
ESTA, you could do something very similar to that. That was
precisely the reason in 2007 that we implemented the Electronic
System for Travel Authorization; to give us advance notice, to
allow us to do the advance vetting, so that you couldn't do
that as a Frenchman.
Airlines are now fully compliant. Again, while I am sure as
in everything it is possible for mistakes to happen, airlines
are subject to fines and other penalties if they transmit or
transport people without proper ESTAs, just as they are if they
transmit and transport people without proper visas.
So that is the individual level. At the country level, the
DHS team goes in, reviews the security standards, talks to CT
and security officials to get a sense of how things are going,
looks at how passports are being issued and, in fact,
manufactured and what vetting is done on passport holders, for
example, to make sure they are meeting the citizenship
requirements and have criminal background checks and all the
things these countries implement. Go to the land border, go to
the airports to review security procedures and vetting
capabilities. So it is a fairly intensive review; one where
DHS, along with elements of the intelligence community and, of
course, the State Department and potentially the FBI go in and
ask these questions.
Mr. Hurd. That type of audit, how often does it happen?
Mr. Frey. That formerly happens per the statute at least
every other year. It is probably a 6- to 9-month process from
beginning to end. In between, DHS has set up a sort-of a
continuous monitoring process using its assets overseas,
whether CBP or ICE or obviously State Department personnel, and
gets reporting on that.
Mr. Hurd. For France, the United Kingdom, Germany, Belgium,
are you aware of whether this review has been done in the last
6 months?
Mr. Frey. I am not aware of the exact cycle and whether
they have been done in the last 6 months.
Mr. Hurd. Okay. All right. Thank you.
Dr. Bucci, this question is for you. I guess compare and
contrast the information sharing that happens between countries
that are part of the Visa Waiver Program and not part of that.
I would welcome, Dr. Frey, your insight and the other
gentleman on the panel's insight on this question too.
Mr. Bucci. Well, it kind of depends on the bilateral
agreements. Info-sharing traditionally is done bilaterally.
When I was the attache in Albania, we established an info-
sharing regime with them. It was not as intense as this. It was
not as routinized as this. So you would have to go across the
whole country, Congressman, our whole world, looking at each
individual bilateral agreement.
Friendly countries, we usually have some sort of info-
sharing or intelligence-sharing arrangement with them. Some it
is very little. Some it is pretty extensive. This is probably
one of the broadest compilations of information sharing that
you will find, other than the very specific, like the Five Eyes
is kind of relationships that we have with those very specific
countries.
But this is tailored to take care of the traveler, the
information that DHS needs to find someone who is traveling
with mal-intent. I think that the various programs that are
illustrated on that graphic I referred to are pretty extensive,
are pretty well-selected to give DHS the information it needs.
If it needs to call on other parts of the U.S. Federal
Government, fine. But this is a--the Visa Waiver Program gives
them a pretty enormous set of tools to find the bad guys if
they are coming in this way.
Mr. Frey. Thank you. I would agree with all of that and add
a couple points. Just one, in many cases, the Visa Waiver
Program builds on already very strong information sharing. You
mentioned the Five Eyes. Of course, with the exception of
Canada, those countries are all under the Visa Waiver Program.
So there are relationships there.
What the VWP does in those cases which is very important,
as you said, it institutionalizes those relationships, some of
which may be based on personal relationships or--you know, and
people obviously rotate to other jobs. This makes it automated,
and it makes it institutionalized.
With newer countries--newer members of the program or
countries with which the United States has had a shorter
relationship, it really is what kick-started the information
sharing. So that is what produces, when put together, the real
value of the information sharing under the program. Because it
is calibrated towards each of these countries and what
information they have.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. Thank you.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you.
The Chairman now recognizes the young lady from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. Good morning. I thank the
Chairman very much. I thank the Ranking Member for this very
valuable hearing. I recall that this subcommittee, Madame
Chairman, and Ranking Member have really been on point on the
Visa Waiver issue.
As you may recall, we did a hearing in September 2014.
Really, seems as if we have been doing a number of things, and
even passed a bill if I recall when we did the border security
bill that we were very concerned about the issue of Visa
Waiver.
To the witnesses, let me thank you for your testimony and
mention that this hearing is more potent probably in this time
and era than ever--that we have ever had questions of Visa
Waiver Programs. I have seen this over my years of service in
the United States Congress. As we note, our friend and ally
Turkey, continually in the spotlight because of its border and
relationship--or its relationship to Syria. Whether or not it
is Denver teenagers leaving and going through Turkey or London
teenagers going through Turkey, then we know for sure that
foreign fighters can travel, and particularly those who have
Visa Waiver structures in their own countries.
I would like to ask unanimous consent to put into the
record H.R. 48, Madame Chairman. It is a bill that I hope that
we can work on together in the Homeland Security Committee,
both this committee, it is to review a--to require a review of
the completeness of the Terrorist Screening Database maintained
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the derivatives
terrorist watch list utilized by the Transportation Security
Administration and for other purposes.
Mrs. Miller. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

114TH CONGRESS

1ST SESSION

H.R. 48

To require a review of the completeness of the Terrorist Screening
Database (TSDB) maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
the derivative terrorist watchlist utilized by the Transportation
Security Administration, and for other purposes.

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

January 6, 2015

Ms. Jackson Lee introduced the following bill; which was referred to
the Committee on the Judiciary

A BILL

To require a review of the completeness of the Terrorist Screening
Database (TSDB) maintained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
the derivative terrorist watchlist utilized by the Transportation
Security Administration, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America in Congress assembled,

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.

This Act may be cited as the ``No Fly for Foreign Fighters Act''.

SEC. 2. REVIEW OF THE COMPLETENESS OF THE TERRORIST SCREENING DATABASE
(TSDB) MAINTAINED BY THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION AND THE DERIVATIVE TERRORIST
WATCHLIST UTILIZED BY THE TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION.

(a) In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the
enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, acting through the
Director of the Terrorist Screening Center, shall complete a review, in
coordination with appropriate representatives from the Department of
Homeland Security and all other relevant Federal agencies, of the
completeness of the Terrorist Screening Database (TSDB) and the
terrorist watchlist utilized by the Administrator of the Transportation
Security Administration to determine if an individual who may seek to
board a United States-bound flight or a domestic flight and who poses a
threat to aviation or national security or a threat of terrorism and
who is known or suspected of being a member of a foreign terrorist
organization is included in such Database and on such watchlist.
(b) Report.--Not later than ten days after the completion of the
review under subsection (a), the Director of the Terrorist Screening
Center shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House
of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and
Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report on the findings of such
review.

Ms. Jackson Lee. The other purposes includes this question
of Visa Waiver. I think that we would be in a strong position
to move forward on legislation like that.
Let me focus my questioning, Mr. Jenkins and others who may
wish to answer. Please, steer me if I am making a misstatement.
But I believe the Terrorist Center Database and the watch list
is not created or maintained by DHS. This is done by
intelligence agencies; is that correct? So I have a concern
that the data sharing from the Visa Waiver Program nations has
to be shared with the DHS through the terrorist screening
database and watch list.
The premise of my statement is that you are all four here
raising important concerns. I know there is a value to the Visa
Waiver Program, because I know that Poland for decades has been
asking to participate, and others in this program. The long
list continues to have countries that wish to be part of it.
So my question is--let me start with Mr. Jenkins. I heard a
comment being made at the table that this administration
doesn't keep a list. Having served just a few years in the
Congress, I can say administrations don't really keep after
visa waivers. That is why the United States Congress continues
to have these hearings.
So Mr. Jenkins, since we are problem solvers, I would ask--
you just heard the premise of my legislation--a greater sharing
of the database with the Department of Homeland Security and
some infrastructure dealing with Visa Waiver lists, overstays,
to really get us in the business of Visa Waiver, making it
work, but also protecting the Nation.
Mr. Jenkins. In terms of the management of--the fact that
one agency may manage the list, put together, assemble these
lists and manage it, should not interfere with other agencies
having access. So an ESTA application, however it comes in and
is processed, it is checked against the tide and the other
lists that reside in other parts of the U.S. Government.
So the fact that DHS is not the manager of this database is
not an impediment to checking of names. In fact, names--matches
have been found on ESTA applications, and potential terrorists
denied entry as a consequence.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, I will follow up with that. It
should not be an impediment. But I think there is no intent in
my question to suggest that the management be switched. The
intent of my question is to indicate that DHS does not manage
it. So it is an agency that has responsibility for domestic
security. I believe there should be a more structured role for
DHS in the sharing--or in the handling of the list. So I always
think that we can improve the quickness, the accuracy of the
list. I think the Department of Homeland Security should be
engaged in that.
Mr. Jenkins. I would certainly agree with that. Here is an
area where as I say, Visa Waiver Program is one component. In
increasing the intelligence role, the capabilities and
intelligence role of both immigration as well as Customs and
Border Patrol----
Ms. Jackson Lee. Yes.
Mr. Jenkins [continuing]. Which are DHS agencies, that is
something that has been recommended by other groups already;
that these are a line of defense and we can do more of that in
that area.
The other thing is in terms of building a National strategy
that will bring all of these key players together, agencies
within DHS, those within the intelligence community, State
Department, and so on, to ensure that these are not isolated
separate lines of defense but, in fact, part of a multi-layered
system of defense. That, I think, has to be our goal. That is
going to take some--this is a big, complicated Government. That
takes--that is an issue--to ensure that that is being done is
an appropriate role for Congressional oversight.
Ms. Jackson Lee. If I just may conclude, I will just end on
this note. I see my time is over. I thank the Chairman and the
Ranking Member for their indulgence.
As we train Customs and Border Protection and Border Patrol
Agents always put it in the context of the Constitutional
protections that we have, citizens may be caught up in the
movement in and out of the country.
But the other point is that I think the premise of the Visa
Waiver Program is good, but we live in a different world. The
very point that you made I think is an important instruction
and one that I think can be modeled in this committee and used
with H.R. 48 as a framework to have that gathering of layered
coming together of the agencies to make a surefooted way of
addressing the Visa Waiver Program, of keeping it, but as well
ensuring that it is a program that does not have the loopholes
that many of us see.
I thank you for your testimony. I hope, Madam Chairman,
that our friend Turkey, our ally, that we can begin to work
with them as other countries on some of the challenges that
they are facing and some of the challenges that are posed
because of their geographic location. I yield back.
Mrs. Miller. Chairman now recognizes the gentleman from
Pennsylvania, Mr. Barletta.
Mr. Barletta. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Dr. Bucci, in your testimony you cite to 2012 GAO testimony
and a 2011 GAO testimony report that found that only roughly
half of the 36 countries in the Visa Waiver Program at that
time were participating in the information-sharing agreements
as they pertain to terrorist watch lists or crime. Now, I know
these figures have reportedly improved. Do you know how many
there are now?
Mr. Bucci. The last report, Congressman, said that pretty
much all of the participating members in the program had now
vastly improved in their information sharing and were trending
to reaching a level where they needed to be. That is because
not everyone is there yet. That is one of the reasons why we
support the giving the Secretary that ability if somebody backs
off on that, that he has that stick.
So they are moving in the right direction. I think we can
comfortably say now that all 38 members are sharing
information. Some are sharing a little more than others. But
they are all moving in the positive direction.
Mr. Barletta. But not all to the level where we are
satisfied that they are sharing all of the information?
Mr. Bucci. No. It is not 100 percent equal across the
board.
Mr. Barletta. So I guess Mr. Jenkins talked about the
number of European fighters; that they are increasing as we
speak. So why would we, or should we--why would we or should we
allow any country to participate or not remove a country from
the list who are not sharing the information to the level that
we are satisfied with the threat to the United States? As we
talk with so many European foreign fighters now being--joining
ISIS, why would we not remove them or allow them to continue to
participate until they do what we need?
Mr. Bucci. I think we should remove them if they are not
meeting that. But I think at that point today that DHS would
tell you, and the GAO most recent reports would say, that
everyone is reaching that standard. Now, as I say, some are
sharing even more. But some of those are countries like the
United Kingdom that we have had long-standing intel-sharing
agreements that go way beyond anything that is in this program.
So the ones that are exceeding those things--the others are
not gonna reach the standard that the United Kingdom has. We
don't share that kind of information with them. So at this
point, I would agree if there were someone who was being very
recalcitrant, not sharing the information--and then the last
part, Congressman, I will throw out. In some cases we don't
know what they are not sharing. We found out with France all of
the sudden hey, they had a whole bunch of people that they were
watching that they hadn't told us about. I don't think it was
any mal-intent there. They felt that those people didn't rise
to the level that they needed to share it. After Charlie Hebdo
they realized yes, that was a bad call, they needed to be
sharing that. Now they are.
So this kind of thing--and I will be honest with you, the
other aspect is that some of this is the result of Mr. Snowden
and the revelations that came out there that kind of put a
little frost on info-sharing with some of our friendly
countries that Charlie Hebdo I think blew the frost off a lot
of them and they decided yes, maybe we didn't like that, but we
have got to move forward on this to protect ourselves and for
them to protect themselves.
Mr. Barletta. A July 2013 GAO report revealed that DHS has
lost track of over 1 million foreign visitors to the United
States.
Mr. Frey, what mechanisms does the Visa Waiver Program have
in place to ensure that individuals who enter the United States
under the program leave when they are supposed to?
Mr. Frey. Thank you for that question, Congressman. I don't
know if it is the right frame--I think what mechanisms does the
Visa Waiver Program have in place. The Visa Waiver Program is
part of the larger border security entry/exit program the
United States has. As such, the Visa Waiver Program sort-of
both benefits and in some cases suffers from some of the flaws
or gaps in that program.
I agree that--with some of my colleagues here and some of
the statements made that DHS needs to produce these overstay
numbers and show us the tracking methodology. They haven't to
date for a host of reasons. But I think the data that I have
seen, some of it at this point dated. But nevertheless, data
that I have seen show that Visa Waiver Program travelers, as
you might expect, don't overstay in any significant numbers.
They come here for their business trip, they come here for
their family vacation, whatever it is, and they go home.
Mr. Barletta. How would we know that?
Mr. Frey. Well, we know that because DHS does have a
biometric--I am sorry--a biographic exit system based on the
passenger manifest being submitted to Customs and Border
Protection. Because the 99 percent-plus of Visa Waiver Program
travelers travel via air, very few will enter or exit the
United States via the land border, the system in that case
works. To the extent that DHS can take the manifest from the
airline, from British Airways going from J.F.K. to London and
say oh look, here are the people who left. We saw when they
entered; they entered 3 weeks ago. We check them off as they
leave.
Now, the system isn't perfect. Partly because there can be
and have been, you know, name mismatches. Partly because some
airlines, frankly, do a better job than others in giving a
complete manifest. But that system is slowly improving. It does
need to get better. I think every day it is getting better. But
in the Visa Waiver air environment context, I think DHS has got
fairly good visibility into who is coming in and in particular
who is leaving.
Mr. Barletta. That is great. Okay. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chairman.
Mrs. Miller. I thank the gentleman.
The Chairman now recognizes the gentlelady from Arizona,
Martha McSally. We also appreciate her joining our committee.
She has served in the Air Force for 26 years previous to coming
from--coming to Congress. She was the first female pilot,
fighter pilot to fly in combat, and the first to command a
fighter squadron.
So we appreciate you joining our committee. We are looking
forward to working with you.
Ms. McSally. Thank you, Madam Chairman. I appreciate it.
Mrs. Miller. Chairman recognizes.
Ms. McSally. Dr. Frey, to follow up on the previous
question, you mentioned that the administration has not
reported the visa overstay numbers for a variety of different
reasons. Could you go through some of those reasons?
Mr. Frey. Happy to, Congresswoman. Obviously, happy to do
so from my perspective. The administration or the Department
may have different views of this.
Ms. McSally. You may be more free to----
Mr. Frey. That is true. I think that some of which--some of
them I have already discussed. In the air environment, it is a
biometric--I mean a biographic system that relies on the
airlines to be able to submit the information. In the past that
has been problematic. In part, for example, because there have
been various airline mergers over the last several years. As a
result of those mergers, they have been forced to integrate old
IT systems. You know--and that has proven difficult sometimes
in interfacing with CBP and getting the appropriate
information. That problem I think has been a bit worsened by
some of the lower-cost you know, budget carriers that have now
been in the market that, again, they are not spending all that
much time on these issues, or perhaps as much time as they
should.
I think though that the bigger problem, of course, is that
the air environment is only part of this. It is a big part for
the Visa Waiver Program. But it doesn't address the land border
issue. If you really want to have an accurate overstay count,
you are going to have to be able to address the land border
problem. That from both an infrastructure and a resource
perspective has proven to be a very difficult challenge as to
how you ensure that folks are being identified and checked off,
so to speak, when they depart via land. That has been a problem
that DHS has really struggled with.
So my view has always been that even if you move to 100
percent foolproof air exit system--and I think DHS is very
close, in the high 90s in terms of its ability to match by air,
you are still leaving a fairly large gap in the land border.
Until you close that, you are never going to have a true
picture of the overstays.
Of course, the final element here is this is all assuming a
conversation about people who entered legally. Also I don't
want to get--I don't want to--that is a different set of
questions and a different set of challenges. But people who
came in illegally aren't likely to check out legally in any
event, which adds to the overall uncertainty.
Ms. McSally. Other perspectives? Any other----
Mr. Dow. I would just like the say that we--DHS has said to
us that overwhelmingly the number of people leave. It is less
than 1 percent overstay. Even if someone stays 92 days, then
they get reported as an overstay. So those numbers.
But we would like to see DHS release these numbers. We
think it is very important for Congress to know, and we think
that Congress should demand that they get these numbers so we
can take a hard look and really understand that is going on.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thank you.
Mr. Bucci. Just real quickly, a lot of the overstays,
Congressman, are, you know, students and people here on work
visas. Not the VWP kind of travelers who are here for short-
term business meetings or vacation. The problem there is you
have got to get those institutions who have sponsored those
people, either the companies that have hired them or the
universities that have accepted them to let you know when they
disappear.
Until we get that system going--and I know it has been
years and years, and they don't seem to want to get them to do
that. That is what really drives your overstay rates for the
overall system up tremendously. It is really not the VWP folks.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thanks. Turning to another question
on--I know there has been expanded data collected from those
that are applying. Do you think that is enough? I mean, it is
still less than 20 questions versus somebody who has an in-
person interview is about 100 questions. Do we need to expand?
What sort of additional data would be required if we wanted to
do that?
Mr. Frey. Sure, I am happy to take that first. I think that
what DHS did in November was good. I think they evaluated what
additional data they needed to do appropriate vetting, and that
was the answer they came to. I don't think it should stop
there. I think they should continue to evaluate, and I think
they will continue to evaluate.
But I think that the biographic information provided on the
ESTA form, certainly now that it has been expanded, gives you
all you need to do the appropriate security vetting. Most of
the other--the vast majority of the additional questions on the
visa form are not for security vetting purposes. They are for
economic immigration purposes; do you have a house, do you have
a job, what are your family ties back in the country? So that
information is sort-of, kept off from the application when it
goes in for security vetting in any event.
So I think the short answer is yes, DHS probably has what
it needs now, but that shouldn't stop it from looking for more
as the situation evolves.
Ms. McSally. Okay. Great. My time is expired. So if you
just have a brief comment.
Mr. Bucci. Just that this kind of thing never stops. This
is gonna be a process we are gonna have to continue to improve
as we get better computer analysis capability tying in these
other databases. This stuff is gonna go on. This is not
something that you pass the law today and we are done. As much
as Americans like those kind of solutions, in this case that is
not one of those situations.
Ms. McSally. Great. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. I yield back.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you very much.
Just following up on that for my closing comment here, I
just wonder if there is any question that we have not asked the
four of you, as you have all had a opportunity to review our
bill. I am on a mission with this bill. We hope to mark it up
and bring it to the full House, full floor at some point here
shortly. So if there is something else that we should be doing
in there, we would appreciate you telling us at this time,
understanding that it is always going to evolve.
Mr. Bucci. Madam Chairman, I would just say that, you know,
what you are doing is right. This is something that vitally
affects our security and our economy and our relations with
other countries. It warrants the Congressional oversight you
are giving it. It is gonna be something that is gonna
continually evolve, and should. So the positive way that your
committee is looking at this and trying to approach the
situation I think is the right answer. We need to keep at this.
Because the bad guys are continuing to work at it. We need to,
as well.
Mrs. Miller. Yes. Mr. Dow.
Mr. Dow. We also support strongly any improvements to this
system and your bill; we are totally behind it, any way we can
help.
One thing that wasn't asked is, what would happen if the
Visa Waiver Program was suspended. I will give you an example.
In 2002, Argentina was put out of the program, and visitation
to the United States dropped 60 percent. So let's take that
number and apply it to all Visa Waiver countries. That is $114
billion U.S., 600,000 jobs. Just a view--of almost $50 billion
to earn 60,000 jobs.
So I think we have to understand there are two types of
terrorism. There is economic terrorism, and there is physical
terrorism. I think we have to guard against both. So in
closing, we support what you are doing. We think it is
absolutely important to continue to strengthen and improve this
program.
Mrs. Miller. Thank you. Anybody else?
Mr. Frey. Sure. I would reiterate that and say that of
course any measures--and I understand that that is not the
intent here, and I agree with that. It should not be to suspend
or terminate the program. Because we would also lose very
important security benefits and we would--it had have a
significant effect on our close allies in the face of a whole
host of threats, including ISIS and foreign fighters, but also
including Russia and other things. So I am glad to hear that
that is not where we are going.
Because there are sensible reforms. I think the bill in
question makes those sensible reforms and does so not losing
sight of what has been working in the Visa Waiver Program. So
building on what is a very strong foundation. But I guess if
you just asked me what was one more thing that needed to
change--and I have been saying this for a number of years. In
the beginning, I said it somewhat facetiously, but I am
increasingly convinced. The name has to change.
Mr. Bucci. So true.
Mr. Frey. The Visa Waiver Program gives people the wrong
impression. It makes it seem like you can--people are waived
into the country----
Mrs. Miller. That is true.
Mr. Frey [continuing]. Without security checks. It is very
hard to combat that. Because it takes quite a while to explain
here are all the security checks DHS and other do when it is--
when it doesn't seem that way because of the name, so----
Mrs. Miller. Do you have any suggestions on what we should
call it?
Mr. Frey. Sure. The one I have always liked is the secure
travel partnership program. In part because the section of the
9/11 Commission and Limitation Act that made ESTA and the
information-sharing agreements is called the Counterterrorism
and Secure Partnership Act of 2007. So I always thought that
that was a nice way to phrase it. Because it is, it is about
working with secure partners.
Mrs. Miller. All right.
Mr. Jenkins, do you have any final comment?
Mr. Jenkins. No. I like the title too. But I would extend
our--again, the scope. I know the focus here is the Visa Waiver
component. But again, to push and make this part of a National
strategy where we really emphasize both internally among the
agencies in the United States Government, but also externally
with our partners on this; that we can utilize all aspects,
everything from improving land border security in particularly
exposed countries to shaping the expansion of PNR data that is
going on right now in Europe, to Visa Waiver, to expanding the
role of CBP and ICE, that should be part of a National and
international strategy that gets us into really secure travel.
Mrs. Miller. Okay. Well, thank you all, gentlemen. I
certainly appreciate, the committee appreciates all of you
being in attendance today and for your excellent testimony. I
think we all learned a lot today. I know I have some ideas of
what we want to do with this bill. So I want to thank you all.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 7(e), the hearing record will be
held open for 10 days. Without objection, the committee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:22 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
