- EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION-SHARING PROPOSAL

[House Hearing, 114 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S CYBERSECURITY
INFORMATION-SHARING PROPOSAL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FOURTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 25, 2015

__________

Serial No. 114-4

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
94-108 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2015

_______________________________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Michael T. McCaul, Texas, Chairman
Lamar Smith, Texas                   Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
Peter T. King, New York              Loretta Sanchez, California
Mike Rogers, Alabama                 Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Candice S. Miller, Michigan, Vice    James R. Langevin, Rhode Island
Chair                            Brian Higgins, New York
Jeff Duncan, South Carolina          Cedric L. Richmond, Louisiana
Tom Marino, Pennsylvania             William R. Keating, Massachusetts
Steven M. Palazzo, Mississippi       Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Lou Barletta, Pennsylvania           Filemon Vela, Texas
Scott Perry, Pennsylvania            Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Curt Clawson, Florida                Kathleen M. Rice, New York
John Katko, New York                 Norma J. Torres, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Earl L. ``Buddy'' Carter, Georgia
Mark Walker, North Carolina
Barry Loudermilk, Georgia
Martha McSally, Arizona
John Ratcliffe, Texas
Brendan P. Shields, Staff Director
Joan V. O'Hara,  General Counsel
Michael S. Twinchek, Chief Clerk
I. Lanier Avant, Minority Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Ms. Suzanne E. Spaulding, Under Secretary, National Protection
and Programs Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     9
Ms. Phyllis Schneck, Deputy Under Secretary, Cybersecurity and
Communications, National Protection and Programs Directorate,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................     9
Mr. Eric A. Fischer, Senior Specialist, Science and Technology,
Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    17

For the Record

The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Letter.........................................................    25

Appendix

Questions From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Suzanne E.
Spaulding and Phyllis Schneck..................................    47
Questions From Honorable Jim Langevin for Suzanne E. Spaulding
and Phyllis Schneck............................................    48
Question From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Eric A.
Fischer........................................................    48
Questions From Honorable Jim Langevin for Eric A. Fischer........    52

EXAMINING THE PRESIDENT'S CYBERSECURITY INFORMATION-SHARING PROPOSAL

----------

Wednesday, February 25, 2015

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 12:04 p.m., in Room
311, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Michael T. McCaul
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives McCaul, Rogers, Barletta, Clawson,
Katko, Hurd, Carter, Walker, Loudermilk, McSally, Ratcliffe,
Thompson, Jackson Lee, Langevin, Richmond, Payne, Vela, Watson
Coleman, and Torres.
Chairman McCaul. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
First of all, my apologies to the Members and the
witnesses. I had a conflict with the--on the Foreign Affairs
Committee with the Secretary of State on the authorized use of
military force against ISIS, which I think is a very relevant
issue to this committee, as well, in terms of dealing with the
threat where it exists before it can come into the United
States. Anyway, I just want to thank everybody for your
patience.
I will give this opening statement. Been involved in this
issue for quite some time. To Suzanne and Phyllis Schneck,
thank you for being here, Dr. Fischer.
At the dawn of the digital age, our Nation saw endless
opportunities to generate prosperity by expanding our networks
and connecting to the world. But today, American prosperity
depends as much on defending those networks as it does on
expanding them. Every day, our country faces digital intrusions
from criminals, activists, terrorists, and nation-states like
Russia, China, and Iran. The impact of those intrusions are
felt everywhere; from our National security secrets to the
personal information of Americans.
We cannot tolerate acts of cyber vandalism, theft, or cyber
warfare, especially when they put our Nation's critical
infrastructure at risk and when they steal American
intellectual property and innovations. Accordingly, our
Government must play a leading role in combating threats in the
digital domain.
It is clear that safeguarding American cyber space is one
of the great National security challenges of our time. We are
confronted almost daily with frightening new precedents, such
as North Korea's act on Sony Pictures; a cowardly act meant to
intimidate Americans and stifle freedom of expression. This
attack came from a nation-state using a digital bomb to target
and destroy computer systems here in the United States.
Iranian-backed hackers also demonstrated this capability
when they attacked Saudi Arabia's national oil company, Aramco,
and destroyed 30,000 computers. Iran also targeted and
continues to target major U.S. banks to shut down websites and
restrict Americans' ability to access their bank accounts.
Imagine this type of attack on our gas pipelines or power
grids in the northeast. Such assaults on our critical
infrastructure could cripple our economy and weaken our ability
to defend the United States. These scenarios sometimes sound
alarmist. But we must take them seriously, as they grow more
realistic every day. Our adversaries are hard at work
developing and refining cyber attack capabilities, and they are
using them to intimidate our Government and threaten our people
in both times of peace and times of conflict.
But the threat extends beyond the industrial engines that
drive our economies, to the homes of Americans themselves.
Criminals and countries alike can use cyber attacks to raid
Americans' saving accounts or steal their personal health
records. The recent breach of health insurer Anthem illustrates
the intrusiveness of these attacks. That assault alone exposed
the personal information of up to 80 million people, including
the names, birth dates, and Social Security numbers of tens of
millions of children.
But this is just the latest in a long string of cyber
breaches targeting private citizens, a list that includes
breaches at Target, Neiman Marcus, Home Depot, and J.P. Morgan.
Our adversaries are also seeking to steal secrets from our
Government and our most innovative companies. We know that
Chinese hackers, for instance, continue to breach Federal
networks for the purpose of espionage and attack major U.S.
businesses to give themselves a competitive edge in the global
economy.
Make no mistake, these attacks are costing Americans their
time, their money, and their jobs. General Keith Alexander
described cyber espionage and the loss of American intellectual
property as the greatest transfer of wealth in human history.
Sadly, our laws are not keeping up with the threat. For
instance, fearing legal liability, many private companies
choose not to disclose the threats they see on their own
networks, leaving others vulnerable to the same intrusions. We
cannot leave the American people and our businesses to fend for
themselves. Now more than ever, Congress must take aggressive
action.
This year I will lead a renewed effort to push
cybersecurity legislation through Congress. Last year, the
Ranking Member and I in this committee passed five
cybersecurity bills. These new statutes lay out the rules of
the road on how cyber information will be shared between
Government and the private sector so that the two can work
together to combat this persistent threat.
The laws also provide important protections to ensure
Americans' information and civil liabilities are not
compromised. But now we must build on that success. We can
start by creating a safe harbor, where legal barriers to share
cyber threat information are removed and the private sector is
encouraged to collaborate. This will allow us to respond to
cyber incidents more quickly and effectively and will give
Government and private entities the ability to see the threat
landscape in real time.
I am pleased the President has come forward with a proposal
on this important issue. Our solutions must transcend partisan
boundaries if we are going to tackle this challenge, and the
American people are counting on us.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses. I want to thank the
Members for their patience here today.
[The statement of Chairman McCaul follows:]
Statement of Chairman Michael T. McCaul
February 25, 2015
At the dawn of the digital age, our Nation saw endless
opportunities to generate prosperity by expanding our networks and
connecting to the world. But today, American prosperity depends as much
on defending those networks as it does on expanding them.
Every day our country faces digital intrusions from criminals,
hacktivists, terrorists, and nation-states like Russia, China, and
Iran. The impacts of those intrusions are felt everywhere--from our
National security secrets to the personal information of Americans.
We cannot tolerate acts of cyber vandalism, cyber theft, and cyber
warfare especially when they put our Nation's critical infrastructure
at risk and when they steal American intellectual property and
innovation. Accordingly, our Government must play a leading role in
combating threats in the digital domain.
It is clear that safeguarding American cyber space is one of the
great National security challenges of our time. We are confronted
almost daily with frightening new precedents, such as the North Korean
cyber attack on Sony Pictures--a cowardly act meant to intimidate
Americans and stifle freedom of expression.
This attack came from a nation-state using a digital bomb to target
and destroy computer systems here in the United States. Iranian-backed
hackers also demonstrated this capability when they attacked Saudi
Arabia's national oil company, Aramco, and destroyed 30,000 computers.
Iran also continues to target major U.S. banks to shut down websites
and restrict Americans ability to access their bank accounts.
Imagine this type of attack on our gas pipelines or power grid in
the Northeast. Such assaults on our critical infrastructure could
cripple our economy and weaken our ability to defend the United States.
These scenarios sometimes sound alarmist, but we must take them
seriously as they grow more realistic every day. Our adversaries are
hard at work developing and refining cyber attack capabilities, and
they are using them to intimidate our Government and threaten our
people in both times of peace and times of conflict.
But the threat extends beyond the industrial engines that drive our
economy to the homes of Americans themselves. Criminals and countries
alike can use cyber attacks to raid Americans' savings accounts or
steal their personal health records.
The recent breach of health insurer, Anthem, illustrates the
intrusiveness of these attacks. That assault alone exposed the personal
information of up to 80 million people, including the names, birth
dates, and social security numbers of tens of millions of children. But
this is just the latest in a long string of cyber breaches targeting
private citizens--a list that includes breaches at Target, Neiman
Marcus, Home Depot, and JP Morgan.
Our adversaries are also seeking to steal secrets from our
Government and our most innovative companies. We know that Chinese
hackers, for instance, continue to breach Federal networks for the
purpose of espionage and attack major U.S. businesses to give
themselves a competitive edge in the global economy. Make no mistake:
These attacks are costing Americans their time, money, and jobs.
General Keith Alexander has described cyber espionage and the loss of
American intellectual property as the ``greatest transfer of wealth in
history.''
Sadly, our laws are not keeping up with the threat. For instance,
fearing legal liability, many private companies choose to not disclose
the threats they see on their own networks, leaving others vulnerable
to the same intrusions.
We cannot leave the American people and our businesses to fend for
themselves. Now, more than ever, Congress must take aggressive action.
This year I will lead a renewed effort to push cybersecurity
legislation through Congress. Last year, the Ranking Member and I, and
this committee, passed five cyber bills. These new statutes lay out the
rules of the road on how cyber information will be shared between
Government and the private sector so that the two can work together to
combat this persistent threat. The laws also provide important
protections to ensure Americans' information and civil liberties are
not compromised.
But now, we must build on that success. And, we can start by
creating a ``safe harbor'' where legal barriers to sharing cyber threat
information are removed and the private sector is encouraged to
collaborate. This will allow us to respond to cyber incidents more
quickly and effectively--and will give Government and private entities
the ability to see the threat landscape in real time.
I am pleased the President has come forward with a proposal on this
important issue. Our solutions must transcend partisan boundaries if we
are going to tackle this challenge. The American people are counting on
us.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying before this committee
and I look forward to your testimony.

Chairman McCaul. I now recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Let me
also welcome our witnesses and thank them for their patience on
getting started.
Earlier, some of us were briefed on some on-going efforts
by the Department, Mr. Chairman. I might add, it was very
informative. Thank you all very much for doing it.
Our hearing today is examining the President's
cybersecurity information-sharing proposal. Mr. Chairman, at
its core cybersecurity relies on effective information sharing
among network operators about indicator, hacks, and cyber
vulnerabilities.
This committee has been central in its effort to foster
better cyber information sharing by producing bipartisan
cybersecurity legislation that President Obama signed into law
at the end of last year. As you talked about it, the National
Cybersecurity Protection Act of 2014 authorizes the National
Cyber and Communications Integrity Center, NCCIC, within the
Department of Homeland Security as an information-sharing hub
for cybersecurity risk and incidents, and erected the NCCIC to
provide technical assistance, risk management support, and
incident response capabilities to impacted network operators.
The legislative proposal that the President unveiled last
month has again spurred debate. Importantly, the
administration's proposal would require participating companies
to comply with certain privacy restrictions, such as removing
unnecessary personal information and taking measures to protect
any personal information to quality for liability protection.
In my view, the President's proposal has some merit.
As we go forward, we should consider the following
questions: First, what is being shared? Is it just computer
code made up of zeros and ones, or does the information contain
Americans' sensitive personal data? If it does contain personal
data, I believe that reasonable efforts should be made by
participating companies to remove personally identifiable
information from the information shared with the Government
that will help to preserve Americans' privacy.
Second, who is doing the sharing? Is it a critical
infrastructure operator?
Third, where is the sharing happening? The answer to the
question has privacy implications, particularly when the
sharing is between the Federal Government and the private
sector, as opposed to sharing between private-sector companies.
I look forward to hearing testimony from our witnesses on
the potential risks and rewards of a cyber information-sharing
environment dominated by ISAO, as the President envisions.
Certainly, I would like to hear how the proposed changes could
impact NCCIC. The success of NCCIC is dependent on the
companies' seeing the value of proposition for sharing with the
Department.
I look forward to hearing from the Department on how they
intend to drive traffic to the NCCIC and how implementation of
a new cyber law is progressing. I would also like to hear more
about the new education grant program that the President has
proposed.
While I am pleased that the President seems to agree about
the importance of making this investment in growing our cyber
workforce, I am disappointed that the proposal calls for just
$5 million a year to be spent over 5 years at 13 historically
black colleges and universities and two National laboratories
is disappointing, especially in light of a documented shortfall
in cyber workforce. Given the billions of dollars spent on
cybersecurity, much of which is spent on Federal contractors, I
would have expected a more ambitious plan for developing cyber
tactics.
Before I close, I would like to note that on February 11,
together with the Chairman and the leadership of its Senate
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, we wrote
to the President about the new Cyber Threat Intelligence
Integration Center. We look forward to a formal response to our
questions, particularly as they relate to the NCCIC.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and
working with the Chairman on forthcoming legislation to help
ensure that the networks of our Nation's critical
infrastructure are more secure.
With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 25, 2015
Over the past decade, we have witnessed an explosion of internet
use in all aspects of life. As a Nation, we do more business on-line
than ever before--trillions of dollars a year. For most Americans,
smartphones, tablets, and other computers have become the platforms on
which we live, work, and play.
Unfortunately, these devices and networks have also become targets
for bad actors.
Last month's cyber attack on the Nation's second-largest health
insurer, Anthem, resulted in tens of millions of Social Security
numbers, birth dates, addresses, and names being stolen from its
database. Given that Anthem insures 7.5 million people in 14 States,
the potential damage of this breach is expected to be extensive.
Last year's attack on Sony destroyed data, disabled thousands of
computers, and exposed the personal information of Sony employees.
These attacks underscore that any network that is connected to the
internet is a potential victim.
The fact that our Nation's critical infrastructure--including the
power grid, financial institutions, and health care systems--are all
connected to the internet make them particularly attractive targets for
attack.
Cyber attackers are constantly probing for weaknesses in our
critical infrastructure which powers much of our electric grid,
financial institutions, and health care systems.
The attention that cybersecurity has received in recent years by
President Obama and Congress is reflective of the increasing awareness
that the responsibility to address this homeland security threat is a
collective one.
At its core, cybersecurity relies on effective information sharing
among network operators about indicators, hacks, and cyber
vulnerabilities.
This committee has been central in efforts to foster better cyber
information sharing by producing bipartisan cybersecurity legislation
that President Obama signed into law at the end of last year.
The ``National Cybersecurity Protection Act of 2014'' authorizes
the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integrity Center (NCCIC)
within the Department of Homeland Security as an information-sharing
hub for cybersecurity risks and incidents, and directed the NCCIC to
provide technical assistance, risk management support, and incident
response capabilities to impacted network operators.
The legislative proposal that the President unveiled last month
has, again, spurred debate.
Importantly, the administration's proposal would require
participating companies to comply with certain privacy restrictions
such as removing unnecessary personal information and taking measures
to protect any personal information to qualify for liability
protection.
In my view, the President's proposal has some merit.
As we go forward, we should consider the following questions:
First, what is being shared?--Is it just computer code made up of
``zeroes and ones'' or does the information contain Americans'
sensitive personal data? If it does contain personal data, I believe
that ``reasonable efforts'' should be made by participating companies
to remove ``personally identifiable information'' from information
shared with the Government. This will help to preserve Americans'
privacy.
Second, who is doing the sharing?--Is it a critical infrastructure
operator?
Third, where is the sharing happening?--The answer to that question
has privacy implications--particularly when the sharing is between the
Federal Government and the private sector, as opposed to sharing
between private-sector companies.
I look forward to hearing testimony from our witnesses on the
potential risks and rewards of a cyber information-sharing environment
dominated by ISAOs, as the President envisions.
Certainly, I would like to hear how these proposed changes could
impact the NCCIC. The success of the NCCIC is dependent on companies
seeing the ``value proposition'' for sharing with the Department.
I look forward to hearing from the Department on how they intend to
drive traffic to the NCCIC and how implementation of the new cyber law
is progressing.
I would also like to hear more about the new education grant
program that the President has proposed.
While I am pleased that the President seems to agree about the
importance of making this investment in growing our cyber workforce, I
am disappointed that the proposal calls for just $5 million a year to
be spent over 5 years at 13 Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, and two National laboratories, is disappointing.
Given the billions of dollars spent on cybersecurity, much of which
is spent on Federal contractors, I would have expected a more ambitious
plan for developing cyber talent.
Before I close, I would like to acknowledge that the committee just
met with the President's cybersecurity advisor, Michael Daniel. I
appreciate Mr. Daniel's willingness to lay out the administration's
vision for cybersecurity and to address our questions, particularly
about the newly-announced cyber center that will be housed in the
intelligence community.
On February 11, together with the Chairman and the leadership of
the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, we
wrote to the President about this new ``Cyber Threat Intelligence
Integration Center''. We look forward to a formal response to our
questions, particularly as they relate to the NCCIC.
In conclusion, I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
and to working with the Chairman on forthcoming legislation to help
ensure that the networks of our Nation's critical infrastructure are
more secure.

Chairman McCaul. Thank the Ranking Member.
Chairman now recognizes the--I would like to briefly
introduce the witnesses. First, we have the Honorable Suzanne
Spaulding. She is the under secretary for the National
Protection and Programs Directorate at the Department of
Homeland Security.
Next, we have Dr. Phyllis Schneck. She is a deputy under
secretary for cybersecurity and communications within the
National Protection and Programs Directorate at the Department
of Homeland Security. It is great to have both of you here
today.
Finally, we have Dr. Eric Fischer, who is a senior
specialist for science and technology at the Congressional
Research Service.
The witnesses' full statements will appear in the record.
The Chairman now recognizes Ms. Spaulding for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SUZANNE E. SPAULDING, UNDER SECRETARY, NATIONAL
PROTECTION AND PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Spaulding. Thank you, Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member
Thompson, Members of the committee.
We are very pleased to be here today to discuss the
administration's proposal to enhance cybersecurity information
sharing. This proposal recognizes the unique mission and
capabilities of the Department of Homeland Security's National
Protection and Programs Directorate. It will facilitate
information sharing in ways that will significantly advance our
National security.
By placing the Department's National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center, or NCCIC, as the
coordination center for receiving and disseminating cyber
threat indicator information, which will be very quickly
shared. We will receive and disseminate that information to
Federal and non-Federal entities.
As this committee knows, we are faced with pervasive cyber
threats from a variety of actors, including nation-state
actors. They are motivated by a range of objectives, including
espionage, political and ideological beliefs, and financial
gain.
The National Preparedness and Protection Directorate
focuses on helping our partners across Government and non-
Government to manage those cyber risks, to reduce the frequency
and impact of cyber incidents, and to build their own capacity.
We do this by sharing timely and accurate information and
analysis, particularly to enable the private and public-sector
partners to protect themselves. This includes detailed analysis
about cascading consequences in the physical world that can
result from cyber incidents.
We provide technology to detect and block cyber threats
from impacting the dot.gov networks, the civilian Government
networks, and enable those agencies to more readily identify
network security issues and prioritize the actions that they
must take to address those.
We enable commercial cybersecurity companies to use
Government-furnished Classified information to better protect
their private-sector customers. We provide on-site assistance
to critical infrastructure and Federal agencies who have been
impacted by a significant cyber incident. We maintain a trusted
environment for private-sector partners to share information
and to collaborate to address cybersecurity threats and trends.
Congress' support for these activities led to the
bipartisan action last year to pass critical cybersecurity
legislation. That legislation enhanced our ability to work with
the private sector and with other Federal civilian departments.
As been noted, it strengthened the Department's ability to
recruit and to retain the kind of cybersecurity exerts that we
now have on-board.
Enactment of these bills represents significant progress in
the Department's cybersecurity mission. I am very grateful to
Congress, to this committee, and particularly to Chairman
McCaul and Ranking Member Thompson, who contributed significant
efforts to ensure the enactment of this legislation.
But we need to keep moving forward. Additional legislation
is needed. Carefully updating laws to facilitate cybersecurity
information sharing is essential to improving the Nation's
cybersecurity. While many companies currently do share
cybersecurity information with each other and with the
Government under existing laws, there is a growing need to
increase the volume and the speed of such information sharing,
without sacrificing the trust of the American people or
individual privacy and civil liberties.
The President's legislative proposal incentivizes private
entities to share information with the Government through that
National Cybersecurity and Integration Center, or NCCIC, that I
mentioned earlier. That is our 24/7 operations and watch
center. It brings together currently Government partners from
across the Government and the private sector. This is
important.
The NCCIC's core mission, as stated in this committee's
unanimously-passed National Cybersecurity Protection Act, is
coordinating and serving as the interface for cybersecurity
information across the Government and the private sector. We do
this with strong protections in place for protecting privacy
and for protecting sensitive business information.
Having a single designated entry point into the Government
makes it easier to ensure that privacy protections are being
consistently applied across the Government. It reduces the
complexity for the private sector that wonders where to go. It
improves our ability to develop a common operating picture of
the cyber threats that we see daily. It helps us to connect the
dots, if you will, with regard to cyber threats.
I understand that Chairman McCaul has invited Members of
this committee to visit and tour our National Cybersecurity
Communications Integration Center. I look forward to seeing
many of you there and continuing this discussion at that time.
Before I close, I would like to reiterate Secretary
Johnson's comments on the Department's funding situation.
Congress still has not passed a fiscal year 2015 appropriations
bill for the Department of Homeland Security. As long as we
operate on a continuing resolution, we are hampered by
uncertainty and the inability to fund vital new homeland
security initiatives. Without funding, NPBD's cybersecurity and
critical infrastructure mission will be significantly impacted.
Let me end by saying that today, our adversaries can
exploit a fundamental asymmetry in our network infrastructure.
While nearly all of our systems and networks are globally
interconnected, our defensive capabilities are not yet. This
gives the attacker a compelling advantage. They can find and
exploit weak links in our systems from anywhere around the
world at machine speed. By sharing cyber threat indicators in
near real time, we can and will reduce that asymmetry.
I want to thank you for this opportunity to testify. I look
forward to your questions.
I turn it over to my cyber deputy, Dr. Phyllis Schneck.
[The joint prepared statement of Ms. Spaulding and Ms.
Schneck follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Suzanne E. Spaulding and Phyllis Schneck
February 25, 2015
introduction
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the committee, we are pleased to appear today to discuss the
President's cybersecurity legislative proposal on information sharing.
In our testimony today, we will highlight the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) National Protection and Programs Directorate
cybersecurity role and capabilities, and describe how the President's
legislative proposal to facilitate cyber threat indicator information
sharing will further our National security, with DHS's National
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) as the
coordination center to receive and disclose cyber threat indicators to
Federal and Non-Federal entities.
the on-going cyber threat and the dhs cybersecurity role
As a Nation, we are faced with pervasive cyber threats. Malicious
actors, including those at nation-state level, are motivated by a
variety of reasons that include espionage, political and ideological
beliefs, and financial gain. Increasingly, State, Local, Tribal and
Territorial (SLTT) networks are experiencing cyber activity of a
sophistication level similar to that seen on Federal networks.
To achieve our cybersecurity mission, the National Protection and
Programs Directorate focuses on helping our partners understand and
manage cyber risk, reduce the frequency and impact of cyber incidents,
and build partner capacity. We share timely and accurate information
and analysis to enable private and public-sector partners to protect
themselves. We provide on-site assistance to Federal agencies and
critical infrastructure entities impacted by a significant
cybersecurity incident. We provide technology and services to detect
and block cyber threats from impacting Federal civilian networks. We
enable Federal agencies to more readily identify network security
issues and take prioritized action. We enable commercial cybersecurity
companies to use Classified information so they can better protect
their private-sector customers. We perform comprehensive consequence
analyses that assess cross-sector interdependencies and cascading
effects, including the potential for kinetic harm that includes loss of
life, and we maintain a trusted environment for private-sector partners
to share information and collaborate on cybersecurity threats and
trends.
DHS's National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
The NCCIC serves as a 24x7 centralized location for the
coordination and integration of cyber situational awareness and
incident management. NCCIC partners include all Federal departments and
agencies; State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments; the
private sector; and international entities. The NCCIC continues to
explore opportunities to expand its liaison capacity from other
agencies and the private sector. The NCCIC provides its partners with
enhanced situational awareness of cybersecurity and communications
incidents and risks, and provides timely information to manage
vulnerabilities, threats, and incidents. In 2014, the NCCIC received
over 97,000 incident reports, and issued nearly 12,000 actionable cyber
alerts or warnings. NCCIC teams also detected over 64,000 significant
vulnerabilities on Federal and non-Federal systems and directly
responded to 115 significant cyber incidents.
The NCCIC actively shares cyber threat indicators to and from
multiple sources including private-sector partners, the intelligence
community, Federal Departments and agencies, law enforcement, State,
local, Tribal, and territorial governments, and international
governments. This sharing, which has been taking place for many years,
takes many forms including person-to-person interactions on the NCCIC
floor, manual exchange of information via e-mail and secure web
portals, and more recently via automated, machine-to-machine exchanges
in STIX and TAXII protocols. While all of these sharing methods have
value, the cybersecurity community has recognized the strategic
importance of migrating cyber threat indicator sharing to more
automated mechanisms when and where appropriate.
cybersecurity legislation
Last year, Congress acted in a bipartisan manner to pass critical
cybersecurity legislation that enhanced the ability of the Department
of Homeland Security to work with the private sector and other Federal
civilian departments in each of their own cybersecurity activities, and
enhanced the Department's cyber workforce authorities. Enactment of
these bills represents a significant moment for the Department's
cybersecurity mission, and this committee in particular undertook
significant efforts to bring the bills to passage. We are thankful for
your support and we are deploying those additional authorities with
clarity of mission.
Additional legislation is needed. We must take additional steps to
ensure that DHS is able to rapidly and efficiently deploy new
protective technologies across Federal civilian agency information
systems. In addition, carefully updating laws to facilitate
cybersecurity information sharing within the private sector and between
the private and Government sectors is also essential to improving the
Nation's cybersecurity. While many companies currently share
cybersecurity threat information under existing laws, there is a
heightening need to increase the volume and speed of information shared
without sacrificing the trust of the American people or the protection
of privacy, confidentiality, civil rights, or civil liberties. It is
essential to ensure that cyber threat information can be shared quickly
among trusted partners, including with law enforcement, so that network
owners and operators can take necessary steps to block threats and
avoid damage.
The NCCIC plays a critical role in the President's recent
legislative proposal because its core mission--as articulated in the
National Cybersecurity Protection Act, developed by this committee and
unanimously passed by the House in December--is to coordinate and serve
as an interface for cybersecurity information across the Government and
private sector.
The Administration's Information-Sharing Proposal for Cyber Threat
Indicators
Building on the bipartisan cybersecurity legislation enacted last
Congress, President Obama visited the NCCIC on January 13, 2015, to
announce a proposal for additional legislation to improve cybersecurity
information sharing. The President noted, ``Much of our critical
infrastructure runs on networks connected to the Internet . . . [a]nd
most of this infrastructure is owned and operated by the private
sector. So neither Government nor the private sector can defend the
Nation alone. It's going to have to be a shared mission--Government and
industry working hand in hand, as partners.'' This partnership entails
sharing cyber threat indicators to better enable Government agencies
and the private sector to protect themselves.
Information sharing, especially of these technical ``threat
indicators'' that can be used to identify and block malicious activity,
is the lifeblood of effective cyber defense and response. Pulling
together this information allows defenders to identify anomalies or
patterns and recognize dangerous activity before it can do significant
damage. The goal of the President's proposal is to increase the sharing
of this type of information, as quickly as possible, with appropriate
protection for privacy and of sensitive information and systems.
Among other things, the administration's proposal would reduce the
risks for private entities to voluntarily share technical cyber threat
indicators with each other and the NCCIC by providing protections
against civil or criminal liability for such sharing. Equally
important, the proposal narrowly defines the threat indicators that
will be shared, requires that irrelevant identifying information be
minimized from these indicators, and generally requires strong
protections for the privacy and confidentiality of personal
information. Finally, the proposal calls for the creation of
Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs). ISAOs would be
information sharing organizations that would help speed information
sharing within the private sector and between the private sector and
Government.
Our goal is to expand information sharing within the private
sector, and to build on the existing relationships, processes and
programs of the NCCIC to enhance cooperation between the Government and
private sector. The proposal will help us improve the methods that the
NCCIC already uses to share cyber threat indicators, and leverage
automation to achieve scalability wherever possible. We look to evolve
and expand indicator sharing at the NCCIC from human exchanges,
portals, and written reports to automated machine-to-machine
communications. Our vision is that this may reduce the time to receive
and act on indicators from hours to milliseconds, create consistency in
information provided to interagency partners, law enforcement, and the
private sector, and free analysts to focus on the threats that require
human analysis while expediting detection and blocking of new threats.
NCCIC as the Coordination Center
Cyber threat indicators, which allow Government agencies and the
private sector to better protect themselves, come from a variety of
sources, including: Government agencies, private companies,
international partners, and ISAOs. Given the variety of formats used--
and information that is included--when sharing such information, the
Government must have a central clearinghouse to ensure that privacy and
confidentiality protections are consistently applied and that the right
information reaches the right Government and private-sector entities.
DHS is a leader within the Government when it comes to the
development and operational implementation of privacy, confidentiality,
and civil liberties policies. DHS was the first agency to have
statutorily established Officers for Privacy and for Civil Rights and
Civil Liberties. From its creation, DHS has built both privacy and
civil liberties protections into all of its programs and has dedicated,
on-site privacy professionals committed to ensuring that its cyber
mission is carried out in a way consistent with our Nation's values.
Through statutory protections like Protected Critical Infrastructure
Information (PCII), DHS will continue to anonymize the identity of
submitters and other proprietary and sensitive information in threat
indicator submissions. Moreover, the President's proposal calls for DHS
to build upon its existing privacy, confidentiality, and civil liberty
procedures by working with the Attorney General to develop new
procedures to appropriately limit Government receipt, use, and
retention of threat indicators. Establishing the NCCIC as the primary
entry way for cyber threat indicators from the private sector will
ensure uniform application of these important privacy and
confidentiality protections, while still allowing cyber threat
indictors to be shared with law enforcement for the specific purposes
identified in the legislation.
NCCIC sits at the intersection of cyber communities, with
representatives from the private sector and other Government entities
physically present on the NCCIC floor and connected virtually. This
diverse participation in the NCCIC was cemented by section 226(d) of
the Homeland Security Act as added by the National Cybersecurity
Protection Act. NCCIC's core mission is to enable better network
defense by assessing and appropriately sharing information on the risks
to America's critical cyber systems and how to reduce them.
building capacity to accelerate automated sharing of cyber threat
indicators
The administration's proposal directs DHS to automate and share
information in as close to real time as practicable with relevant
Federal agencies, including law enforcement entities, and with ISAOs.
For the past 3 years, DHS has led the development in collaboration with
the private sector of specifications--known as STIX and TAXII--which
standardize the representation and exchange of cyber threat
information, including actionable cyber threat indicators. STIX, the
Structured Threat Information eXpression, is a standardized format for
the representation and exchange of cyber threat information, including
indicators. TAXII, the Trusted Automated eXchange of Indicator
Information, is a standardized protocol for discovering and exchanging
cyber threat information in STIX. The interagency Enhance Shared
Situational Awareness initiative has already chosen STIX as the basis
for sharing cyber threat indicators between the Federal cyber centers,
ensuring interoperability between these key sources of information.
Through collaboration between DHS and the private sector, there is
a solid and rapidly-growing base of commercial offerings supporting
STIX and sharing indicators via the TAXII, including platforms, network
protection appliances and endpoint security tools. While the NCCIC has
in-house systems and tools to assist analysts in generating STIX
indicators, those indicators are currently analyzed and filtered by
human analysts and shared back out with the private sector and Federal
partners through manual methods such as e-mail and secure portals. In
2014, the NCCIC began a limited pilot with several organizations to
test automated delivery of STIX indicators via TAXII.
To inform our plan for achieving automated cyber threat indicator
information sharing, DHS created a working group between a range of DHS
offices and the FBI, a critical stakeholder in the NCCIC. We also
included experts from our Privacy, Civil Rights and Civil Liberties,
and Science and Technology offices, among others, to ensure that our
architecture is based on best-in-class technology and is consistent
with our values and our respect for Americans' privacy and civil
liberties.
Implementation will proceed through four major phases: (1) An
initial operating capability phase in which we will deploy a TAXII
system that can disseminate STIX cyber threat indicators with increased
automation capability, enabling the use of human analysis for the most
complex problems and egregious threats; (2) an expanded automation
phase in which we will develop and deploy DHS infrastructure that can
receive, filter, and analyze cyber threat indicators--during this
phase, we will promulgate guidance for private-sector companies to
minimize, redact, and tag their data prior to submission to NCCIC, and
will complete a Privacy Impact Assessment; (3) a final operating
capability phase in which we will fully automate DHS processes to
receive and appropriately disseminate cyber threat indicators in a
machine-readable format and finalize policies for filtering, receipt,
retention, use, and sharing, including regular compliance reviews; and
(4) a scaled services capability phase, during which DHS will work to
enable agencies that lack sufficient cybersecurity resources or
expertise to receive and share cyber threat indicators with the NCCIC
in near-real time by providing a turnkey technical solution to ``plug
in'' to the NCCIC.
dhs shares information widely with federal agencies and the private
sector
Currently, DHS shares information with Federal agencies and the
private sector. DHS takes a customer-focused approach to information
sharing, and different types of information require differing response
times and dissemination protocols. DHS provides information to detect
and block cybersecurity attacks on Federal civilian agencies and shares
information to help critical infrastructure entities in their own
protection; provides information to commercial cybersecurity companies
so they can better protect their customers through the Enhanced
Cybersecurity Services program, or ECS; and maintains a trusted
information-sharing environment for private-sector partners to share
information and collaborate on cybersecurity threats and trends via a
program known as the Cyber Information Sharing and Collaboration
Program, or CISCP. This trust derives in large part from our emphasis
on privacy, confidentiality, civil rights, and civil liberties across
all information-sharing programs, including special care to safeguard
personally identifiable information.
DHS also directly supports Federal civilian departments and
agencies in developing capabilities that will improve their own
cybersecurity posture. Through the Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation (CDM) program, DHS enables Federal agencies to more readily
identify network security issues, including unauthorized and unmanaged
hardware and software; known vulnerabilities; weak configuration
settings; and potential insider attacks. Agencies can then prioritize
mitigation of these issues based upon potential consequences or
likelihood of exploitation by adversaries. The CDM program provides
diagnostic sensors, tools, and dashboards that provide situational
awareness to individual agencies, and will provide DHS with summary
data to understand relative and system risk across the Executive
branch. DHS is moving aggressively to implement CDM across all Federal
civilian agencies, and Memoranda of Agreement with the CDM program
encompass over 97 percent of all Federal civilian personnel.
While CDM will identify vulnerabilities and systemic risks within
agency networks, the National Cybersecurity Protection System, also
known as EINSTEIN, detects and blocks threats at the perimeter of those
networks or at an agencies' Internet Service Provider. EINSTEIN is an
integrated intrusion detection, analysis, information-sharing, and
intrusion-prevention system. The most recent iteration, Einstein 3
Accelerated (E3A), supplements EINSTEIN 2 by adding additional
intrusion prevention capabilities and enabling Internet Service
Providers (ISPs), under the direction of DHS, to detect and block known
or suspected cyber threats using indicators.
conclusion
We are working together to find new and better ways to share
accurate, timely data in a manner consistent with fundamental American
values of privacy, confidentiality, and civil rights. While securing
cyberspace has been identified as a core DHS mission since the 2010
Quadrennial Homeland Security Review, the Department's view of
cybersecurity has evolved to include a more holistic emphasis on
critical infrastructure which takes into account the convergence of
cyber and physical risk.
Today our adversaries exploit a fundamental asymmetry in our
network infrastructure: While nearly all of our systems and networks
are globally interconnected, our defensive capabilities are not. This
gives the attackers a compelling advantage as they can find and exploit
the weak links in our systems from anywhere around the world--at
machine speed. By sharing cyber threat indicators in near-real time, we
reduce that asymmetry.
As our defensive cybersecurity capabilities become more
interconnected, we greatly reduce the likelihood that an adversary can
re-use attack infrastructure, tools, tactics, techniques, and
procedures. In addition, we greatly reduce the time window in which new
and novel attacks are effective because the ecosystem shares those
indicators and develops a type of ``herd immunity,'' improving defenses
as indicators are shared and events are correlated in near-real time.
These two factors do not eliminate all cyber threats, but they hold the
promise of significantly increasing the time and resources (both
technical and human) that attackers must expend to achieve their goals.
Moreover, the STIX data format and the TAXII transport method are
increasingly compatible with commonly-used commercial information
technology (IT) products. This means more entities are able to send
indicators automatically to the NCCIC, creating an ecosystem of
indicators which will in turn provide greater context to malicious
cyber activity and rapidly increase situational awareness per Executive
Order 13636, Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity and
Executive Order 13691, signed February 13, 2015, Promoting Private
Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing.
DHS will continue to serve as one of the Government's primary
resources for information sharing and collaborative analysis, at
machine speed wherever possible, of global cyber risks, trends, and
incidents. Through our leadership role in protecting civilian
Government systems and helping the private sector protect itself, DHS
can correlate data from diverse sources, in an anonymized and secure
manner, to maximize insights and inform effective risk mitigation.
DHS provides the foundation of the U.S. Government's approach to
securing and ensuring the resilience of civilian critical
infrastructure and essential services. We look forward to continuing
the conversation and supporting the American goals of peace and
stability; in these endeavors, we rely upon your continued support.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and we look forward to
any questions you may have.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Ms. Spaulding. We appreciate
your service and dedication to this important issue.
The Chairman now recognizes Dr. Schneck.

STATEMENT OF PHYLLIS SCHNECK, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY,
CYBERSECURITY AND COMMUNICATIONS, NATIONAL PROTECTION AND
PROGRAMS DIRECTORATE, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Schneck. Good morning and thank you Chairman McCaul,
Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members of the
committee.
Let me echo Under Secretary Spaulding's thanks for
convening this meeting today. Thank you for your tireless
support to our cyber mission and thank you for making it a
constant between my time in the private sector and my time now
in Government, the impact that our work and our legislative
process can have on good things.
The under secretary explained the Department of Homeland
Security's role and capabilities in cybersecurity and explained
why our National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center, our NCCIC, is key and at the forefront of the
President's proposal for increasing the volume and speed of
information sharing.
I would like to amplify that and tell you how we are going
to do this and how we are building that capability. First, to
the Ranking Member's question; what is being shared and what do
we need most? We need information sharing and especially the
technical threat indicators; the bare bones information of, for
example, what is an address of a machine that is doing
something bad that we see? What is the specific code of
software that is being sent to hurt good people? By identifying
these indicators, that is the life blood of cyber defense; by
being able to very quickly recognize them and put them
together.
Pulling together this information, it builds on the rules
of statistics. We have to understand good behavior and bad
behavior to identify anomalies. Identifying those anomalies at
the speed of machines will help us in our cyber defense
initiatives.
The President's proposal defines the kind of information,
specifically, that can be shared and requires very strong
protections around privacy and civil liberties to protect our
personal information and protect those privacy and civil
liberties and American ways of life that we seek to protect and
defend through our cybersecurity mission.
The proposal narrowly defines categories of technical
information used to define and mitigate these threats so that
we can then pull them together. But it does not, for an
example, include exfiltrated information; which means the
information, for example, that someone might have tried to
steal, which could include proprietary information or someone's
private information. So very narrowly-defined information on
what we need to share and share quickly.
The President's ISAO Executive Order will enhance the
information-sharing efforts. The order focuses specifically on
encouraging the formation effectiveness of information sharing
and analysis organizations. They can be profit or nonprofit,
private sector, and they can be composed of any combination of
public and private sectors. The Executive Order directs DHS to
strongly encourage the development of these formations to bring
people together in trusted relationships to share information
that transcends competition to enable those cyber threat
indicators to come together and show us, again at machine
speed, what enemy might be trying to hurt our systems and be
able to see at that 50,000-foot level all over the world what
actions are happening dispersed that we could use to protect
somebody right now.
DHS--this is a very important point--is already sharing
information in real time with Federal agencies and the private
sector. We share with people and machines using people and
machines. We provide information to detect and block
cybersecurity threats to our Federal civilian government
agencies and, as the under secretary mentioned, within that,
using Government-Classified information.
We also provide information to commercial companies so that
they can better protect themselves as well, also with some
systems using that Classified information. We maintain key
trusted information-sharing partnerships at a scientist level
and at policy levels with parts of the private sector so we can
enable us--ourselves and them to understand what is the science
and what are the key things we need to be looking for? So trust
between people and machines.
Where are we going and why is this so important? We need to
up our game to automate. We need to take the machines and
remember that machines are not smart, they are just fast, and
use that very machine speed that the adversary uses to steal
and hurt us in our cyber systems and use that machine to
understand what is happening all over the world and enable our
machines in addition to other technologies to sense bad
behavior before it hurts.
In doing that, part of that is pulling those automated
cyber threat indicators together so that we can start looking
at behavior all over the world and work--and this is very, very
important--in partnership. So no one can do this alone. We need
DHS, we need the FBI, we need the Secret Service, we need the
intelligence community, and we need the private sector.
I thank you, Chairman, as well for all the work you have
done with the private sector to engage them with your committee
and how important it is to work with Government.
We have developed a common language and a common way of
writing cyber threat indicators so that anyone who wants to
share with us can, that can be transported at machine speed,
and that machines can readily read the information; and it
limits itself to what is required to be a cyber threat
indicator. We need to continue to work with our privacy and
civil liberties experts constantly; with the FBI, with the
Secret Service, with law enforcement, with the intelligence
community to manage all the expectations and all of the
equities.
But we are building protocols and structured language to
equalize and normalize with what a cyber threat indicator is,
to have the machines get a lot of the noise out of the way so
our top minds can look at the most egregious threats, and to
have our networks become more self-healing and more resilient.
Finally, I would like to reemphasize the importance of our
NCCIC, our National Cybersecurity Communications Integration
Center, and point out that that is the interface for sharing
cyber information across the Government and private sector. But
we do this in clear cooperation, and as we develop these
protocols, it is with the Secret Service and the FBI and all
the law enforcement and the intelligence community and the
private sector.
This can't work if we do it alone. It has to respect
everyone's equities and all privacy and civil liberties. Having
that single designated entity in the Government reduces
complexity, as the under secretary stated and streamlines our
ability to develop that common picture of the threats we see
daily.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify. I look forward
to any questions you might have.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Just let me say that you have
really done an outstanding job standing up the NCCIC, bringing
the capabilities of the NCCIC to the current threats that we
have. Your experience at McAfee is well-served. I thank the
Department.
With that, the Chairman now recognizes Dr. Fischer.

STATEMENT OF ERIC A. FISCHER, SENIOR SPECIALIST, SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE, LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

Mr. Fischer. Good afternoon, Chairman McCaul, Ranking
Member Thompson, and distinguished Members of the committee.
On behalf of the Congressional Research Service, I would
like to thank you for the opportunity to testify today on
information sharing and cybersecurity. Barriers to sharing of
cybersecurity information are considered by many, as we heard,
to be a significant hindrance to effective protection of
information systems.
That is especially true for critical infrastructure, even
though most recent prominent cases of successful cyber attacks
have not involved such organizations. Many examples have been
cited of legal, technical, and other barriers. In addition,
traditional approaches to security and confidentiality would
themselves impede sharing of information.
There is some disagreement among experts about whether
Federal legislation is needed. Nevertheless, there appears to
be a fairly broad consensus that legislation could be useful if
crafted appropriately. However, there is disagreement also
about what the key characteristics should be. Proposals to
reduce or remove barriers have raised concerns, some of which
are related to the purpose of the barriers; that the barriers
are thought to currently impede sharing.
A key challenge appears to be how to achieve the proper
level of balance that fosters the sharing of useful information
efficiently and effectively, while ensuring avoidance of
adverse impacts. I will touch on five questions that the debate
has tended to focus on.
Question No. 1: What are the kinds of information for which
barriers to sharing make effective cybersecurity more
difficult? Information sharing can involve a wide variety of
materials communicated on a wide variety of time scales. The
level of sensitivity of information can vary. For example, it
may be Classified, proprietary, or personal, or open public
information. Information of any class will also vary in its
value for cybersecurity and the degree to which it needs human
processing to be useful.
To the extent that the goal of information sharing is to
defend information systems against cyber attacks, the focus has
been on actionable information. Such information may often need
to be shared very quickly, as Dr. Schneck has mentioned, with
little or no time for human examination.
Broader information contributing to shared situational
awareness may also be useful; for example, among companies
within a sector. Such information might not be technically
actionable, but helps organizations to analyze their current
security postures and inform their responses.
A key point is that addressing what should be shared, how
and when, is not as straightforward as it may seem. This is
true not only for cybersecurity information, but more broadly
with security information.
Question No. 2: How should information sharing be
structured to ensure that it is efficient and effective?
Information sharing can conceivably lead to information
overload. That can include not only information of uncertain
quality and use, but also similar or redundant information from
a variety of sources.
Various legislative proposals have approached the structure
information sharing differently. The White House proposal would
use information sharing and analysis organizations, which were
created in the Homeland Security Act, but few of which appear
to exist today. It might be useful to clarify the roles of
these and other entities as the committee considers
legislation.
Question No. 3: What are the risks to privacy rights and
civil liberties of individual citizens, and how are they best
protected? Such concerns have been a significant source of
controversy and debate about information sharing and
legislation. They have arisen in part because proposals would
permit sharing of specific information or specified information
by covered private entities, notwithstanding any other
provision of law. That particular phrase has certain
implications that would be worthy of--perhaps of additional
consideration. Now, the various legislative proposals address
privacy concerns in various ways, but there are also many
similarities among them.
Fourth question is: What, if any, statutory protections
against liability are needed? Concerns about liability has
often been cited as a significant barrier to private-sector
information sharing, both with other private entities and with
the Federal Government. There are--in addition to the
notwithstanding provisions, there are also various proposals to
prohibit court actions to protect organizations against such
actions--or against liability concerns and reduce that barrier.
The fifth question, finally, is: What improvements to
current standards and practices are needed to ensure that
information sharing is useful and efficient for protecting
information systems, networks, and their contents? As the other
witnesses have testified, standards for exchange of threat data
have been developed and their use is growing. But there are
also calls for additional standards and best practices. There
are some concerns among observers that such work is needed,
particularly with respect to--well, for example, evaluating the
effectiveness of information sharing.
That concludes my testimony. Once again, thank you for
asking me to appear before you today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Fischer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eric A. Fischer
February 25, 2015
Chairman McCaul, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the committee: Thank you for this opportunity to discuss legislative
proposals on information sharing in cybersecurity.\1\ In January of
this year, the White House announced a revision of its 2011
information-sharing proposal as part of a set of updated proposals and
other actions relating to cybersecurity:\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ This statement is limited to a policy analysis of the proposals
and initiatives discussed and is not intended to reach any legal
conclusions regarding them.
\2\ The White House, ``Securing Cyberspace: President Obama
Announces New Cybersecurity Legislative Proposal and Other
Cybersecurity Efforts,'' Press Release (January 13, 2015), http://
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/13/securing-cyberspace-
president-obama-announces-new-cybersecurity-legislat.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A draft bill to enhance information sharing on cybersecurity
within the private sector and between the private sector and
the Federal Government. Most of my testimony today will focus
on this proposal and related bills in the 113th and 114th
Congresses.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The White House, Updated Information Sharing Legislative
Proposal, 2015, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
legislative/letters/updated-information-sharing-legislative-
proposal.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A draft bill to amend Federal statutes relating to cyber
crime by creating or increasing criminal penalties for certain
types of offenses and providing some other authorities to law-
enforcement agencies and the courts.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The White House, Updated Administration Proposal: Law
Enforcement Provisions, 2015, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/
files/omb/legislative/letters/updated-law-enforcement-tools.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A draft bill to harmonize State laws requiring companies
holding personal information on customers to notify them of
data breaches involving such information.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ The White House, The Personal Data Notification & Protection
Act, 2015, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
legislative/letters/updated-data-breach-notification.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A 5-year, $25 million grant to create a new cybersecurity
consortium consisting of 13 Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), the Lawrence Livermore and Sandia
National Laboratories of the Department of Energy, and a South
Carolina school district. The object of the program is to help
fill demand for cybersecurity professionals while diversifying
the pipeline of talent for this and related fields of
expertise.\6\ This program can be seen as a complement to
legislation enacted by the 113th Congress that addresses
cybersecurity workforce needs in the Department of Homeland
Security \7\ (DHS) and more broadly.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ The White House, ``Vice President Biden Announces $25 Million
in Funding for Cybersecurity Education at HBCUs,'' Press Release
(January 15, 2015), http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/
15/vice-president-biden-announces-25-million-funding-cybersecurity-
educatio.
\7\ H.R. 2952, the Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act (Pub. L.
No. 113-246), and S. 1691, the Border Patrol Agent Pay Reform Act of
2014 (Pub. L. No. 113-277), requiring assessments of workforce needs
within the Department of Homeland Security and providing enhanced
authorities to the Secretary for recruitment and retention of
cybersecurity personnel.
\8\ S. 1353, the Cybersecurity Enhancement Act of 2014 (Pub. L. No.
113-274), establishing in statute a National Science Foundation program
for educating cybersecurity professionals for Government agencies, and
an interagency program of challenges and competitions in cybersecurity
to stimulate identification and recruitment of cybersecurity
professionals more broadly as well as cybersecurity research and
innovation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The announcement also included a description of the White House
cybersecurity summit held on February 13 at Stanford University.
Barriers to the sharing of information on threats, attacks,
vulnerabilities, and other aspects of cybersecurity--both within and
across sectors--have long been considered by many to be a significant
hindrance to effective protection of information systems, especially
those associated with critical infrastructure.\9\ Examples have
included legal barriers, concerns about liability and misuse,
protection of trade secrets and other proprietary business information,
and institutional and cultural factors--for example, the traditional
approach to security tends to emphasize secrecy and confidentiality,
which would necessarily impede sharing of information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See, for example, The Markle Foundation Task Force on National
Security in the Information Age, Nation At Risk: Policy Makers Need
Better Information to Protect the Country, March 2009, http://
www.markle.org/downloadable_assets/20090304_mtf_report.pdf; CSIS
Commission on Cybersecurity for the 44th Presidency, Cybersecurity Two
Years Later, January 2011, http://csis.org/files/publication/
110128_Lewis_CybersecurityTwoYearsLater_Web.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A few sectors are subject to Federal notification requirements,\10\
but most such information sharing is voluntary, often through sector-
specific Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)\11\ or
programs under the auspices of the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) or sector-specific agencies.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Notable examples include the chemical industry, electricity,
financial, and transportation sectors.
\11\ See, for example, ISAC Council, ``National Council of ISACS,''
2015, http://www.isaccouncil.org/. ISACs were originally formed
pursuant to a 1998 Presidential Directive (The White House,
``Presidential Decision Directive 63: Critical Infrastructure
Protection,'' May 22, 1998, http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd/pdd-
63.htm).
\12\ See also CRS Report R42114, Federal Laws Relating to
Cybersecurity: Overview and Discussion of Proposed Revisions, by Eric
A. Fischer; CRS Report R42409, Cybersecurity: Selected Legal Issues, by
Edward C. Liu et al.; CRS Report R42984, The 2013 Cybersecurity
Executive Order: Overview and Considerations for Congress, by Eric A.
Fischer et al.; CRS Report R4381, Legislation to Facilitate
Cybersecurity Information Sharing: Economic Analysis, by N. Eric Weiss.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While there is some disagreement among experts about whether
Federal legislation is needed to address the problem, there appears to
be fairly broad consensus that such legislation could be useful if
crafted appropriately but potentially harmful if not. However, there is
disagreement about what the key characteristics of useful legislation
would be. Proposals to reduce or remove such barriers, including
provisions in legislative proposals in the last two Congresses, have
raised concerns, some of which are related to the purpose of barriers
that currently impede sharing. Examples include risks to individual
privacy and even free speech and other rights, use of information for
purposes other than cybersecurity, such as unrelated Government
regulatory actions, commercial exploitation of personal information, or
anticompetitive collusion among businesses that would currently violate
Federal law.
More broadly, debate has tended to focus on questions such as the
following:
1. What are the kinds of information for which barriers to sharing
exist that make effective cybersecurity more difficult, and
what are those barriers?
2. How should information sharing be structured in the public and
private sectors to ensure that it is efficient and effective?
3. What are the risks to privacy rights and civil liberties of
individual citizens associated with sharing different kinds of
cybersecurity information, and how can those rights and
liberties best be protected?
4. What, if any, statutory protections against liability are needed
to reduce disincentives for private-sector entities to share
cybersecurity information with each other and with Government
agencies, and how can the need to reduce such barriers best be
balanced against any risks to well-established protections?
5. What improvements to current standards and practices are needed
to ensure that information sharing is useful and efficient for
protecting information systems, networks, and their contents?
The White House information-sharing proposal would attempt to
address such questions in several ways. The discussion below includes a
summary of how the proposal would address them in comparison to the
following bills addressing information sharing:

H.R. 234, the Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act
(CISPA), in the 114th Congress, identical to H.R. 624 as passed
by the House in the 113th Congress;

S. 2588, Cybersecurity Information Sharing Act of 2014
(CISA) as reported to the Senate in the 113th Congress;

S. 456, the Cyber Threat Sharing Act of 2015, as introduced
in the 114th Congress.
kinds of information shared
Information sharing can involve a wide variety of material
communicated on a wide range of time scales, ranging from broad
cybersecurity policies and principles to best practices to descriptions
of specific threats and vulnerabilities to computer-generated data
transmitted directly from one information system to another
electronically. The level of sensitivity of information can also vary--
for example, it may be Classified, proprietary, or personal.
Information of any class will also vary in its value for cybersecurity
and the degree to which it needs human processing to be useful.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See, for example, Kathleen M. Moriarty, ``Transforming
Expectations for Threat-Intelligence Sharing,'' RSA Perspective (August
3, 2013), https://www.emc.com/collateral/emc-perspective/h12175-transf-
expect-for-threat-intell-sharing.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the extent that the goal of information sharing is to defend
information systems against cyber attacks, there appears to be a
consensus that shared information needs to be actionable--that is, it
should identify or evoke a specific response aimed at mitigating
cybersecurity risks. To be meaningfully actionable, information may
often need to be shared very quickly or even in an automated fashion.
There may therefore be little or no time for human operators to examine
a specific parcel of data to determine whether sharing it could raise
privacy, liability, or other concerns.
The White House proposal would limit the scope of shared
information covered under the proposal to ``cyber threat indicators,''
which includes information needed to ``indicate, describe, or
identify'' malicious reconnaissance or command-and-control activities,
methods of social engineering and of defeating technical or operational
controls, and technical vulnerabilities, and from which ``reasonable
efforts'' have been made to remove personally identifying information
if the person is thought to be unrelated to the threat. The definition
in S. 456 is largely identical.
The definition in the White House proposal and S. 456 are arguably
the narrowest in scope. S. 2588 also focuses on ``cyber threat
indicators,'' with a definition that is similar to that in the White
House proposal, but is somewhat broader, including other attributes,
such as the actual or potential harm caused by an incident. It also
expressly permits sharing of information on countermeasures--measures
to prevent or mitigate threats and vulnerabilities.
H.R. 234 uses the term ``cyber threat information,'' characterized
as information ``directly pertaining to'' efforts to gain unauthorized
access to information systems or to effect negative impacts on systems
or networks, threats to the information security of a system or its
contents, and vulnerabilities of systems and networks. The bill also
defines a related term, ``cyber threat intelligence,'' with
characteristics similar to those of cyber threat information but is in
the possession of the intelligence community.
structure of information sharing
Information sharing can conceivably lead to information overload,
where an entity receives much more information than it can reasonably
process. That could include not only information of uncertain quality
and use, but also similar or redundant information from a variety of
sources. In addition, a proliferation of sharing mechanisms could lead
to stovepiping, which could reduce sharing across sectors, for example,
and lack of clarity with respect to responsibilities, which could lead
to gaps in sharing useful information. In contrast, a narrow, tightly-
defined structure for information sharing could lead to logjams or
impede innovation in response to continuing evolution of cyberspace.
The White House proposal and S. 456 would create a structure for
information sharing that includes the National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center (NCCIC) as the Federal hub for
receipt and distribution of cybersecurity information, and fostering
the use of private information sharing and analysis organizations
(ISAOs) as recipients of information from private entities.\14\ ISAOs
could presumably also share such information under the provisions of
the Homeland Security Act, but the proposal does not specifically
address that function for them. The proposal would require the DHS
Secretary to ensure that indicators are shared in a timely fashion with
other Federal agencies. S. 456 would require that procedures for such
sharing be established and would specifically require the Secretary to
ensure that both useful Classified and Unclassified information is
shared with non-Federal entities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ ISAOs were defined in the Homeland Security Act (6 U.S.C. 
131(5)) as entities that gather and analyze information relating to the
security of critical infrastructure, communicate such information to
help with defense against and recovery from incidents, and disseminate
such information to any entities that might assist in carrying out
those goals. The proposal covers receipt of indicators by ISAOs but
does not mention communication or dissemination of information by them,
except, by inference, to the NCCIC. Information Sharing and Analysis
Centers (ISACs) are more familiar to most observers. They may also be
ISAOs but are not the same, having been originally formed pursuant to a
1998 Presidential directive (The White House, ``Presidential Decision
Directive 63: Critical Infrastructure Protection,'' May 22, 1998,
http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd/pdd-63.htm).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 234 would create an entity at DHS (presumably the NCCIC \15\)
to share threat information and an entity at the Department of Justice
to share cyber crime information. It would require individual agencies
that receive threat information to develop procedures for sharing it.
In contrast to S. 456, it would require the Director of National
Intelligence to establish procedures for sharing Classified threat
information. It would also designate specific classes of private-sector
entities as those permitted to monitor systems and share threat
information under the bill. Those include entities that provide
cybersecurity goods and services to others or to themselves.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ The text in the bill was originally drafted before the
enactment of the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center Act of 2014 (Pub. L. No. 113-282), which established the NCCIC
by statute.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. 2588 would require DHS to create a ``capability and process''
for sharing both threat indicators and countermeasures. It would
establish an interagency process to develop procedures for sharing
Federal information with the private sector. It would require
development of an interagency process for sharing Classified threat
indicators.
timeliness of sharing
The time scale on which shared information will be most useful
varies. That is especially an issue in an environment where the
relevance of timing for shared information may be measured in seconds
or even milliseconds in many cases.\16\ The White House proposal and S.
456 would address this concern by requiring the NCCIC to share
indicators ``in as close to real time as practicable'' and by requiring
establishment of a program to advance automated mechanisms for such
sharing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See, for example, M.J. Herring and K.D. Willett, ``Active
Cyber Defense: A Vision for Real-Time Cyber Defense,'' Journal of
Information Warfare 13, no. 2 (April 2014): 46-55.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
H.R. 234 and S. 2588 would also require ``real-time sharing.'' The
meaning of this term is not explicitly defined or described in the
bills, but it presumably refers to sharing that occurs rapidly, for
example, by machine-to-machine transmission. That is consistent with
the stated purposes of the legislative proposals, in that threat
information would likely need to be disseminated quickly in order to
detect or prevent incoming cyber attacks, which can occur very quickly.
This raises the question of whether this term should require any
particular mode of sharing, for example, by machine-to-machine
transmission without or with minimal intervening processing by human
operators, and how different interpretations of the term may impact
operational effectiveness, privacy interests, and competition for
technical and financial resources. The White House proposal appears to
address that through its proposed development of automated mechanisms,
and S. 2588 would require development of a process to receive
indicators and countermeasures electronically, including via an
``automated process between information systems.''
privacy and civil liberties
Concerns relating to privacy and civil liberties, especially the
protection of personal and proprietary information and uses of shared
information, have been a significant source of controversy in debate
about information-sharing legislation. Such concerns have arisen in
part because the White House proposal and the bills would permit
sharing of specified cybersecurity information by covered private
entities ``notwithstanding any other provision of law.'' That would
arguably remove barriers to sharing stemming from concerns that
information would inadvertently violate laws such as those on privacy
and anti-trust.
However, it also raises concerns about privacy and civil liberties.
In particular, personally identifying information might be included in
the shared information but might not be related to the threat. In
addition, data analytics might conceivably be used to draw inferences
about identity from data sets even if any given piece of the shared
information would not be identifying. Second, if access to shared
information is not strictly controlled and restricted, or is used for
purposes other than cybersecurity, risks to civil liberties may arise.
Concerns have also been raised about regulatory use of shared
information and disclosure of proprietary business information.
The White House proposal would address such concerns by:

limiting application of the ``notwithstanding'' provision to
indicators disclosed to the NCCIC and ISAOs;

limiting private-sector use of shared indicators to purposes
relating to protection of information systems and their
contents;

requiring minimization of personally identifiable
information and safeguarding of any such information that
cannot be removed;

requiring development of guidelines by the Attorney General
on limiting the acquisition and sharing of personally
identifiable information and establishing processes for
anonymization, safeguarding, and destruction of information;

exempting information received by the Federal Government
from disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act;

prohibiting use of shared information for regulatory
enforcement;

requiring penalties for Federal violations of its
restrictions relating to information sharing; and

an annual report to Congress on privacy and civil liberties.
S. 456 includes those provisions but would also permit a private
entity to receive indicators under the ``notwithstanding'' provision.
H.R. 234 and S. 2588 have related provisions except as follows:
Both bills explicitly limit Federal use of shared information to
cybersecurity purposes and uses relating to protection of individuals
and investigation and prosecution of cyber crimes and certain other
offenses. They both require various activities to reduce the degree to
which personal information is shared and other means of safeguarding it
from unauthorized sharing and use. H.R. 234 requires that guidelines be
developed through an interagency process.
liability protections
Concern about liability has often been cited as a significant
barrier to private-sector sharing of cybersecurity information, both
with other private entities and with the Federal Government. In
addition to the protections granted by the use of ``notwithstanding any
other provision of law'' with respect to provision of information by
private-sector entities, the White House proposal would address this
issue by prohibiting civil or criminal actions in Federal or State
courts for covered activities with respect to lawfully obtained cyber
threat indicators disclosed to or received from the NCCIC or a
certified ISAO. However, it also specifies monopolistic actions such as
price fixing that are not permitted.
The prohibition on civil or criminal actions in H.R. 234 covers
acquisition and sharing of cyber threat information, or decisions for
cybersecurity purposes based on such information. The bill stipulates
that actions must be taken in good faith. The S. 2588 prohibition
covers only private defendants, and includes monitoring systems or
sharing information. S. 2588 states that a good-faith reliance that an
activity was permitted under the bill's provisions will serve as a
complete defense against any court action. It also stipulates that
private-sector exchange of cyber threat information or assistance for
cybersecurity purposes does not violate anti-trust laws, but further
specifies monopolistic actions such as price-fixing that are not
permitted.
improvements to standards and practices
The concerns discussed above about what information would be most
useful to share and how raise the question of whether better standards
and best practices are needed for improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of information sharing.\17\ The White House proposal and S.
456 would require the DHS Secretary to establish a process for
selecting a private entity that would determine best practices for
creating and operating private ISAOs. The recent Executive Order on
information sharing has a similar provision.\18\ There are no similar
provisions in the other bills.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ See, for example, Moriarty, Transforming Expectations for
Threat-Intelligence Sharing.
\18\ Executive Order 13691, ``Promoting Private Sector
Cybersecurity Information Sharing,'' Federal Register 80, no. 34
(February 20, 2015): 9349-53.

Chairman McCaul. Thank you, Dr. Fischer.
I now recognize myself for questions.
Ms. Spaulding, I think as you mentioned, we have
extraordinary offensive capabilities that we--you and I have
seen and Dr. Schneck. That kind of capability turned against us
could be very destructive. It is the defensive capability that
I think is where we are trying to improve here through
additional legislation.
I am very proud of this committee's work last Congress in
passing really the first cybersecurity legislation, landmark
cybersecurity legislation, that I think the Ranking Member--I
can speak for him as well--is both pro-security but pro-
privacy. We had that support from two groups that don't always
agree on how to get things done.
Mr. Thompson. Oh, really?
Chairman McCaul. Well, I am not talking about you. I am
talking about the pro-privacy and pro-security.
You know, as I have studied this--and I have studied it
extensively--it seems to me that there is--the Department of
Homeland Security is really the ideal place for the safe
harbor. It is the civilian interface to the private sector. It
also has a robust privacy office and can protect personal
information.
Some would argue it should be another portal in the Federal
Government. I think that the safe harbor at DHS is--again,
should be the lead portal, if you will, for the sharing of this
information.
But there are other opinions on that. I wanted to elicit
first from Dr. Schneck and Ms. Spaulding, what are your
thoughts on how to integrate the other portals that exist
today? We have, of course, NSA, the intelligence community, we
have Treasury Department that the financial world, as I talk to
people in that sector seem to--they like that portal, as well.
I know that you would be taking it--you know, information from
the intelligence community, FBI, and other agencies to
basically funnel that threat information through the DHS
civilian interface.
But can you speak to these other portals and how they
factor into the President's proposal and what do you think
would be the best idea here?
Ms. Spaulding. Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I think it is really important to emphasize what
this legislation does and does not cover. So this is narrowly
focused on network defense and the kind of information that is
most important for specifically defending networks; and that is
this cyber threat indicator information. It is in no way
intended to get in the way of existing relationships that
companies might have today with other parts of the Federal
Government, whether it is the FBI or Treasury or elsewhere in
the Federal Government.
Calls to say we think we see something odd going on in our
system should continue to be made wherever those companies are
most comfortable going in. We have mechanisms in place to
ensure that a call to one is effectively and appropriately a
call to all; and that we put together the appropriate
interagency teams to respond to those kinds of requests for
assistance and information coming in.
So this is by no means intended to cover all kinds of
information sharing between the private sector and the
Government. Those relationships are very important.
Chairman McCaul. I think that is an important point. As I
talk to the private sector--and it is very important to me to
have their buy-in on this--I think that is a very important
point to make; is that we are not saying you can't have contact
with these other portals. It is just that DHS is, you know, the
lead interface.
Dr. Schneck, do you have any thoughts on that?
Ms. Schneck. I would only add at a technical level, we are
working day in and day out with our----
Ms. Spaulding. Push to talk.
Ms. Schneck. Sorry. At a technical level, we are working
constantly with our peers, across with the FBI and with the
Secret Service and with the intelligence community to look at
how do we make sure that information that comes in is handled
and distributed exactly the right way in real time, as if it
had come into them, so that we can have it. The important thing
here is that it is not a fragmented weather map, if you would.
The way to see a tornado--and I used to work tornado modeling.
The way you do this is to see all the information at once.
That is one of the key reasons why we think this is so
important, to have the NCCIC do this. But we are working
constantly with our partners to make sure that no one is
deprived of any information. That is what takes so long. It is
not just a technology problem. This is a policy puzzle of how
do we preserve the privacy, civil liberties, and equities,
continue to maintain all the existing relationships and make
sure information gets to the right people at the right time at
light speed.
Chairman McCaul. Let me just echo the comments made
earlier, and that is that in the last 5 years, I have seen the
capabilities at Homeland Security go way up. The sharing of
this threat information in real time has increased
exponentially, I think, under your leadership. That makes a
difference. Because there were doubters, you know, 5 years ago
about whether DHS could stand up and have that capability. I
think you have demonstrated and proved that they can.
So last question. Well, I have two quick ones. But on the
liability protection, I commend the Secretary for coming
forward with this piece. It is sometimes a bone of contention
between both sides of the aisle. But I think it is absolutely
essential to incentivize the private sector to participate in
the safe harbor; for without that, they will not do so. I think
they have to have the assurance that if they share information,
they are not open to a lawsuit.
So I have talked to the private sector. They like the
liability protections that are presented here. I think they
have some concern about private-to-private sharing and the
certification process and all this. How would that work under
this proposal?
Ms. Spaulding. So the liability protections, as you know,
apply not only to sharing of these cyber threat indicators with
the NCCIC, with the Department of Homeland Security, but also
to sharing with these information sharing and analysis
organizations, these--we call them ISAOs. Many of those are the
ISACs that exist today for the various sectors; the financial
services ISAC, the multi-State ISAC, and others.
So what the legislation provides is that the private sector
can share among themselves through these appropriate
organizations and enjoy the same liability protection for
providing that information to those organizations.
Chairman McCaul. I think the safe harbor at DHS is a
construct within--where we want to incentivize most of the
sharing of information. But I do think the private sector's
private-to-private sharing also should be protected as well. We
can discuss that more as this legislation unfolds.
Last question. I get asked this question probably the most.
That is, you know, what keeps you up at night? I talk about
cybersecurity quite a bit. But within this space, to both Ms.
Spaulding and Dr. Schneck, what keeps you up at night the most?
Ms. Spaulding. So clearly, what I worry most about is cyber
activity that would significantly disrupt our critical
infrastructure. So we spend a lot of time thinking about those
consequences and making sure we understand interdependencies
within the physical world. Because this is not just about
protecting machines, this is about protecting our ways of life.
So we need to make sure that we understand what are those
consequences that would be most devastating, and that we are
working most closely with those parts of our critical
infrastructure to make sure that we can mitigate those
consequences and try to prevent, as Dr. Schneck said, bad
things--bad things from doing bad harm.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you.
Dr. Schneck.
Ms. Schneck. Thank you. I would echo the interface of the
physical world. No one ever tried to keep a machine safe to
keep a machine safe. Our job at Homeland Security is to keep
people safe. The Secretary always tells us that cybersecurity
is a key part of homeland security.
Another piece that really does keep me up at night as well
is our small-to-medium business and our State and local. They
don't typically have enough budget to focus on cybersecurity.
Part of the elegance that will come from our teamwork with our
partners and the FBI and the intelligence community and across
the private sector and Government is to pull those threat
indicators together to be able to, in final phases, make them
available to the greater 99 percent of our business fabric that
is not a big company and to our State and locals, and to have
that system learn by participating and make all of us smarter
and safer.
If I would just add, I thank you for your gracious comments
about my leadership earlier. I think about the team back at the
NCCIC and back across DHS that really makes it happen, and I
want you to know about that. I walked into the finest team on
the planet.
Chairman McCaul. Well, thank you. Your boss just arrived. I
want to recognize the Secretary. I will reiterate my comments
about Ms. Spaulding and Dr. Schneck and their tremendous
performance in standing up DHS with the capabilities with the
respect it deserves, and I think the ability to move forward
with the proposal from you, sir.
I also commended you before you came in on your proposal of
liability protection, which I think will incentivize the
private sector to fully participate in this safe harbor. So
thank you for your leadership. You got two really good
employees right here.
So with that, the Chairman now recognizes the Ranking
Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very rarely do we agree 100 percent on anything. But the
two employees referenced here today absolutely have
distinguished themselves. Not just here, but in their careers
in general.
I would like unanimous consent to have entered into the
record the letter that you co-authored with me and our
colleagues on the Senate to the President referencing some
concerns we had about the new cyber center.
Chairman McCaul. Without objection, it is ordered.
[The information follows:]
Letter Submitted for the Record by Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
February 11, 2015.
The Honorable Barack Obama,
President of The United States, The White House, Washington, DC 20500.
Dear Mr. President: Thank you for your dedication and leadership on
the important national and economic security issue of cybersecurity. As
the leaders of the Committees that developed legislation to codify the
Department of Homeland Security's role as the lead Federal agency for
helping to protect private sector networks, principally through the
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC),
we have several questions regarding your newly-unveiled proposal for a
new cybersecurity information integration center.
We were pleased that you signed ``National Cybersecurity Protection
Act of 2014'' (P.L. 113-282) into law less than two months ago, on
December 18th, and implementation of that law is underway. At this
time, the NCCIC, with its newly codified authority, is working to
establish itself as an effective partner with the private sector to
meet evolving cybersecurity challenges. Pursuant to the ``National
Cybersecurity Protection Act of 2014,'' among the functions of the
NCCIC are the following:
``(1) being a Federal civilian interface for the multi-directional
and cross-sector sharing of information related to
cybersecurity risks, incidents, analysis, and warnings for
Federal and non-Federal entities;
``(2) providing shared situational awareness to enable real-time,
integrated, and operational actions across the Federal
Government and non-Federal entities to address cybersecurity
risks and incidents to Federal and non-Federal entities;
``(3) coordinating the sharing of information related to
cybersecurity risks and incidents across the Federal
Government;''
Additionally, the NCCIC is ``a 24/7 cyber situational awareness,
incident response, and management center that is a national nexus of
cyber and communications integration for the Federal government,
intelligence community, and law enforcement.'' We understand that
increasing private sector participation and improving the quantity and
quality of information received at this Federal civilian center was a
priority for you, as it is for us and DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson.
Therefore, we have questions about your new proposal to establish
another information sharing hub, the Cyber Threat Intelligence
Integration Center (CTIIC) that was unveiled this week, as the
activities outlined for the center seem to resemble the functions
authorized in law for the NCCIC. We are concerned that the introduction
of the CTIIC at this moment in the NCCIC's evolution may complicate
those efforts and introduce uncertainty for the private sector and
other partners. It also risks driving away activity to the new CTIIC,
which would be operated by the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence (ODNI).
Accordingly, we request that you please answer the following
questions:

Why is the CTIIC needed at this time? How is it supposed to
differ from the NCCIC? Do you intend to submit a legislative
proposal to Congress to authorize this center? If so, when?

Some have observed that functions of the CTIIC are
duplicative with those of the NCCIC.\1\ Others have said that
it introduces unnecessary bureaucracy.\2\ Is the CTIIC
duplicative? Specifically, what are the responsibilities and
activities of the CTIIC and are they already covered by the
NCCIC or, for that matter, the FBI's cyber center?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Sean Lyngaas, ``New Cyber Agency Modeled on Counterterrorism
Center,'' FEDERAL COMPUTER WEEK (FCW), February 10, 2015, wrote that
Chris Cummiskey, the former DHS under secretary for management, said
his first reaction to the news of the CTIIC's establishment was that
``its prescribed functions sounded quite a bit like NCCIC's.''
\2\ Melissa Hathaway, former White House cybersecurity coordinator
and president of Hathaway Global Strategies told Ellen Nakashima in
``New Agency to Sniff Out Threats in Cyberspace,'' WASHINGTON POST,
February 10, 2015, that said ``We should not be creating more
organizations and bureaucracy . . . we need to be forcing the existing
organizations to become more effective--hold them accountable.''
Further, Stephen Cobb, a security researcher at ESET North America,
told National Public Radio's Marketplace Tech that ``the only real
difference between NCCIC and CTIIC is that NCCIC reports to the
Department of Homeland Security, whereas the new agency answers to the
Office of Director of National Intelligence,'' at http://
www.marketplace.org/topics/tech/two-cybersecurity-agencies-diverged-
wood.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Why are you establishing this center at the ODNI,
particularly in light of your longstanding interest in
bolstering DHS as the interface for the private sector on
cybersecurity? What interactions will the new center have with
the private sector?

Given that the CTIIC will be housed in the Intelligence
Community, please explain how it will relate to the National
Security Agency and the degree to which it will be involved in
the collection of intelligence?

As you roll out this new center, how do you plan to ensure
that the private sector shares timely cyber threat information
with the statutorily-authorized NCCIC?

To what degree does the effectiveness of the CTIIC depend on
enactment of information-sharing legislation? The protections
for personally identifiable information are well-established
with respect to private sector information sharing at the
NCCIC. What, if any, privacy protections would be required for
information sharing with the CTIIC?
As partners in efforts to bolster the nation's cyber posture, we
have a keen interest in ensuring efficiency and effectiveness of the
Federal government's efforts and seek opportunities to minimize
duplication and get the best results for our money.
Thank you, in advance, for your timely response to our questions.
Should you or other members of your team need to follow up on this
request, please feel free to contact Hope Goins, Chief Counsel for
Oversight (Committee on Homeland Security, Minority), Brett DeWitt,
Senior Policy Advisor for Cybersecurity (Committee on Homeland
Security, Majority), Matt Grote, Senior Professional Staff Member
(Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, Minority)
or William McKenna, Chief Counsel for Homeland Security (Senate
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, Majority).
Sincerely,
Bennie G. Thompson,
Ranking Member, Committee on Homeland Security.
Michael T. McCaul,
Chairman, Committee on Homeland Security.
Thomas R. Carper,
Ranking Member, Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee.
Ron Johnson,
Chairman, Homeland Security and Government Affairs Committee.

Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Ms. Spaulding, I referenced the letter in my opening
statements. I would hope that at some point we will have an
answer back on that. Thank you very much.
In 3 days, unless a miracle happens, we will be, as a
Department, out of money. We have talked here about the cyber
threat and what that means to this country, what keeps us up at
night and all of that.
Ms. Spaulding, can you enlighten the Members of this
committee, if 3 days come and DHS is without money to go
forward, what that would mean for our cyber defense here?
Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely, Ranking Member Thompson. Thank
you, and let me just reassure you that we are working
diligently on the response to your letter, and it will arrive
promptly. It is a priority of the Secretary's that we be prompt
in our response to Congressional inquires. This is one we take
particularly seriously. We will get back to you very quickly on
that.
With regard to the impact of a potential funding hiatus, I
can say it will--as I said in my testimony, it will have an
impact on our cyber mission. Let me give you a few examples. So
we are in the process of deploying the latest iteration of our
sensors in the dot.gov, in our civilian government networks and
systems. That is our Einstein program. This is Einstein 3A,
which is the technology that will help us not just detect, but
block the intrusions coming in; and Einstein 2, which is the
detection capability.
These activities of rolling this out will have to stop in
the event of a funding hiatus. I will say a week of stoppage we
could probably make up. But with each week that continues, that
is another couple of agencies that are not brought on-board and
receiving the protection at a time when the adversary is not
taking any break in their efforts to penetrate our civilian
government systems.
Our other dot.gov technologies is our continuous
diagnostics and mitigation program, which looks inside that
civilian government networks and systems to look at their
health. That--deployment of that also will be delayed if we
have a funding hiatus. That has an impact on our ability to
quickly address--identify and address vulnerabilities like the
JASBUG vulnerability that has been most recently in the media.
With regard to our enhanced cybersecurity services program,
where we make sensitive Government and Classified information
available to cybersecurity providers to better protect private-
sector companies, the on-boarding of new providers will be
delayed if we have a funding hiatus. So our ability to protect
critical infrastructure owners and operators will be impacted.
On the communications side, our ability to keep up with the
next generation of communication technologies that the private
sector is going full-speed-ahead to implement, our ability to
continue to provide priority interoperable communication for
National security and emergency response will be impacted, will
be delayed. As I say, in the mean time, the private sector is
rolling out that new technology. If we don't keep up, we will
not be able to provide that prioritized interoperable
communications that is so essential.
Mr. Thompson. Well, thank you very much. A follow-up to
that, all of us want to work with the business community. What
constraints would a lack of money impact the Department's work
in interfacing from a cyber standpoint with the business
community?
Ms. Spaulding. So the work we do on a daily basis to build
those essential trusted relationships would be put on hold. All
of that outreach, we are--have done a campaign across the
country, for example, to educate critical infrastructure owners
and operators about threats to their industrial control systems
in cyber space. Critically important; you asked what keeps me
awake at night, those are the kinds of things that do. Those
activities would not be able to continue.
The guidance from the President, the direction to the
President to have--for the Department to set up the standards
body to facilitate the establishment of these appropriate
information-sharing mechanisms between private-sector entities,
these information sharing and analysis organizations, our
ability to issue that grant and get that going forward would be
hampered by both a continuing resolution and certainly by a
funding hiatus.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Let me just say for myself that I don't
think we should be playing politics with the National Security
Agency, given the high-threat environment that we are in today,
both from a cybersecurity standpoint and also from al-Qaeda and
ISIS, as well. I certainly hope that Congress can resolve this
and avoid a shutdown of the Department.
With that, the Chairman now recognizes Mr. Clawson.
Mr. Clawson. Thank you for coming today and for your
service. Thank you--both of y'all for holding this important
session.
So I imagine myself on the top of a large multi-national
company. I have got employee--I have got stakeholders all over
the world, a board of directors that is not all Americans. I
have got an ERP system, maybe it is--could be Triton Bond,
could be Oracle, could be--you know, could be SAP, could be
anything. I have worked years to get it integrated around the
world. Factories everywhere. I accept that cybersecurity is an
important public good, and that if we don't have it, we are
dead. I also accept that the liability insurance that you y'all
talk about here protects one stakeholder, and that is the
shareholder.
But my world is much more complicated. I have data centers,
regional data centers, all over the world, with customers and
suppliers integrated in those data centers. Now as CEO, I am
gonna go out and say look, y'all, in the name of cybersecurity
for the world, but mainly for America, we are gonna start
sharing data. You kind of have to trust us on what we are gonna
share, when we are gonna share it. The devil will be in the
details actually. We are gonna--you know, those specifics will
be defined later. But don't worry, none of this data will get
into the wrong hands; your privacy will not be violated, even
though you grew up in the Czech Republic or Russia, where they
were spied upon their whole lives, and the last thing they want
is another big brother.
It feels to me like y'all got a tough sale. It feels to me
liability insurance or not, that my world is all about multiple
stakeholders. It is not just about profit; big, bad
corporations making more money. We are trying to protect our
customers, our suppliers, the communities that we live in. What
I have read so far about what y'all propose just doesn't feel
like a very compelling case that I can take to my multi-
national board of directors.
What am I missing, and what data can you give to make this
more palatable? Because if you can't get me, I know what my
friends back in the private sector are gonna say. It is not
just about profit. Go ahead.
Ms. Spaulding. No, Congressman, you have very well
articulated the concerns that we hear when we are out talking
to our partners in the private sector. You are absolutely
right. There is a wide range of reasons that companies have--
legitimate reasons--for having concerns about sharing
information with the Government.
Mr. Clawson. It is not just lack--it is not lack of
patriotism.
Ms. Spaulding. Right. No, I totally agree. Throughout my
career, interacting with CEOs of companies, I find them to be
an extremely patriotic bunch. So I absolutely agree.
I will say, with respect to this legislative proposal and
the sharing of cyber threat indicator information, you are
correct, the devil is in the details. The good news is that as
we move to automated information sharing, those details will be
apparent. There will be total transparency about the specific
kinds of information that we are seeking and receiving.
Because we are creating a structured way of presenting that
information that will detail very specifically the kind of
information that we want to get. We will also work through the
policy and protocols for protecting that sensitive information,
both in terms of proprietary information and privacy
information. So those things will be transparent.
Mr. Clawson. Can you imagine if, in one of the countries
that I operate in, the government of that country telling me
that I had to share this same sort of information? How would we
respond?
Ms. Spaulding. Again, I--think the--limiting this to cyber
threat indicator information, which is fairly technical
information about the IP addresses that are sending malware,
for example, to disrupt equipment, this is the kind of
information that is less sensitive. Each company will make its
own decisions. I think you are right.
One of the things we have tried to be clear about, this is
not a silver bullet, this is not a panacea, this is not gonna
make every company open its doors. But it does address concerns
that we have heard from the private sector. There will be a
fair amount of detail about precisely what we are talking about
sharing here. The legislation defines it fairly----
Mr. Clawson. I think that without that detail, any private-
sector CEO would be negligent to go along on the basis of
trust.
Chairman McCaul. Dr. Schneck, would you like to answer
that?
Ms. Schneck. Yes, very briefly. So I was in a very large
company about 18 months ago. I hear you. I lived that. I was
not at the level you describe. But I was a key technology
officer for the global government. I was the one that shared
information or didn't. I was the subject of a storied phone
call from a former FBI executive and executive assistant
director, three down from the top, who I consider a very close
friend, who yelled at me at 11:00 at night on my home phone
because he found out something he didn't know, and I couldn't
share it with him.
We are going to have to earn your trust. This sharing is
not required. It is my scientific belief that there will be
benefits in getting our data. You don't have to give anything
at first to get it. I think what the under secretary points out
is very important, it is key. These are just scientific
indicators. But you--the companies will see that. We will work
to earn your trust. It is voluntary.
Mr. Clawson. I am nonpartisan on this issue. Anything I can
do to help you, you know, with my background, I urge you to
seek me out. I am always worried about people on the telephone.
I am even more worried about people in my ERP system. So with
that as a starting point, y'all--you know, use--anything I can
do to help, I am here.
Ms. Spaulding. Thank you very much, Congressman. We will
definitely take you up on that. Thank you.
Chairman McCaul. If the gentleman would yield, we do have a
field trip, if you will, to the NCCIC facility. I would
encourage you to attend that. I think it is important to note
also this is not a mandatory sharing system. It is voluntary.
This authorization that we authorized the Department's cyber
operations last Congress had the support of industry, the
chamber, the privacy groups.
All I think in moving forward what we want to do is provide
liability protection so that they can fully participate.
Because I think there is a reluctance, as you point out.
Because you have a duty to the shareholders to not want to
participate until you have that assurance that you wouldn't
open yourself up to a lawsuit. So I look forward to you--you
obviously have tremendous experience on this issue. I look
forward to working with you on this.
Chairman recognizes the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson
Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. I might
say to my good friend, Mr. Clawson, with his experience but
also his demeanor. I truly believe that we have common ground
on these very important issues.
I gave an old story that I hope will be very brief. I
indicated that when I chaired the transportation security
committee, we had included infrastructure, which was then
cybersecurity. The point was that it was all embracing an
infrastructure that we had not yet hit, if you will, the
epicenter of fear and epicenter of hacking. But we did look at
the infrastructures that are governed by cybersecurity and
realized that we were vulnerable.
So I want to thank all of you for bringing us up into the
21st Century as it relates to home homeland security and this
very crucial issue. I want to add my appreciation for those of
you who have come from the private sector for serving your
Nation.
Let me acknowledge the Secretary in his absence and thank
him for being, as he has indicated, everywhere and all over on
the basis of National security.
I want to thank the Chairman of this full committee. I hope
that his efforts will be heard in his Republican conference
that we should be dealing with National security and not
political security. Clearly, on the issue of where we are in
this time and date and what we are facing, I can't imagine a
more important component. There are many important components
at DHS. But certainly, what we are discussing today has far-
reaching impact.
So I want to just take the words that were presented when
the President offered his thoughts on January 13 and he said
when public and private networks are facing an unprecedented
threat from rogue hackers, as well as organized crime and even
state actors, the President is, of course, unveiling the next
steps in his plan to defend the Nation.
At that time, then he unveiled the White House proposal.
That is, of course, the Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration
Center. Many of you know that we have worked so hard on the
efforts to have the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center.
So my questions are going to be--I know we had some earlier
discussions--the pointed synergism, if you will, of those two
entities and the concern about confusion between the broader
public. My interpretation--I have some privacy questions--is
that the CTIIC will be not gathering, but analyzing; will be
the high-level threat entity. My concern is, will that
information of their analysis be accessible to DHS, Members of
the respective homeland security committees? Because it looks
as if there is an attempt to put a wall between the very agency
that then has to act on trying to save the Nation.
Then, of course, the NCCIC will be the face to the private
sector. We will have to engender their trust. They will have to
know well, this is an agency that can help me, or do I need to
try to bang down the doors of the CTIIC, even though that is
not the intent?
So let me just end right there so that I can ask you, Madam
Secretary Spaulding, our Ranking Member gave you the
opportunity for a long litany. Let me for the record speak to
this defunding or no funding of Department of Homeland Security
in the backdrop of--let me try not to use the word ``crisis''--
but the increasing threats that are viable through hacking,
through other efforts as it relates to security.
Does this put us, the Department of Homeland Security and
the security of this Nation, in a position of jeopardy if all
of the functions in your area are either halted, stalled,
people laid off because of the actual moment in history that we
are in? Are we at a serious moment in history that you need all
hands on deck?
Ms. Spaulding. Congresswoman, I think that is an accurate
statement. I mean, we are--as this committee knows as well as
anyone, we are, as I said, under daily moment-by-moment efforts
by adversaries to penetrate our networks and systems across the
Federal Government, State, local, territorial, Tribal
government systems, and the private sector.
There is no pausing, no slowing down, in that range of
actors' efforts to penetrate our systems and to do us harm. So
anything that hampers, we are running on a daily basis full
speed ahead to try to keep ahead of those--efforts of those
adversaries. Anything that hampers and slows us down creates
risk for us and for the Nation.
Ms. Jackson Lee. If I could get these last two questions
in, I would greatly appreciate it.
I started out by offering my assessment of the CTIC--CTIIC
and the NCCIC. So if I could get the question answered as to
how the public is to decipher between these entities. Then I
want to add a question of my colleague here on privacy.
Will the information shared that is going to be shared with
the Government identify the identity of law-abiding citizens?
Will it be the responsibility of the company--companies--for
removing personal information for what is shared with DHS?
So first, how are they gonna interface with these two
entities? I am concerned about the confusion. Then the privacy
question.
Ms. Spaulding. Great. I very much appreciate the question.
We welcome the establishment of the Cyber Threat Intelligence
Integration Center. Those two ``I''s are actually important to
help make this distinction. Because what the CTIIC will do for
us is to pull together intelligence information from across the
16 different entities that make up that intelligence community
over which the DNI, the Director of National Intelligence, has
purview.
So that is a very useful function for us. Part of their
articulated, explicit mission is to support the NCCIC, our
operations in watch center, and the other centers across
Government; the FBI's NCIJTF and the other centers out there
across Government. They are--in military terms, they are
supporting command and we are the supported demand. So they
will provide that integrated analysis for us, which will be
very useful.
They also will be one place where we can go to work with
the intelligence community to get information cleared for wide
dissemination. So whether that is continuing to press
intelligence agencies to write or release, to create products
from the very beginning that can be widely disseminated or to
go back to them to get things declassified that we think are
important to disseminate widely. Instead of having to go to 16
different entities, we can go to this one place who will be an
advocate for us, because that is their mission in making sure
we can disseminate this information.
Those two key functions will be really helpful for us. It
is a very distinct mission from our mission, which is to
interact with the private sector. That is not the mission of
the CTIIC. Our mission is to interact on a daily basis with our
partners across the Federal Government and the private sector
and to receive information from them; and most importantly, to
get information out as broadly as we the can so that those who
are trying to defend their networks can do so effectively.
I will ask the deputy to address the privacy issue if----
Mr. Clawson [presiding]. Quickly, if that is okay.
Ms. Schneck. I will make it very quick, sir.
The privacy issue cuts to the core of why we do what we do
and why I came here to the Department to serve in Government.
The story I shared about the call from the FBI, this is one of
the finest investigators on the planet. I wanted to answer him.
I couldn't. If we had a system like this in place that night, I
could have. My lawyer would have given us the ability to share
just the indicators. So what we are building----
Mr. Clawson. That I understand.
Ms. Schneck. So what we are building is with a team,
working every day with the FBI, their assistant director of
cyber. He called me last night just to make sure we were in the
loop on things. This is the kind of relationship that we have.
He called me on my cell phone a couple of weeks ago. We have--
--
Ms. Jackson Lee. Are you answering--I am sorry. I don't
want to interrupt. But are you answering my question, which is
will the information----
Ms. Schneck. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. Shared identify--because I
want to--abide by the Chairman----
Ms. Schneck. No. Working with----
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. Identify law-abiding citizens
and is the companies have the responsibility of removing the
personal data?
Ms. Schneck. The companies have a responsibility to make a
good-faith effort. This is a policy puzzle that which is being
solved each day by working together with each different equity
with the private sector, with law enforcement, with the
intelligence community. We are doing our best to get everybody
to design that.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I am just gonna say this for
the record and then yield back.
You all issued $25 million in cybersecurity education
grants. I noticed that States to the west of the Mississippi,
including Texas, have not been included. I would like to meet
with whoever is appropriate to talk about these important
grants. Because we need a vast array of representation. So
would someone let me know who I should be meeting with?
Ms. Spaulding. Absolutely, Congresswoman. That was
announced by the Department of Energy for historically black
colleges and universities. We will absolutely make sure that
you get a full briefing on that and hear your thoughts.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the gentleman for his courtesy.
Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Clawson. The Chairman recognizes the gentleman from
Texas, Mr. Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. I would like to also thank y'all for being here.
This is an important topic. I know a little something about it.
I spent 9 years as an undercover officer in the CIA. My job was
collecting intelligence on threats to the homeland. But I also
did some offensive cyber operations and I recognize the
dangerous threat that is out there. Helped start a
cybersecurity company, as well. I have been doing that for the
last 5 years. It is pretty scary, the folks that y'all have to
help defend against. So it is a difficult job. But I appreciate
you all being here.
My question is, you know, when you look at Border Patrol
and ICE, they have difficulty sharing information amongst each
other. A lot of it is structural issues; right? You know, it
is--and then you talk about, you know, having DHS sharing with
FBI or CIA or NSA. Even more difficult. Then also trying to do
it with the private sector. I know this is one of the areas
that these new entities have been created to do.
My question is, you know, in an attack of the magnitude
that we are starting to see, one of the most important things
that you need is you need timely information. What is the
system--how are y'all trying to design this so that the
information is timely?
Ms. Schneck. So as information comes in, it will go through
a process that is automatic. So that is fractions of a second
for a machine. Indicators will be available through those
standard protocols that every machine can read and every
machine can send. So right now, we are depending our real-time
sharing on people to all be in the room to get it at once to
create a report and to fan it out. Now you will have machines
do it at their speed, which is the speed of the adversary.
This already works in pockets in the private sector,
protecting against bot-nets. A few tens of thousands of
machines light up with bad behavior, and the rest of the world
can block against them. We will do that for extended threats,
as well as the ability to combine what we see of protecting the
Government, combining it with what we see which may be
partnered or bought from private sector, and creating a large
set of data that can be provided to all.
Mr. Hurd. So how do you plan on sharing tactics,
techniques, and procedures that the bad guys are using; right?
It is one thing to have an IP address or a piece of digital
code that you can share, that you can share quickly. But some
of the--you know, they are looking at certain, you know, ports
or the style of the attack. How is that gonna be shared with
the broader community?
Ms. Schneck. I think two ways. One is, that is currently
shared today across the agencies and with the private sector
through trusted relationships. The other way is as we see those
indicators coming in, we build patterns that can be combined.
Again, this is where the CTIIC can help, as well. That can be
combined with the intelligence they would give us and creating
an even broader picture for then people to disseminate that
context.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. Thank you for that. The other area is,
you know, the stuff that you are talking about, obviously, the
level of classification of the data, you know, is not going to
be a problem because you are sharing it, you know, with folks.
But how do we address the classification of threat information
that is gathered by, you know, elements throughout the entire
Federal Government to push that down to the private sector?
Ms. Spaulding. So this is also an issue that we deal with
on a regular basis currently. We have a couple of ways we
address this. One is, as I mentioned, the enhanced
cybersecurity services program that we are implementing and
have implemented, where we work with managed security providers
to build systems that can take Classified information and,
while protecting sources and methods, use that information to
provide enhanced cybersecurity solutions to their customers.
So this is a way for us to use Classified information, to
protect private-sector entities, without having to clear all of
those private-sector entities to receive the information. So
that is one way.
The other thing that we do is we do interact on a very
regular basis with the help of our intelligence and analysis
I&A directorate, headed by General Frank Taylor, with the
intelligence community to help them understand what is the
information that we need to get out more broadly and what is
the information we don't need to share that might implicate
sources and methods.
That granularity we are able to achieve because we bring in
cleared private-sector folks who look at the intelligence and
say as a network defender, this is the piece I need. I don't
need to know where it came from. I don't need to know all of
these other things that are very sensitive. But this bit I
need. Then we can go back to the intelligence community and say
this is the piece we really need to get out to folks.
That equities review process is actually working fairly
well. We have shortened the amount of time that it takes to run
through that process significantly. We also have ways of,
again, working to mask sources and methods and be able to
disseminate that information.
So these are issues we are working through, but would love
to sit down and talk with you. You might have some additional
insights and ideas for us to continue to push that boundary.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul [presiding]. Thank you, Mr. Hurd.
The Chairman now recognizes my fellow co-chair of the
cybersecurity caucus, Mr. Langevin.
Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and Ranking Member Thompson for the attention and
support you have been giving to this topic for many years. In
many ways, you and I were pioneers on this--in the Congress on
the challenges we face in cyber space.
I want to thank our panelists for their testimony today,
for the work you are doing on this issue. I applaud your work
and the Department's work, and especially the President's
leadership on trying to better protect the Nation's cyber
space, close the glaring vulnerabilities that we face.
Of the range of things that we could do in this area and
clearly, we face significant challenges, I have often said that
this is never a problem, unfortunately, that we are going to
solve. It is a problem to be managed. Right now, the aperture
vulnerability is wide open. What we need to do is shrink this
down to something that is much more manageable.
I have often said that the single most important thing we
can do in closing that aperture vulnerability is information
sharing. Right now in many ways we are fighting this battle
with both hands tied behind our back. If we can inform, the
Government can share the information that it has with private
sector more easily and private sector can share the threat and
the hacks that they are experiencing, we can disseminate that,
we are going to be light years ahead of where we are right now.
So with that point--and maybe, Dr. Fischer, I will start
with you. Information sharing is in many ways, it is a means to
an end. It is undoubtedly an important means. However, as has
been demonstrated, even at DHS, for example, during Heartbleed,
perfect information is useless without appropriate processes,
protocols, and people to act on it.
So based on your scholarship, can you give a base
assessment of the proportion of cyber incidents that only
suceeded because information about a known threat was not
disseminated? How substantial an impact do you foresee cyber
information sharing legislation, such as the President's
proposal, having on the overall state of cybersecurity?
Mr. Fischer. Well, Congressman, I would have to get back to
you on the specifics with respect to what there might be--what
the proportion of attacks that have been, say, prevented
specifically with respect to--because of cybersecurity
information sharing.
The question, though, with respect to--I mean, part of the
problem here is that there are--information sharing, as a
number of people have said, is no silver bullet. It is an
important tool for protecting systems and their contents. As
long as organizations are not implementing even basic cyber
hygiene, there are going to be some significant difficulties.
So companies--there are demonstrated cases of companies
that have had the information which--but nevertheless, did not
pay sufficient attention to it. They have had information they
could have used to prevent an attack.
If a company is not prepared to implement sort of threat
assessments that they receive, then that is going to be a
problem. A recent study by Hewlett Packard I think indicated
like 45 percent of companies do not actually have sufficient
basic cyber hygiene. So those sorts of companies are not going
to be able to actually implement information sharing
effectively. So--and what was the second part of your question,
sir?
Mr. Langevin. I wanted to know the substantial impact that
you perceive that information-sharing legislation would have on
the--such as the President's bill would have on the overall
state of cybersecurity.
Mr. Fischer. Right. That is something--there is a
fundamental sort of issue about the effectiveness of
information sharing. It is very difficult to measure--and there
have been attempts by a number of folks. I saw a recent study
by the Rand Corporation, for example, to try to analyze what
the effectiveness of information sharing is.
So you start out with a baseline. So the question is well,
what is the current baseline for information sharing? How much
would actually improving information sharing improve
cybersecurity? There are plenty of examples, specific examples.
It is very--I think one could make a fairly compelling case on
principle as to why improving information sharing is important.
But to really be able to determine its actual effectiveness
will require, I think, additional information and study, and
perhaps some information that is not readily available now. So
I am sorry I can't give you a--you know, a definite answer to
it. But it is an important challenge, and one I think that a
number of people are thinking about.
Mr. Langevin. Well, my time is expired. But I will have
additional questions for our witnesses. I just want to thank
you for the expertise you bring to the table, the work you are
doing in this, and I look forward to supporting you in your
efforts.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman McCaul. Thank you. Thank you for your strong
interest and leadership on this issue.
The Chairman now recognizes the gentleman from Georgia, Mr.
Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to each of
you for being here.
This is obviously something that is very needed. I want to
speak about small businesses, in particular. I am a small
business owner, or I was. My wife is now. But, you know, I have
three independent retail pharmacies, have 19 employees. This is
important. This is important to my business, just as it is
important to a big corporation. But it is tough. It is tough
for us to adhere to some of the procedures, some of the
policies that we are gonna be forced to adhere to. Do you take
that into account at all?
Ms. Spaulding. We absolutely pay, as the deputy said,
particular attention to small and medium-sized businesses. So
the first thing that I want to point out is that even with this
information-sharing legislation, it is all voluntary. So there
are no new requirements being imposed on businesses of any size
pursuant to this legislative proposal.
But that said, even a company that wants to voluntarily
participate in this may be challenged by a lack of resources
and the ability to bring on the human resources.
So we do look at how can we facilitate better cyber hygiene
by small and medium-size businesses. Because they make up the
important part of that cyber ecosystem in which our critical
infrastructure swims. We all swim in the same ocean. As we saw
in the Target breach, those small companies can be an opening
for an adversary.
So I will let the deputy address a request for proposals
for information that we put out to the cybersecurity solution
providers to say, what ideas can you give us from your
innovation in the private sector to specifically address the
needs of small and medium-size businesses? Because we
understand that is a real challenge, but it is critically
important.
Mr. Carter. Well, and thank you for recognizing that.
Ms. Schneck. So as I mentioned earlier, it is the small
businesses and State and locals that also keep me at night. Two
initial things I did when I came here. First is we put money to
protect the State and local governments and gave them
management security services that we paid for. We couldn't do
that for small businesses.
So what we did was put out a request for information, which
is basically asking all the companies to please tell us how
would you use your innovation and use your desire for revenue,
use the market to drive better, faster, safer, cheaper
solutions that can enable, whether you are a small business
that makes the solution, makes money off it, or whether you are
one that gets the protection from it.
The other piece I want to make very, very clear is in all
this technical talk, the main thing is that as we as a
Government are able to put together this indicator information,
that is available for you. You don't have to give us anything.
So you will inevitably, as any business, buy a few widgets to
protect yourself. Whatever those widgets are in our vision--and
I don't mean in 5 years, I mean hopefully in 1, if not sooner--
will be able to start to talk to our big database and get what
we have. We are not asking you to necessarily deliberately
share things. So we are trying to just make it available to you
because we recognize that.
Mr. Carter. Well, good. Thank you for that. But let me ask
you, thus far have you had a good participation rate from small
and medium-sized businesses?
Ms. Schneck. I have a binder literally that thick full of
responses to that proposal and requests for information that
could lead to a request for a proposal. The team is looking at
how we act on that. It will go into a larger strategy in the
name of efficiency in cybersecurity really across DHS with all
the components, the two pieces of cyber.
But our State and local and Tribal territorial is--and our
small-to-medium business work--is huge to us. This is homeland
security, not big business security. It is everybody.
Mr. Carter. Right. Right. Well, let me ask you this:
Specifically to health care, do you see any specific threats in
that? I mean, you know, we have insurance information. We have
Social Security numbers, birth dates. I mean, we have
everything that is essential that would use in a patient's
information. What are the real threats there?
Ms. Schneck. So I think that any time you have a computer
that is connected to the internet, somebody can see whatever it
stores. So the adversaries are looking for whatever the motive
that was mentioned earlier, they can get that information. So
what you have to do, no matter what the information, is find
the best way to secure those assets. We will work with you on
that. We have people in each of the areas that can work with
you on that and partnerships with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
to get this message out.
Ms. Spaulding. We are absolutely seeing activity in the
health care arena. Some of which appears to be for financial
gain. It is a target-rich environment with very rich
information; beyond just Social Security numbers or credit card
numbers, for example; but information that can perpetrate other
criminal schemes, such as Medicare fraud. So----
Mr. Carter. Exactly.
Ms. Spaulding. Right? So we are watching that very
carefully. The FBI and others in law enforcement are looking at
this.
Mr. Carter. Well, great. Thank you very much for what you
are doing. We appreciate this.
Mr. Speaker, I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Appreciate the promotion in my title. But
I am not sure I would want to be Speaker right now, to be
honest.
The Chairman now recognizes Mrs. Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for
the generosity you demonstrated with the information sharing
that we have been doing here today.
First of all, let me just acknowledge the fact that this
has been an incredible experience for me, information that you
have given me today. I am really very, very proud that there
are two women at this helm. I get to say that without possibly
being a discrimination complaint, being a woman. But it is
unusual, and it is an illustration that women should really be
in these areas much more. You all are fantastic. So are you,
Mr. Fischer. You are fantastic too.
But even so, I have so many questions I just don't even
know where to begin.
First of all, let me ask this. There is the--this CTIIC,
which is being proposed. There is the NCCIC, which exists.
Thank you so--oh, NCCIC. Sure enough is. CTIIC and NCCIC.
So what is the guarantee that the new proposal, this CTIIC,
doesn't wander out there and become the face of the interaction
with businesses and companies and stuff and basically infringes
upon the NCCIC?
Ms. Spaulding. Congresswoman, first of all, let me echo
your plug for encouragement for more women to get into STEM
fields. I think it is critically important. So thank you for
that.
With regard to the CTIIC and the NCCIC, the CTIIC is very
clearly defined in the President's roll-out of this, which I
believe occurred this morning, just a couple of hours ago. As a
place for integrating the intelligence information, it is
really to help Government. It is a Government-to-Government. To
help the centers that exist already, including the NCCIC, to
have a common operating picture and all sorts of intelligence
analysis that we can provide to the private sector.
Again, we will also be taking in information from the
private sector and with appropriate safeguards for privacy and
civil liberty, sharing that with both the intelligence
community and law enforcement as appropriate to help enrich the
common picture that we all have.
So it--its responsibilities and its role are pretty clearly
defined, and I think very distinct from the role of the NCCIC
which, again, has been defined both by this committee and again
in the President's legislative proposal as the central place
for interacting with the private sector with regard to
indicator information.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Should we not come up with the
funding, should there not be a funding solution on the 27th of
February? Will the two of you be working on the 28th?
Ms. Spaulding. We will, Congresswoman. We will be working
without a paycheck. But we are under the statutory definition.
But I will tell you in my organization, the National Protection
Programs Directorate, which is responsible for critical
infrastructure security and resilience, we will be down to 57
percent of our workforce.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Are you at full force right now?
Ms. Spaulding. Right now we are at full force. But of our a
little over 3,000 employees, if there is a funding hiatus, we
will be down to 1,748. So it will be, again, 57 percent. I want
to point out that those numbers include--most of those numbers
are the Federal Protective Service, which engages on a daily
basis in the critical mission of protecting Federal facilities,
and our office of biometrics and identity management, which
uses biometrics to particularly keep known and suspected
terrorists out of the country.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. That is pretty scary.
Ms. Spaulding. Two critical important missions, they will
be on the job. But the rest of my workforce that worries about
critical infrastructure in the private sector, cyber, will be
down to about 9 percent--normal strength----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So I have two quick questions, because
that is pretty scary. I need to know the difference between
ISAOs and ISACs.
Ms. Spaulding. Yes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. My other questions is to Mr. Fischer
real fast. What is it that this new proposal that the White
House has put out, what does it address that is deficient in
what exists now? Did we need to do this in an entirely new
legislative approach, or could there have been some tweaking to
what already existed? Thank you.
Ms. Spaulding. So I should point out under the--in a
funding hiatus, our--again, we are gonna make sure that we have
in place everything we need to have in place to protect lives
and property on a daily basis. So our NCCIC will continue to
function. But the analytic support that feeds that and helps
prioritize those activities will be hampered, and the roll-out
of the things that I mentioned earlier will be hampered.
The ISAC, ISAO--ISACs information and analysis centers are
a kind of information sharing and analysis organization. So
they are a subset, ISACs share a subset of ISAOs. What the
administration's Executive Order hopes to do is to encourage
additional coming together of private-sector entities to share
information.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. Mr. Fischer.
Mr. Fischer. So what the--there are, I should preface by
saying that there are some observers who would argue that, in
fact, new legislation is not really necessary; that current
mechanisms are sufficient. But there are plenty of people who
actually think the opposite, as well.
With respect to what the new legislation would do, the
White House proposal, it would create some mechanisms,
including the establishment of these ISAOs for the receiving
and sharing of information that don't really exist now, or that
exists in another form; like, for example, the ISACs exist now
but they are--the ISAOs are somewhat different from that. It
specifically designates the NCCIC as a particular role with
respect to receiving and sharing this kind of information.
It also would provide certain--it tries to remove these
barriers that have been mentioned that private-sector
organizations may have for sharing information and make sure
to--and provide protections for things like privacy and----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. So you said, I believe, that there is
both the issue of barriers, and there is the issue of
incentives; incentives perhaps doing something, eliminating or
minimizing some of the barriers. So is the incentive just
simply the value of the sharing of the information, or is there
some other kind of incentive that needs to use to encourage
these businesses to engage in this?
Mr. Fischer. Right. So, I mean, one of the questions is
what would the--why would a company want to share information?
One way, of course, to encourage them to share information is
to reduce the risks to them of sharing that information. But at
the same time, what are they going to get out of sharing it?
Are they doing it as simply a--something that they think is for
the public good, or are they gonna get something back?
So one of the ways that they might get something back is
through reciprocity. So, for example, if they are a member of
an ISAC or perhaps an ISAO, they may have some relationship
with that organization that ensures that if they provide
information, they will be able to get information.
But of course, with respect to the Federal Government,
there have been enough concerns about, you know, forcing
organizations to give information to the Federal Government
that, in fact, all of the legislative proposals say that they
are voluntary.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. The Chairman now recognizes the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, Infrastructure
Protection, and Security Technologies, Mr. Ratcliffe.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Spaulding, I would like to start with you. The
administration's proposal discusses how Federal agencies--and I
will quote--``through an open and competitive process will
choose a private entity to identify and develop a common set of
best practices for the creation and operation of private
information sharing and analysis organizations.''
The NIST, the National Institute of Standards and
Technology led a collaborative process last year to develop the
cybersecurity framework. Why isn't this NIST framework, why
isn't it being utilized in the process here?
Ms. Spaulding. Congressman, I think it will be utilized in
the process here. What the NIST framework does is provide a
framework, a way for companies to think about their
cybersecurity and how to achieve better cybersecurity. So it
breaks it down into five key functions; identify, identify the
assets you want to protect and the risks that it faces, ways to
protect, ways to detect, ways to respond, and ways to recover.
It pulled together from the private sector their best practices
in each of those categories. So that is the cybersecurity
framework.
What this standards organization will do is to look at what
are the best practices for these ISAOs. Of the ISACs, of the
ISAOs, of the information-sharing organizations that are out
there today, which are the best ones, what are the best
practices that we see out there? Let's pull that together as a
guideline for private-sector groups that want to come together
to say here are some of the best practices in terms of ways in
which they are protecting the information that has been given--
that is being shared in there. So that I know that if I give it
to you, you are only going to share it within this ISAC, for
example. Or ways in which you are going to protect privacy
information, et cetera; ways in which you are gonna get it out
quickly to me, get back to me, so that I get information for
information I give in. How do I know I am going to get
something good back from it?
So it is a different set of best practices. But the process
for developing that will be very similar to the one NIST used.
This third-party standards organization, will be canvassing the
private sector, the existing public and private-sector sharing
organizations to say to them tell us what you think are the
best practices. Very collaborative is what we envision.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Sure. So I want to talk a little bit about
this--a single portal for information sharing. As a former
terrorism prosecutor after 9/11, while we would have liked the
information to come through one single avenue, what was more
important was that people would share information. So whether
it was with the FBI or whether it was with Secret Service, we
encouraged information sharing.
So I am wondering if you can expound on the process here,
the thought process behind there just being one single portal
for sharing information.
Ms. Spaulding. Yes, absolutely. We totally agree. The
highest priority is on information sharing. Again, that is such
a high priority, that even if it is only sharing between
private-sector companies and they don't share with the
Government, we think that is worth promoting, because sharing
of information is gonna significantly advance the ball here.
But with respect to sharing with the Government, again, we
want to make sure that existing relationships are not disrupted
here. So companies that have relationships with the FBI, with
Treasury, with other parts of the Government and are
comfortable picking up the phone and calling them, they should
continue to reach out and say we think we see something, you
know, that looks a little strange on our system; we think we
may have some intrusion activity here. That kind of information
sharing across Government we hope will continue to take place.
What we are trying to do--and even sharing of cyber threat
indicators can be shared--you know, we are not saying you can't
share it with other departments and agencies.
We are creating a newly-incentivized program. If we are
doing that, we want to use that to help us create a common
operating picture. So rather than have that information coming
in in a distributed, dispersed way all across the Government
and hope that it comes together somewhere at some point,
sometime, we want to say we would really like to incentivize
you to bring it in to this one place, and we will take
responsibility for making sure that it gets to the people who
need it very quickly.
But this way, we are--greater confidence, both that we have
a common operating picture and that privacy protections are
clearly in place.
Mr. Ratcliffe. Terrific. Thank you, Ms. Spaulding.
Very quickly, Dr. Schneck, I wanted to give you an
opportunity. Ms. Spaulding and Dr. Fischer were able to expand
on Congresswoman Watson Coleman's question about privacy.
Just very quickly, I want to give you an opportunity. Can
you explain the processes in which NCCIC protects privacy and
explain that relationship with DHS privacy office?
Ms. Schneck. So thank you. Very quickly, DHS has one of the
first statutory privacy officers. We work not only with the
front office at that level, but the under secretary has for our
directorate her own privacy officer that reports up. Every
program that we have engages them. When I came in I actually
asked--because I write code. Or I used to--the people that
write code, I asked them; are you getting rid of the extra
memory so that there isn't--because this is one of the famous
ways that attackers attack--so that there isn't a gap that we
didn't know about that is actually storing information that we
didn't know about.
Every step of the way in how we build our programs, we work
with those teams on privacy. We also do impact assessments,
which means a document is published on our website. What we do,
what we collect, what we are doing with it, and why we do it.
As we grow these capabilities, that is an ingrained philosophy
in who we do at DHS.
There has never been a harder time to want companies, as we
heard before and it is true, to share with Government. There
has also never been a more urgent time to put the indicators
together to respond to an adversary that candidly has an
infinite appropriation and does whatever they want.
We need to make sure that we have our defensive
capabilities as strong as they are. That means putting this
data together. It is speed and privacy and the balance therein.
It takes all hands on deck, everybody to work this. Part of the
reason it is taking us more than just a few months to build
this capability is because we have to build it with the right
privacy, the right policy, and the right equities to make it
light speed and get it right. Does that answer your question?
Mr. Ratcliffe. It does. Thank you. I am out of time. But I
do want to thank you all of you for being here and for better
informing the committee Members so that we can hopefully move
forward with cyber legislation in this Congress. I yield back.
Chairman McCaul. Thank the gentleman. Excuse me.
The Chairman now recognizes Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. and I also want to
join my colleagues in thanking the panel--or the witnesses for
being here. Most of all, for spending an entire hour with some
of us, ensuring that we understand and that we somehow feel at
peace that you are collecting data that is absolutely
necessary, but actually being very cautious at ensuring that
individual privacy rights are being abided by.
We have also heard a lot from the perspective of corporate
America. But what I haven't heard yet coming from you is how
you plan to communicate everything that you are doing with the
general public. So someone like myself at home, where my
computer gets hacked and my IP address gets duplicated 15
times, how is my information as an individual victim or
survivor of a hack attack in my personal network, how are you
going to protect me from sharing my personal information with
anyone else?
I haven't heard it from a perspective that I think the
general public can relate to. We have been speaking at this
level, and we haven't really simplified it in a way that my
constituents could be comfortable with what we are doing here.
So could you explain a little bit as to--in the private
session, you know, we heard specific information of what would
be pulled. Can you speak to that here?
Ms. Spaulding. Congresswoman, thank you for the question.
As I hear it, it involves at least two aspects. One is as a
private citizen, what does this mean to me; right? How is what
you have just been describing here for the last couple of hours
relevant to protecting my identity information----
Mrs. Torres. Right.
Ms. Spaulding [continuing]. For example, my PII?
What I would say to that is that by protecting the networks
and systems that hold your information, we are protecting you--
and your--against identity theft, for example. One of the
pieces of legislation that the administration proposed--we have
talked about their information-sharing legislation, but they
also proposed breach notification legislation. That is very
much designed to protect consumers; to make sure that companies
have a single standard across the country for being required to
notify individuals when there is reasonable basis to believe
that their personal information may have been stolen, and to do
so promptly. So that is very much geared toward the individual
and the consumer.
In terms of how do we reassure them that this work that we
are doing on their behalf is not interfering with their privacy
interests? As we have talked today, we are very much focused on
the specific information that we need to defend networks. We
are very precise. The legislation the administration has
proposed defines that information very carefully.
The automation that we are building will have a structured
way of providing that information that will minimize the
likelihood that information we don't need could be included. We
place a very high priority on making sure that we are--we have
no interest, it does not help our network defense to gather a
lot of personal information about Americans or others.
I will let the deputy address that, as well.
Ms. Schneck. I would only add that it is my hope that we
can use campaigns like our ``Stop. Think. Connect.'' messaging
or the awareness that we do every October in cybersecurity
awareness month. I think every month should be cyber awareness
month. But we focus that month to get out on the road and talk
to everyone.
I am hoping that the public will start to understand this.
We have to work to take some of our technical terms and make
them actually English. But start to understand that Government
is working very hard to protect them. It starts with getting
our own agencies talking, which we are doing. It starts with
building into the private sector. Then making sure that through
its providers of theirs of other programs with agencies in the
Federal Government that work directly with citizens, that we
get that right. But we need to really enhance the trust
relationship in the cyber area.
Mrs. Torres. So I am almost out of time. I just want to
make sure that I get my two other questions answered.
To this issue though, my final word on this is that we need
to ensure that that community outreach is part of whatever
legislation that we can produce; that community grants and
opportunities to include the public in this discussion happens.
Mr. Fischer, the fair information practice principles we
have been talking about, mentioned in the President's--in his
security Executive Order, how are they incorporated into the
Department procedures, from your perspective?
Mr. Fischer. Well, I think the Department people would
probably be better-situated to answer the specifics with
respect to that. But I think on the question of how privacy is
incorporated, it is a--one of the difficulties--and this also
gets back to your earlier question a little bit--that the
general public has various views of what privacy means. There
isn't any one really universal kind of understanding. I mean,
there is something called, you know, ``personally identifiable
information,'' which is kind of interpreted as being something
that, you know, could actually identify a person specifically.
But when people think about privacy, they don't necessarily
think about it in the same way as Government may think about
privacy. So, you know, if one is going to develop a set of
principles or use a set of principles or, in fact, incorporate
something like privacy by design, which has been around for a
long time, or something that people have tried to do, it is--
there--it can become very complicated very quickly.
I think one of the things that is very important is to be
able to create a way of letting people understand specifically
what the issues are so that there can become really a consensus
among consumers about what it is that we are really trying to
protect.
Because one more point here, which is, you know, people are
always worried about--understandably, about Government and its
role. But, in fact, people willingly give huge amounts of
information to private companies.
Mrs. Torres. We do.
Mr. Fischer. If you get software that is free, it just
means you are the product. Because the company is getting
something out of it. Usually, that means they are getting
information from you; right?
Well, people don't even often realize this. You know, the
service agreements that we sign, I mean, who has time to read
through them or can understand them? So I think it is very
important that there be a--you know, a dialogue, really, about
how to characterize privacy more clearly for everybody so there
can be consensus.
Mrs. Torres. Thank you. I think I am out of time. I yield
back.
Chairman McCaul. Recognize the Ranking Member for closing
comments.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. I just want to thank the
entire panel for giving us this time today and the information.
Particularly, I want to thank you, Honorable, Honorable,
Honorable Spaulding and Dr. Schneck, because you have given us
the majority of the day when I knew you could be doing some
other things, including preparing for what might be a furlough
of some very important people. I hope you don't have to do
that. But I want you to know and I thank you, Chairman, for
guiding me through this very moment of being next to you. Thank
you.
Chairman McCaul. Well, you did quite well, I must say.
Let me thank the witnesses. Let me thank Ms. Spaulding and
Dr. Schneck for your service to our country on a very important
issue. I think the education process is very important for
Members of Congress and for the American people to identify
that this is a real and valid threat that we need to defend the
Nation from. The hearing will be open for 10 days, the record I
should say.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:51 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Suzanne E.
Spaulding and Phyllis Schneck
Question 1. According to the testimony of the under secretary, the
White House legislative proposal on information sharing would immunize
against civil or criminal liability entities that voluntarily disclose
to or receive lawfully obtained cyber threat indicators from the NCCIC
or a private ISAO that has adopted certain best practices. Please
explain the scope of the liability protection, including a delineation
of the circumstances in which liability protections would not be
afforded to an entity that chooses to disclose or receive information
from the NCCIC or a certified ISAO.
Answer. The President's information-sharing legislative proposal
provides targeted liability protection to private entities that
voluntarily disclose or receive lawfully obtained cyber threat
indicators from a private information security and analysis
organization (ISAO) or the National Cybersecurity and Communications
Integration Center (NCCIC). It affords such entities protection from
public disclosure, and from use of disclosed indicators as evidence in
a regulatory enforcement action.
The proposal directs DHS to select a non-governmental Standards
Organization for the purpose of identifying a common set of best
practices for the creation and operation of private ISAOs. The
Standards Organization will work directly with the public to identify
and develop best practices. To receive the liability protection
afforded by the President's proposal, private-sector entities must
share with the NCCIC or an ISAO that has self-certified that it adheres
to these best practices.
Question 2a. To receive liability protection, does a private entity
need any kind of certification from the NCCIC or an ISAO to which it
disclosed or from which it received cyber threat indicators?
If so, what standards would guide an NCCIC or ISAO in issuing such
a certification?
Answer. There is no NCCIC- or ISAO-issued certification. The
proposal directs DHS to select a non-governmental Standards
Organization for the purpose of identifying a common set of best
practices for the creation and operation of private ISAOs. The
Standards Organization will work directly with the private sector to
identify and develop best practices. To receive the liability
protection afforded by the President's proposal, private-sector
entities must share with the NCCIC or an ISAO that has self-certified
that it adheres to these best practices.
The proposed independent standards organization for ISAOs would not
promulgate Government-determined standards or require a compliance
certification. It would be an independent organization that sets forth
voluntary standards that it will develop in consultation with the
public.
Question 2b. If no certification were required or issued, would a
court in the first instance have to assess whether a private entity
deserves immunity under Section 106?
Answer. ISAOs would have to self-certify under Section 106 of the
information-sharing proposal. That self-certification is distinct from
any acknowledgement of receipt that the NCCIC or the ISAO might
generate as a way to reassure an entity sharing threat indicators that
it has submitted the information to the correct place.
Question 3. What are the limitations of the ISAC model that
necessitate the effort to increase the proliferation of ISAOs?
Answer. An ISAC is a type of ISAO. In practice, as ISACs have
evolved, they are sector-specific entities that encourage information
sharing within specific critical infrastructure sectors. While ISACs
have had a great deal of success and lessons learned that will serve
ISAOs as they form, many companies do not fall within a designated
sector or fall within multiple sectors. And some companies want to
share with partners outside of their sector for a wider scope of
situational awareness.
Encouraging ISAOs beyond just ISACS will provide for more
organizational flexibility. ISAOs can be organized around a particular
region, community of interest, or concern about a particular type of
cybersecurity risk. ISAOs could include companies regardless of their
sector affiliation.
Question 4. What are the risks and rewards of an information-
sharing environment that is dominated by ISAOs?
Answer. Critical infrastructure includes both physical and cyber
infrastructure, publicly- and privately-owned. The ISAO model builds
upon the successes of existing models. The formulation of ISAOs allows
and encourages organizations to participate in cyber threat information
sharing to proactively detect and prevent cybersecurity incidents
before they can cause damage to their networks by applying the
knowledge, capabilities, and experiences of a wider community. Sharing
cyber threat information broadly and with sufficient timeliness can
improve the Nation's cybersecurity writ large by reducing our cyber
adversaries' advantages of speed and stealth.
Questions From Honorable Jim Langevin for Suzanne E. Spaulding and
Phyllis Schneck
Question 1. In reviewing the President's information-sharing
proposal, I was drawn to the phrase ``lawfully obtained'' as it relates
to cyber threat indicators. Due to ambiguities in anti-hacking
statutes, courts have not yet settled whether the work of many well-
intentioned security researchers--so-called white-hat hackers--is
lawfully obtained. How can we work to ensure that information-sharing
legislation does not chill vital security research while at the same
time not opening the door to companies ``hacking back''?
Answer. The President's information-sharing proposal aims to
emphasize that activities conducted to obtain cyber indicators should
comply with the law. The Department of Justice is best positioned to
answer questions pertaining to the relevant statutes and to what extent
they apply to the activities of cybersecurity researchers.
Question 2. It is vitally important that we incent private-to-
private information sharing, something the President's proposal does
through the use of Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations
(ISAOs). However, ISAOs need only self-certify to be able to receive
threat indicators. Without any independent oversight to be sure that
best practices are being followed, are you concerned that this could
lead to a reduction in privacy?
Answer. Having publically-available standards for ISAOs, including
standards for privacy protection, will help ISAO member companies hold
their ISAO accountable. ISAOs that are transparent and accountable are
likely to attract more members, providing an incentive to clearly
demonstrate compliance with the standards.
Question 3. We know that cyber threat information is most valuable
when shared expeditiously, which, in this domain, essentially means at
machine speed. How can DHS lead efforts to ensure that the stripping of
PII is accomplished as thoroughly and quickly as possible so that the
information shared is timely?
Answer. DHS requests that, before sharing cyber threat information
with the Department, partners filter out any PII, content, and other
information that is not necessary to describing the cyber threat. In
addition, currently, DHS Analysts are required to review cyber threat
indicator information for PII and handle it as outlined in US-CERT
standard operating procedures. Generally, DHS's policy is to minimize
or redact any personal information that is not necessary to understand
or analyze a threat. As we move to automated threat indicator sharing,
DHS and interagency partners are studying privacy-by-design technical
safeguards as well as policy and process approaches to minimization
that include a combination of automated removal and/or filtering of
sensitive data, oversight capabilities, and where necessary, manual
review. Technical safeguard requirements may also be required. To
safeguard Americans' personal privacy, the administration's
cybersecurity legislative proposal requires private entities to comply
with certain privacy restrictions, such as removing unnecessary
personal information and taking measures to protect any personal
information that must be shared, in order to qualify for liability
protection. The proposal further requires the Attorney General, in
coordination with the Secretary of Homeland Security and in
consultation with the Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board and
others, to develop receipt, retention, use, and disclosure guidelines
for the Federal Government.
Any future cybersecurity legislation will incorporate strong
privacy, confidentiality, and civil liberties safeguards while
strengthening our critical infrastructure's security and resilience DHS
is committed to furthering information sharing and promoting
cybersecurity standards for critical infrastructure.
Question From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Eric A. Fischer
Question. What are the risks and rewards of an information-sharing
environment that is dominated by ISAOs?
Answer.\1\ This question cannot be answered definitively at
present. Such an answer would depend on several factors that are
currently unknown or uncertain. However, the analysis below may be
useful in helping to determine the potential benefits and disadvantages
of the ISAO model in such an environment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Some responses were prepared in consultation with other CRS
experts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ISAOs (Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations) are defined
in the Homeland Security Act (6 U.S.C.  131(5)) as ``any formal or
informal entity or collaboration created or employed by public or
private sector organizations'' created to assist in securing critical
infrastructure and protected systems by acquiring, analyzing, or
sharing ``critical infrastructure information,'' which refers to non-
public information relating to threats to and defense and recovery of
critical infrastructure or protected systems.
Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs) are more familiar
to most observers. They may also be considered ISAOs but have a
different origin, having been initially formed pursuant to a 1998
Presidential directive (PPD 63) on critical infrastructure
protection.\2\ The directive called for a single ISAC but also for a
National Infrastructure Protection Center (somewhat analogous to the
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center [NCCIC])
that would ``establish its own relations directly with others in the
private sector and with any information sharing and analysis entity
that the private sector may create.''\3\ Also, the directive stated
that the ``actual design and functions'' of the ISAC would ``be
determined by the private sector, in consultation with and with
assistance from the Federal Government.'' The result was the creation
of several sector-focused ISACs, rather than a single entity. Many of
today's ISACs are associated with Federally-recognized critical
infrastructure sectors. Eighteen are listed as members of the National
Council of ISACs (NCI).\4\ There are currently 16 Federally-recognized
critical infrastructure sectors.\5\ The table below shows the
relationships between those sectors and the ISACs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ The White House, ``Presidential Decision Directive 63: Critical
Infrastructure Protection,'' May 22, 1998, http://www.fas.org/irp/
offdocs/pdd/pdd-63.htm.
\3\ It is not clear what ``others in the private sector'' refers
to, as the NIPC was a Federal entity. Presumably, this was a drafting
error.
\4\ National Council of ISACs, ``Member ISACs,'' 2015, http://
www.isaccouncil.org/memberisacs.html.
\5\ The White House, ``Critical Infrastructure Security and
Resilience,'' Presidential Policy Directive 21, (February 12, 2013),
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2013/02/12/presidential-
policy-directive-critical-infrastructure-security-and-resil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Information Sharing and
Critical Infrastructure Sector              Analysis Center
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chemical.................................
Commercial Facilities....................  Real Estate ISAC
Communications...........................  Communications ISAC (National
Coordinating Center for
Communications-NCC)
Critical Manufacturing...................
Dams.....................................
Defense Industrial Base..................  DIB-ISAC
Emergency Services.......................  EMR-ISAC
Energy...................................  ES-ISAC (electric sector)
Oil and Gas ISAC
Financial Services.......................  Financial Services ISAC
Food and Agriculture.....................
Government Facilities....................  Multi-State ISAC
Healthcare and Public Health.............  Health ISAC
Information Technology...................  IT-ISAC
Nuclear Reactors, Materials, and Waste...  Nuclear Energy Institute
Transportation Systems...................  Aviation ISAC
Maritime ISAC
Public Transit ISAC
Surface Transportation ISAC
Water and Wastewater Systems.............  Water ISAC
No specific critical-infrastructure        Research and Education ISAC
sector.                                   Supply-Chain ISAC
ICS-ISAC (industrial control
systems)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source.--See text.
Notes.--A Food and Agriculture ISAC and a Chemical ISAC were established
in 2002 (Government Accountability Office, Critical Infrastructure
Protection: Improving Information Sharing with Infrastructure Sectors,
July 2004, http://www.gao.gov/assets/250/243318.pdf) but appear to be
no longer operational. The NCC, within DHS, has served as the
Communications ISAC since 2000 (http://www.dhs.gov/national-
coordinating-center-communications). The ICS-ISAC is not listed as a
member of the NCI. Other entities such as State governments may also
have ISACs.

As the table shows, ISACs currently exist for 12 of the designated
critical infrastructure sectors.\6\ There are also three ISACs that are
cross-sectoral. There appear to be few organizations that call
themselves ISAOs at present.\7\ The concept increased in prominence
following a legislative proposal and an Executive Order from the Obama
administration in January and February of 2015 fostering their
development and use.\8\ The White House described the intent as
``expand[ing] information sharing by encouraging the formation of
communities that share information across a region or in response to a
specific emerging cyber threat. An ISAO could be a not-for-profit
community, a membership organization, or a single company facilitating
sharing among its customers or partners.'' The Executive Order
specifies that ``ISAOs may be organized on the basis of sector, sub-
sector, region, or any other affinity,'' that members may be public
sector, private sector, or both, and that an ISAO may be ``a not-for-
profit community, a membership organization, or a single company
facilitating sharing among its customers or partners.''\9\ Under the
proposed legislation, ISAOs that wish to protect members from liability
risks for sharing information would need to be self-certified according
to standards to be developed under a process to be established by DHS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Some caution should be exercised with respect to the
completeness of this list, as there may also be organizations that have
ISAC-like functions but do not call themselves ISACs.
\7\ One example is the HITRUST Alliance (see Testimony of HITRUST
Alliance CEO Dan Nutkis, Cybersecurity: The Evolving Nature of Cyber
Threats Facing the Private Sector, 2015, http://oversight.house.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/3-18-2015-IT-Hearing-on-Cybersecurity-Nutkis-
HITRUST.pdf). Some organizations may function like ISAOs or ISACs but
not call themselves that.
\8\ The White House, Updated Information Sharing Legislative
Proposal, 2015, http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/omb/
legislative/letters/updated-information-sharing-legislative-
proposal.pdf; The White House, ``Fact Sheet: Executive Order Promoting
Private Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing,'' Press Release,
(February 12, 2015), http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/
02/12/fact-sheet-executive-order-promoting-private-sector-
cybersecurity-inform; Executive Order 13691, ``Promoting Private Sector
Cybersecurity Information Sharing,'' Federal Register 80, no. 34
(February 20, 2015): 9349-53, http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2015-02-
20/pdf/2015-03714.pdf.
\9\ The Homeland Security Act definition is both broader, in that
ISAOs can be ``any formal or informal entity or collaboration created
or employed by public or private sector organizations'', and narrower,
in that under the act, the organizations must be ``created or
employed'' for ``gathering and analyzing,'' ``communicating or
disclosing,'' and ``voluntarily disseminating'' critical infrastructure
information as specified in the act (6 U.S.C. 131(5)). The
administration proposal does not appear to limit ISAOs to information
about critical infrastructure, although its focus is on cybersecurity,
rather than on the all-hazards emphasis in the act.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If this approach were adopted by Congress, ISAOs could possibly
become dominant entities in the information-sharing environment. Given
the uncertainties associated with their anticipated impacts, it may be
best to examine possible effects through a series of questions:

Would ISAOs lead to more information sharing among private-
sector entities and between the NCCIC and the private sector?
The broad and flexible nature of the ISAOs envisioned in the
administration proposal, as opposed to ISACs as currently
configured, could lead to the creation of ISAOs for affinity
groups for which ISACs are not viewed as applicable--for
example, the entertainment industry, with companies such as
Sony.\10\ That could lead to much broader information sharing
among private-sector entities that join the ISAOs and with the
NCCIC. Yet, there is no guarantee that new ISAOs would be
established, or, if they were, that they would lead to
increased information sharing either among the members or with
the NCCIC. Even for a few CI sectors, some former ISACs are no
longer in operation, and the degree to which existing ISACs are
active in information sharing is considered variable by many
observers. Furthermore, the degree to which the NCCIC could
process and usefully disseminate the volume and variety of
information it may likely receive from a large number of ISAOs
is uncertain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ However, the IT-ISAC already lists Sony as a member (https://
www.it-isac.org/).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Would increases in information sharing through ISAOs improve
cybersecurity? The relationship between the volume of
information shared and improved cybersecurity is not
straightforward. Both providers and recipients--whether they
are businesses, ISAOs, or Government agencies--will incur
various costs, including developing, assessing, processing,
sharing, and applying the information. For sharing to be
effective, information from the provider must be relevant to
recipients' needs and in forms that can be readily applied in
their IT and security environments. Recipients must also have
the capacity and willingness to assess and use the information
received in a timely fashion. A large increase in the amount of
information received may in fact be counterproductive,
especially if much of the information proves to be of little
use to the recipient. In theory, ISAOs can be closely tailored
to the needs of their members and therefore help ensure that
those needs are met. However, a closely-tailored ISAO might not
provide information relevant to all the lines of business in
which members may engage, and membership in several
organizations might be preferred.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ For example, Sony is involved in electronics, gaming, movies,
and music. However, it is not clear whether Sony would have been better
protected against recent attacks against it if it had been a member of
ISAOs in any of those subsectors in addition to its membership in the
IT-ISAC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Would ISAOs provide overlapping or duplicative services? One
potential advantage of the sector-focused approach taken by the
ISACs is that it can minimize such duplication. However, it can
also create gaps for entities that do not fall clearly into one
or another ISAC sector or that are multi-sectoral. Addressing
such gaps is one of the stated purposes of the administration's
ISAO proposal. In addition, the potential for duplication
creates the potential for market competition, and such market
forces would ideally yield more innovation and more rapid
improvement in information sharing than would a more restricted
approach. Market forces might also lead to lower costs, and
cost is often cited as an impediment to improved information
sharing, especially for small businesses. Yet market forces
might also lead to higher costs, and a proliferation of ISAOs
might also make decisions about which one or ones to join more
difficult for potential members. It also creates the
possibility that members could receive conflicting information
or even recommendations from different ISAOs. At present, there
appear to be few examples of potentially overlapping
information-sharing entities. One possible case is in the
health sector, which has both the Health ISAC \12\ and an ISAO,
the HITRUST Alliance.\13\ Services provided by the two appear
to be both complementary and potentially competitive.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ National Health Information Sharing and Analysis Center, ``NH-
ISAC,'' 2015.
\13\ Nutkis, Testimony at COGR Hearing.
\14\ See, for example, Marianne Kolbasuk McGee, ``NH-ISAC Offers
Cyber-Intelligence Tool,'' Data Breach Today, December 5, 2014, http://
www.databreachtoday.com/nh-isac-offers-cyber-intelligence-tool-a-7642.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Would for-profit ISAOs be beneficial or disadvantageous for
improving information sharing? The administration proposal
states that for-profit entities that share information can be
ISAOs. That would presumably include internet and cybersecurity
service providers, for example. Such entities might be
particularly well-positioned to share information efficiently
and effectively with customers and to bring market forces to
bear favorably in the information-sharing environment. However,
unintended adverse impacts are also possible. For example, for-
profit companies might have a resource and marketing advantage
over non-profit organizations, and some may perceive such an
advantage as unfair or counterproductive. It is also possible
that competitive pressures may impede information sharing
involving more than one company. Some entities that could
potentially be ISAOs are currently members of ISACs and could
also be members of other ISAOs, creating possible conflicts of
interest.

Would a cybersecurity environment dominated by ISAOs
complement or encumber improvement of cybersecurity risk
management? The NIST Cybersecurity Framework,\15\ developed to
assist critical-infrastructure and other entities in adopting
effective cybersecurity risk management, discusses the role of
information sharing in cybersecurity, including the roles
played by ISACs and other entities in helping organizations
determine their desired levels--called tiers--of cybersecurity
implementation. Each of the four tiers includes descriptions of
risk-management processes and programs, and ``external
participation,'' which largely describes the level of
information sharing in which the organization engages.\16\
Broad availability of involvement with ISAOs could help
organizations that so desire to move to higher tiers with
respect to information sharing. However, as the Framework makes
clear, that is only one facet of cybersecurity implementation.
There may be a risk, therefore, that a proliferation of ISAOs
would lead to an overemphasis on information sharing to the
detriment of other, possibly more critical cybersecurity needs,
thereby resulting paradoxically in a decline in overall
cybersecurity preparedness.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ National Institute of Standards and Technology, Framework for
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.0, February
12, 2014, http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cybersecurity-
framework-021214-final.pdf.
\16\ A Tier-2 organization ``knows its role in the larger
ecosystem, but has not formalized its capabilities to interact and
share information externally,'' whereas a Tier-4 organization `` . . .
actively shares information with partners to ensure that accurate,
current information is being distributed and consumed to improve
cybersecurity before a cybersecurity event occurs (ibid., 10, 11).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Would the proposed ISAO standards process sufficiently
address concerns such as those raised above? Both the
legislative proposal and the Executive Order call for
designation of a nongovernmental organization whose purpose
would be to specify a ``common set'' of ``best practices'' or
``voluntary standards or guidelines'' for creating and
operating ISAOs. Such standards and practices may help address
some but not all of the issues discussed above. For example,
standards may be helpful in determining what kinds of
information may be most useful to share for different purposes
and different kinds of entities, as well as how best to use
such information, but it seems unlikely that they can address
concerns about overlapping or duplicative services, or problems
such as gaps in coverage for key groups caused by economic
factors.
If ISAOs do in fact proliferate, it is very likely that substantial
changes will occur in the information-sharing environment, but many of
those effects may be difficult or even impossible to predict
accurately. However, there appear to be few independent assessments of
the performance and effectiveness of current information-sharing
entities and their relationships.\17\ Some studies have concluded that
measuring the effectiveness of information sharing is difficult in the
current environment,\18\ and the creation of a large number of ISAOs
could further complicate any assessments. Such concerns might be
addressed by options such as on-going independent research and
evaluation activities designed to determine the effectiveness of ISAOs,
perhaps as a part of or complementary to the standards-development and
revision process envisioned by the administration. That could
potentially be started in conjunction with another option-staged
implementation of the ISAO model, perhaps including pilot programs.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ One example is Government Accountability Office, Public
Transit Security Information Sharing: DHS Could Improve Information
Sharing Through Streamlining and Increased Outreach, September 2010,
http://www.gao.gov/assets/310/309903.pdf.
\18\ See, for example, Matthew H. Fleming, Eric Goldstein, and John
K. Roman, Evaluating the Impact of Cybersecurity Information Sharing on
Cyber Incidents and Their Consequences (Homeland Security Studies and
Analysis Institute, March 31, 2014), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=?2418357; Brian A. Jackson, ``How Do We Know
What Information Sharing Is Really Worth?,'' Product Page, (2014),
http://www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR380.html.
\19\ These options are provided for purposes of illustration. CRS
does not make recommendations or take positions on legislative issues.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions From Honorable Jim Langevin for Eric A. Fischer
Question 1. In reviewing the President's information-sharing
proposal, I was drawn to the phrase ``lawfully obtained'' as it relates
to cyber threat indicators. Due to ambiguities in anti-hacking
statutes, courts have not yet settled whether the work of many well-
intentioned security researchers--so-called white-hat hackers--is
lawfully obtained. How can we work to ensure that information-sharing
legislation does not chill vital security research while at the same
time not opening the door to companies ``hacking back''?
Answer. The current cybersecurity environment creates a number of
dilemmas, and one of them is captured by this question. The problem is
that the complexities of cyberspace--whether hardware, software,
networks, or the people using them--combined with its rapid
technological evolution and the changing threat environment, create
significant challenges for distinguishing appropriate and inappropriate
behavior, especially by those pursuing protective and defensive
activities. Such ambiguity can create problems for legal and ethical
interpretation of such actions and is believed by at least some
observers to have a potentially chilling effect on needed research.
This is not a new issue,\20\ but some legislative proposals to improve
cybersecurity have led to increased attention to the concern.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Aaron J. Burstein, ``Conducting Cybersecurity Research Legally
and Ethically,'' April 4, 2008, https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/
leet08/tech/full_papers/burstein/burstein_html/index.html.
\21\ See, for example, Jan Ellis, ``Will the President's
Cybersecurity Proposal Make Us More Secure?,'' Security Street, January
23, 2015, https://community.rapid7.com/community/infosec/blog/2015/01/
23/will-the-president-s-cybersecurity-proposal-make-us-more-secure;
Mark Jaycox and Lee Tien, ``Obama's Computer Security Solution Is a
Mishmash of Old, Outdated Policy Solutions,'' January 16, 2015, https:/
/www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/01/obamas-computer-security-solution-mish-
mash-old-outdated-policy-solutions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, researchers who are part of an established and
recognized enterprise, such as a university or research institution,
are likely to have different opportunities and constraints than those
who operate independently, without either the benefits or the
strictures of an institutional environment. Also, research may refer to
many different activities, from the acquisition of fundamental
knowledge about threats, vulnerabilities, and defenses, to the
development of hardware, software, and procedures to address
cybersecurity needs, to the investigation of specific incidents for
purposes of attribution and response. Constraints on research are
likely to apply to such different classes of researchers and activities
in significantly different ways.
One of the core challenges in finding ways to reduce the risk that
the legal environment will chill needed research is in reaching a clear
consensus among stakeholders about what constitutes proper and improper
research activity. If such a consensus can be reached, legal
ambiguities might be much more easily resolved. Without a consensus,
resolution is likely to be very difficult. For example, some may argue
that a research exception should be provided in communications privacy
laws,\22\ but without agreement on what is and is not appropriate
behavior, such an exception may be difficult to scope.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Burstein, ``Conducting Cybersecurity Research.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Another issue that may be worth considering is lack of
understanding and education among researchers about what they can and
cannot do under current law and regulations. Researchers may be
reluctant to take some actions that are lawful solely because of
uncertainty about their legality.\23\ One way to address this issue is
to provide researchers with access to appropriate education resources
that can clarify what is permitted and also provide guidance for
reducing the risk of violating legal requirements.\24\ For example, the
legal risks associated with the use of honeypots--websites or other
information resources specifically designed to attract attacks--may
depend, some have argued, on how they are implemented.\25\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Ibid.
\24\ See, for example, Jody R. Westby, Legal Guide to Cybersecurity
Research (Chicago, IL: American Bar Association, Section of Science &
Technology Law, 2013).
\25\ Burstein, ``Conducting Cybersecurity Research.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, an option available for some research problems is the use
of isolated testbeds or ``cyber ranges.'' Such facilities are designed
for research and training, can mimic many features of cyberspace, and
permit a wide range of actions that could possibly be illegal if done
in ``the wild.'' However, they are limited in scale and may otherwise
be unable to mimic the environment of cyberspace sufficiently for some
kinds of research. In addition, if they are not completely isolated
from the internet, the risk of impacts on external systems would need
to be considered.
Question 2. I think I can safely speak for everyone on this panel
in saying that we agree that cyber threat information sharing is
important. I believe that the President's proposal will help lower
legal barriers to information sharing. What are other obstacles that
could continue to keep information sharing from being as ubiquitous as
we'd like?
Answer. Awareness of the potential utility of information sharing
in cybersecurity appears to be increasing. As the question points out,
legal barriers are only one set of obstacles that would need to be
overcome for ubiquitous and effective use of this cybersecurity tool.
Several additional potential obstacles are discussed below.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ The list is not intended to be definitive or exhaustive. That
would require a comprehensive, objective study of all aspects of
information sharing in the broader cybersecurity context. In addition,
any such list is likely to change significantly as cyber space and its
component threat and information-sharing environments continue to
evolve. The items in this list are not presented in any order of
priority or desirability.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Resources
The costs of information sharing vary, but may be prohibitive for
some entities. The costs of obtaining information from an entity such
as an ISAC may be comparatively low,\27\ but that is only for a
mechanism to receive information. The information must be processed by
the recipient and applied where appropriate. That will require staff
time and perhaps additional hardware and software, especially for
implementation of so-called ``real-time'' information sharing, which
often involves machine-to-machine communication and action. Such costs
may be particularly problematic for small businesses, which may be of
concern not only because of their broad role in the economy, but also
because the sector includes many innovators that can be inviting
targets for cyber espionage, and because many are contractors with
larger organizations that may be inviting targets for cyber crime.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ See, for example, N. Eric Weiss, Legislation to Facilitate
Cybersecurity Information Sharing: Economic Analysis, CRS Report
R43821.
\28\ In the attack on Target, the criminals accessed the store's
computer system through a compromised system of an HVAC contractor (see
N. Eric Weiss and Rena S. Miller, The Target and Other Financial Data
Breaches: Frequently Asked Questions, CRS Report R43496).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Awareness
Concerns about the lack of awareness about cybersecurity in general
and information sharing in particular, especially within the private
sector, have been long-standing. While the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
\29\ and other efforts, along with media attention to major breaches,
appear to have resulted in some increased awareness of the need for
better cybersecurity, it is not yet clear the degree to which awareness
has improved as a result. Awareness of a problem or need is also not
sufficient on its own. To be effective, it must be translated into
appropriate action, which often may not be the case. For example,
according to a 2012 survey, three-quarters of small businesses believe
that cybersecurity is important, but only 10% have a written policy on
it.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ National Institute of Standards and Technology,
``Cybersecurity Framework,'' August 26, 2014, http://www.nist.gov/
cyberframework/index.cfm.
\30\ About a quarter have an ``informal'' policy (National Cyber
Security Alliance, Symantec, and JZ Analytics, 2012 NCSA/Symantec
National Small Business Study, October 2012, https://
www.staysafeonline.org/ . . . /2012_ncsa_symantec_small_business_
study.pdf).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Usefulness of Information
Many kinds of information can be shared, from threat intelligence
\31\ to business strategies and best practices. In addition, the same
information may have different utility for different users--for
example, threat signatures relating to attacks on one critical
infrastructure sector may be of marginal concern for another, and best
practices may be much more useful for small businesses than signatures
associated with advanced targeted threats. Also, shared information may
prove of little use if it is delayed, provided without relevant
contextual detail, or provided in a form that requires substantial
additional processing to determine its applicability. If recipients
find that the information they are provided is of little use to them,
they may be less likely to participate in or continue with information-
sharing initiatives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ This can be described as ``indicators (i.e., an artifact or
observable that suggests that an attack is imminent, that an attack is
underway, or that a compromise may have already occurred); the TTPs
[tactics, techniques and procedures] of an adversary; and recommended
actions to counter an attack'' Chris Johnson, Lee Badger, and David
Waltermire, Guide to Cyber Threat Information Sharing (Draft), SP 800-
150 [National Institute of Standards and Technology, October 2014], 4,
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/800-15sp800_150_draft.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Application of Information
Information sharing by itself is not sufficient to improve
cybersecurity. Not only must it be actionable--presented in a form that
can be usefully applied--but the recipient must also have processes,
including equipment and software, in place to use the information
effectively. If such processes are not in place and utilized properly,
the net effect is the same as if the information were not shared at
all.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ See, for example, Johnson, Badger, and Waltermire, Guide to
Cyber Threat Information Sharing (Draft).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reliability of Sources
There are several reasons why sources of information may not be
considered reliable by potential recipients. For example, the source
may be a competitor, such as another business. The kinds of information
the source provides may focus on a set of entities other than the one
to which the recipient belongs. Or the source might have a reputation
for providing erroneous, outdated, or otherwise useless information. If
no sources are available to an entity that it deems reliable, it may be
reluctant to participate in information-sharing activities.
Mechanisms for Information Sharing
Currently, there appear to be two general models for information
sharing--a decentralized, ``peer-to-peer,'' often informal approach
between entities with complementary needs, and a more centralized
``hub-and-spoke'' model such as the ISACs.\33\ Organizations such as
ISACs are generally sector-specific. Not all sectors have such
organizations, and other affiliations other than sector may also be
important for some kinds of information sharing. Filling such gaps
appears to be part of the rationale behind the administration's ISAO
proposal.\34\ On the one hand, the absence of an appropriate mechanism
can be a barrier to information sharing for an entity. On the other
hand, a proliferation of mechanisms, such as some observers fear the
administration's ISAO model might result in, could also serve as a
barrier if it makes information sharing inefficient or confusing for
possible participants.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Denise E. Zheng and James A. Lewis, Cyber Threat Information
Sharing: Recommendations for Congress and the Administration (CSIS,
March 2015), https://csis.org/files/publication/
150310_cyberthreatinfosharing.pdf.
\34\ The White House, Updated Information Sharing Legislative
Proposal; The White House, ``Fact Sheet: Executive Order Promoting
Private Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing''; Executive Order
13691, ``Promoting Private Sector Cybersecurity Information Sharing.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Standards
The adoption of standards for information sharing is one way to
help address concerns about reliability and utility of information
received. Dozens of standards exist relating to information
sharing.\35\ The Department of Homeland Security has been developing a
single set applicable to sharing of threat intelligence.\36\ Lack of a
broadly-accepted set of consensus standards or a framework for
information sharing might impede more wide-spread adoption of
information-sharing activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ European Union Agency for Network and Information Security,
Standards and Tools for Exchange and Processing of Actionable
Information, November 2014, https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/
cert/support/actionable-information/standards-and-tools-for-exchange-
and-processing-of-actionable-information.
\36\ Department of Homeland Security, ``Information Sharing
Specifications for Cybersecurity,'' 2015, https://www.us-cert.gov/
Information-Sharing-Specifications-Cybersecurity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Economic Incentives
Some observers have noted that the benefits of receiving
cybersecurity information tend to outweigh the benefits of providing
such information for many organizations.\37\ In addition to legal
issues that may be associated with providing information, businesses
may be concerned about reputation costs, if they provide information
showing that they have been victims of cyber attacks. In the absence of
incentives for reciprocity, it is hard to see what benefit an
organization would gain from providing information, unless it is a
Government entity whose mission is to provide such data or a provider
of cybersecurity services. Government measures such as requirements for
data-breach notification, as enacted in most States, can provide
incentives for organizations to share information about attacks that
may be used to help prevent future attacks on other entities or to
capture and prosecute cyber criminals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ See, for example, N. Eric Weiss, Legislation to Facilitate
Cybersecurity Information Sharing: Economic Analysis, CRS Report
R43821; Zheng and Lewis, Cyber Threat Information Sharing:
Recommendations for Congress and the Administration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Reducing the Need for Information Sharing
Some observers have expressed concern about risks associated with
an overemphasis on the role of information sharing in cybersecurity. It
is only one of many cybersecurity tools. For example, it is a
relatively small part of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, and target
levels of sharing vary among the tiers the Framework identified.\38\ In
addition, information sharing tends to focus on immediate concerns such
as cyber attacks and imminent threats. While those must be addressed,
that does not diminish the need to reduce risks through design and
implementation of more secure systems and networks--sometimes referred
to as ``building security in''--and finding ways to change the
incentive structure within cyber space to increase the costs and reduce
the potential for profit from cyber crime and activities of other
adversaries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ National Institute of Standards and Technology, Framework for
Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.0.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[all]
