- MEMBERS' DAY HEARING ON PROPOSED RULES CHANGES FOR THE 117TH CONGRESS

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

MEMBERS' DAY HEARING ON PROPOSED RULES CHANGES FOR THE 117TH CONGRESS

=======================================================================

MEETING

of the

COMMITTEE ON RULES
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 1, 2020

__________

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via http://govinfo.gov
Printed for the use of the Committee on Rules

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

49-708                    WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON RULES

JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts, Chairman

ALCEE L. HASTINGS, Florida,          TOM COLE, Oklahoma,
Vice Chair                           Ranking Republican
NORMA J. TORRES, California          ROB WOODALL, Georgia
ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado              MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland               DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
DONNA E. SHALALA, Florida
DORIS O. MATSUI, California

Don Sisson, Staff Director
Kelly Dixon, Minority Staff Director

------

Subcommittee on Legislative and Budget Process

ALCEE L. HASTINGS, Florida, Chairman

JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York,         ROB WOODALL, Georgia,
Vice Chair                           Ranking Republican
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas
DONNA E. SHALALA, Florida
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts

------

Subcommittee on Rules and Organization of the House

NORMA J. TORRES, California, Chair

ED PERLMUTTER, Colorado,             DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona,
Vice Chair                           Ranking Republican
MARY GAY SCANLON, Pennsylvania       ROB WOODALL, Georgia
JOSEPH D. MORELLE, New York
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts

------

Subcommittee on Expedited Procedures

JAMIE RASKIN, Maryland, Chair

DONNA E. SHALALA, Florida,           MICHAEL C. BURGESS, Texas,
Vice Chair                           Ranking Republican
NORMA J. TORRES, California          DEBBIE LESKO, Arizona
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts

C O N T E N T S

----------

October 1, 2020

Opening Statements:
Page
Hon. James P. McGovern, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Massachusetts and Chair of the Committee on Rules.     1
Hon. Tom Cole, a Representative in Congress from the State of
Oklahoma and Ranking Member of the Committee on Rules......     2
Witness Testimony:
Hon. Steny Hoyer, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Maryland................................................     3
Hon. James E. Clyburn Hoyer, a Representative in Congress
from the State of South Carolina...........................     6
Hon. Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Mississippi...................................     7
Prepared Statement.......................................    10
Hon. James R. Langvin, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Rhode Island......................................    14
Hon. Anna G. Eshoo, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California........................................    16
Hon. Rodney Davis, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Illinois..........................................    25
Prepared Statement.......................................    28
Hon. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Representative in Congress
from the State of Florida..................................    32
Hon. Ben Cline, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Virginia................................................    34
Hon. Joaquin Castro, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Texas.............................................    36
Hon. Charlie Crist, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida...........................................    37
Hon. Derek Kilmer, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Washington........................................    48
Hon. Stephanie Murphy, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Florida...........................................    50
Hon. Sharice Davids, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Kansas............................................    52
Hon. Van Taylor, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Texas...................................................    53
Hon. Rob Woodall, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Georgia.................................................    55
Hon. Bradley S. Schneider, a Representative in Congress from
the State of Illinois......................................    77
Hon. Ted Lieu, a Representative in Congress from the State of
California.................................................    78
Statements for the Record:
Statement for the record submitted from Congresswoman Rice...    61
Statement for the record submitted from Congressman Graves...    63
Statement for the record submitted from Congresswoman Porter.    66
Statement for the record submitted from Congressman Cleaver..    69
Statement for the record submitted from Congressman
Gottheimer.................................................    72
Additional Material Submitted for the Record:
Remote Voting by Proxy Regulations Pursuant to House
Resolution 965.............................................    75

MEMBERS' DAY HEARING ON PROPOSED RULES CHANGES FOR THE 117TH CONGRESS

----------

THURSDAY, OCTOBER 1, 2020

House of Representatives,
Committee on Rules,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 1:05 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. James P. McGovern [chairman of the committee]
presiding.
Present: Representatives McGovern, Torres, Perlmutter,
Raskin, Scanlon, Morelle, Shalala, Cole, Woodall, and Lesko.

OPENING STATEMENTS

The Chairman. The Rules Committee will come to order. This
Members' Day hearing is an opportunity for us on the committee
to do something radical--to listen more than we talk. This is a
chance for us to hear from our colleagues on both sides of the
aisle about their ideas for the next rules package. Regardless
of who controls Congress next year, I think we can all agree
that running this House with integrity means listening to all
members. So that is what we are going to be doing here today.
We took a similarly collaborative approach with the rules
package for this Congress, and I am proud to say it led to the
first bipartisan vote on a rules package in decades. That
didn't just happen; it took time, a lot of conversation and a
willingness to acknowledge that no party has a monopoly on good
ideas.
I am proud of what we created together, things like the
consensus calendar to expedite consideration of ideas with
broad bipartisan support; the diversity office, to get the
Halls of Congress looking more like the real world; and the
Modernization Select Committee, to advance good ideas from both
sides that get this place functioning better. And although we
were already holding these Member Day hearings in our
committee, we also require that other committees hold them too,
so that all members have a chance to be heard across the
Congress.
Hopefully, more good ideas now have the chance to see the
light of day and move forward. So I couldn't ask for a better
partner in this process than our ranking member, Tom Cole. We
come from different parties, but we share the same dedication
to this institution. We want it to work better not for one
political party or the other, but for the American people,
because that is really what this is all about. A well-
functioning House allows us to tackle the issues that can make
a positive difference in peoples' lives. And that is why we all
ran for Congress in the first place.
Before I turn to our ranking member, I want to acknowledge
that today--today is the first day on the job for the House's
new parliamentarian, Jason Smith. Mr. Cole and I said a lot
about him and his predecessor, Tom Wickham, on the floor last
week. I am not going to repeat all the stuff, but suffice it to
say, that our members spend a lot of time consulting with the
parliamentarian's office.
So I think we can all agree that it is fitting that he is
starting his career as parliamentarian on a Rules Committee
Member Day. So now I want to turn to our ranking member, Mr.
Cole, for any comments that he would like to make. Is he not
hearing me? So I think we have a little bit of a technical
glitch here. We will just wait a minute while Mr. Cole gets--I
can hear you, yeah.
Mr. Cole. It is working?
The Chairman. So Mr. Cole, I said a whole bunch of nice
things about you. So I am not sure if you were plugged in when
I said them.
Mr. Cole. Just now?
The Chairman. Yeah. I just said a whole bunch of nice
things about you.
Mr. Cole. Oh, Mr. Chairman. Yeah, this is a prehearing so
it is not recorded in any way, so you are in the clear.
The Chairman. No. We are in the hearing.
Mr. Cole. Are we? Well, thank you for saying nice things
about me.
The Chairman. So anyway, I just said a whole bunch of nice
things, and now I am yielded to you for any opening remarks.
Mr. Cole. I will reciprocate. I will take your word that
you said nice things, so I would feel obliged to say nice
things back, but they are pretty easy to say. First of all, Mr.
Chairman, I want to thank you for holding the hearing, quite
sincerely. I don't think there is any more person dedicated to
the institution than you, and, frankly, dedicated to making it
member-friendly and having a form where we try to make this as
responsive to each individual member as an institution as we
can be while we discharge our functions.
You have been a good partner in defending the powers and
prerogatives of the institution, and, again, trying to position
members where they can be successful as they fight to achieve
what is in the best interest of the people who sent them here
and the interest of the country as a whole. So I look forward
very much to the ideas we will hear today. I have no
preconceptions.
I would be shocked if I agreed with every one of them, but
I appreciate every one being offered, and I know the members
coming to present ideas are doing it, again, in the best
interest of the institution. So I thank you very much for
making this forum available to our colleagues. I look forward
to working with you to see if there are suggestions that we
can, in a bipartisan manner, work on together to try and
improve the functionality, the flexibility, and the
effectiveness of the House of Representatives. And I know that
we all want to do that, and I applaud you for your leadership.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Ranking Member Cole
yields back. And I am grateful for his opening, and we will be
calling up our witnesses today in panels as they log on to the
virtual platform. So I would like to welcome our first panel to
provide testimony on proposed rules change for the 117th
Congress. We are delighted to have you.
Without objection, any written materials you submit to

[email protected]
before the conclusion of this
hearing will be entered into the record.
So our first panel is Majority Leader Hoyer, Majority Whip
Clyburn, Chairman Thompson, Mr. Langevin, and Ms. Eshoo. So we
will yield to our Majority Leader Mr. Hoyer.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. STENY HOYER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF MARYLAND

Mr. Hoyer. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am glad to
be with you today, and I thank Mr. Cole as well. I think the
House is advantaged by the relationship that you and Tom Cole,
as the ranking member, have, and the fact that both of you care
about the institution.
And I might start my remarks with, no matter what we do in
the rules, no matter what our rules say, if we don't have
comity and respect for one another, the rules will not make us
work better. They can set great guidelines for us, they can be
the rules of conduct, they can be the rules of how we consider
bills, but one of the things that we all need to work together
in the next Congress is to raise the respect for one another,
raise the consideration from one another, and I think, Mr.
Chairman, you and the ranking member reflect that kind of
attitude on working relationships.
So I appreciate the opportunity to participate in today's
Members Listing Day on the rules package for the House in the
117th Congress. As we look ahead, many are anticipating a busy
start to next year. I certainly do. Our rules ought to
facilitate the House's ability to move swiftly to address the
most pressing challenges facing our country.
Others have spoken, or will speak, I am sure, at length
about several of the proposals for next year's rules package,
including the importance of our pay-as-you-go rule.
But I want to focus on the restoration of congressionally
directed spending. Now, that is a great phrase, and you and I
both know, the press and the public will call them earmarks,
but congressionally directed spending with the safeguards that
Democrats put in place in 2007 and 2009. Very, very important.
The safeguards are discussed at the same time we discuss
the focus on congressionally directed spending. Let me add,
before I go further, on the Pay-As-You-Go, that we created the
paygo waiver for emergencies like the COVID-19 crisis, where we
have to meet a serious threat by investing in immediate
priorities and needs.
We now have substantial fiscal challenges, however, about
that, and they will confront us in the years and years ahead.
And we must work responsibly together to address them in the
coming years. With regard to congressionally directed spending,
after abuses in the system were brought to light, we
implemented significant reforms, as I have referenced, that
made it transparent and held members accountable.
A couple of those reforms are included in the rules, and a
number of those reforms included in the committee rules. As you
know, we restricted it to governmental or nonprofit recipients
and required every request to be published online for the
American people to see and judge.
One of those rules is in the rules of the House. We made
the system work and kept it honest. Unfortunately, however,
when our Republican colleagues took control of the House in
2011, they used congressionally directed spending as a partisan
talking point, unfortunately, and eliminated this valuable tool
for Congress, and surrendered part of our power to the
executive branch.
Tom Cole just said, and I agree with him very much, that
the powers and prerogatives of the institution need to be
protected. I will speak just a minute about that. Restoring
this power in Congress, I believe, is essential to restoring
the balance of our constitutional systems of checks and
balances. A major focus, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member, if I
am fortunate enough to be the majority leader in the next
Congress, will be finding ways to restore that balance, that
is, the balance between the executive and the Congress.
And looking how Congress can better assert the powers that
our Founders intended us to have as a coequal branch of
government, and as the sole authority on spending taxpayer
funds. Not the executive.
That is why I think the restoration of the congressionally
directed spending for projects is so important. And my belief
is that Members of Congress elected from 435 districts around
the country know, frankly, better than those who may be in
Washington what their districts need, what their States need.
And we ought to return to a time when members can make that
decision, but obviously have that judgment reviewed by the
other 434 Members of the Congress.
The Founders neither intended nor envisioned an expansion
of executive power the kind we have seen in recent years.
Through many administrations, Democrat and Republican, however,
we have seen that concern heightened by the actions of the
Trump administration. This President, in my view, sees Congress
not as a coequal partner in governing, but as an impediment to
his authoritarian tendencies. We must approach the issue of
congressionally directed spending within this context.
Since the elimination of congressionally directed spending
in 2011, decisions about funding requests for projects in
communities across the country have been made by the executive
branch, not by the Members of Congress, who, under the
Constitution, are solely responsible for the spending of money.
Members know the needs of their districts, as I said, and
are in contact on a daily basis with local leaders and civic
organizations. That is why I strongly support restoring safe,
transparent, and accountable congressionally directed spending
in the 117th Congress. And I will work towards that end with
whomever is the chairman of the Appropriations Committee.
Several of the reforms we adopted during our previous
majority are still part of the current House rules, but others
were adopted as committee practices, and we ought to consider
whether codifying them in the House rules for the 117th
Congress.
I want to thank Chairman Kilmer of the Select Committee on
the Modernization of Congress, and his fellow committee
members, Mr. Chairman, for working hard on a number of
recommendations for the next Congress, which include restoring
congressionally directed spending. And I thank them for that.
I believe strongly that this spending ought not to be,
however, conditioned in any way on the involvement of entities
outside of Congress. Now when I say ``involvement,'' let me
explain that I mean without the necessity to have a check-off
or an approval of a local official or State official. This is
the Congress' judgment. However, obviously, we would involve
all of those in communications for their advice and counsel on
what spending may be helpful for local jurisdictions.
I, therefore, would say that we ought not to have any
requirement for outside approval other than the voting Members
of the Congress. I hope you will consider this proposal
seriously, which can help us better serve the people and
communities that we represent.
Again, I want to thank you, again, for holding the Listing
Day and for the hearing the many important and positive ideas
members are bringing to the table for next year. I would close
as I began, however. I think all of us as leaders, as Members
of the Congress of the United States, when we get through this
toxic, partisan battle that we are now participating in,
hopefully we will be able to restore the kind of comity, Mr.
Chairman, that I experienced and you were working in the
Congress and I was a Member of the Congress, the kind of comity
that we not only had on the Rules Committee, but we had in the
Congress of the United States.
One of the finest members with whom I have served in the
Congress over the last 40 years was Bob Michel, who is the
minority leader. He was a partisan Republican from Peoria,
Illinois, the middle of our country. He cared for his party and
was his party's leader, but he cared for his country, and he
cared for the institution and he respected and worked with in a
positive way his fellow members. I appreciated that. I think
other members appreciated that. And as a member for over 20
years in the Appropriations Committee, when I came there, it
was a very partisan committee. And Silvio Conte from your
State, Mr. Chairman, was an extraordinarily good member. A
passionate member, but also a very bipartisan member, and that
is what we need. Not bipartisanship in the sense that I am
going to change my philosophy or my Republican counterparts is
going to change his or her philosophy, but that we both have a
philosophy that your ideas are worth listening to as are mine,
and we may disagree, but we can do so in a positive way and
that furthers the work of the Congress of the United States and
our country.
Thank you very much for this opportunity to be with you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I appreciate your
testimony.
We are now going to go Majority Whip Clyburn.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMES E. CLYBURN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

Mr. Clyburn. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and Mr.
Ranking Member, Ranking Member Cole, and members of the
committee. Thank you very much for allowing me to participate
in this Members' hearing today to discuss what may be a way to
take back the spending authority that we have under Article I
of the Constitution, which, in recent years, have been ceded to
the executive branch.
I joined this august body back in 1993. At the time, the
appropriations process allowed members to direct funds to
activities and communities they deemed worthy. This process
directed a small percentage of the appropriated levels to be
congressionally directed, thereby not adding anything to the
cost of the spending bills. And in this process resulted in
Federal agency employees with no knowledge of residents or
their needs deciding on the merit of our requests.
Even efforts to make the process fairer, such as
competitive rank process, is inherently unfair because they
reward skills rather than needs. I represent many rural
communities, each with its own challenges and needs. These
communities have limited resources and are unable to hire grant
writers and lobbyists. What these communities do have is a
Congressman who lives among them, interacts with them
regularly, understands their needs, and has been elected by
them to represent their needs.
When I was first elected to Congress, I was told by my
State's Secretary of Commerce that until the water problems in
my district were solved, there was little chance of attracting
the levels of investments needed to improve the health,
education, and welfare of the citizens who had overwhelmingly
elected me to serve them. I heeded his advice. I used the
earmark process to secure funding through the United States
Army Corps of Engineers to create and expand the Lake Marion
Regional Water Agency.
Now I might add, I was criticized severely by many of the
people in this district, because that to them was wasted
Federal dollars. Well, we move not just to establish it, but to
expand it. And it includes a six-county rural area.
Today, I am pleased to say that South Carolina won the
first Volvo plant in this country because of that water system.
And now they are creating what is to be 4,000 jobs in this
rural area. Were it not for this water system, these jobs would
surely have gone elsewhere.
Twenty-five years ago, South Carolina's economy was driven
by textiles and tobacco, and many of these communities relied
on them. Today, South Carolina's economy is driven by
transportation and tourism. Twenty-five years ago, South
Carolina had no Heritage Corridors. Today, it has two. South
Carolina had no, what we call, national parks. Today, South
Carolina has three.
The initial funding for the nationally acclaimed Call Me
MISTER program, designed to recruit, educate, and train African
American males to become schoolteachers in elementary schools.
That program, started by Clemson University, was started with
an earmark, and it is now a national program.
Many of the communities of my district have been
chronically neglected over the years. I was elected to address
these inequities and help these communities that have been
mired in poverty for generations, to help them get their fair
share. And while I have spoken to a few successes, many other
communities in my district are still struggling. They need
clean water. They need sewage systems. They need targeted
Federal investments.
Mr. Chairman and members, we can put into our rules the
safeguards needed to protect the process from abuse. We should
prohibit a member from sponsoring a project that they or family
members have a financial interest in. We should require
transparency so that the public can see what the members have
requested. I have always been proud of the spending I have
requested for my district, and I welcome the public knowing
about every one of them.
As our district's elected representatives, our rules should
empower us to request spending we need to be in the best
interest of the people we represent. We do our constituents a
disservice by ceding to the bureaucracy the power the
Constitution has given us to improve the lives of our
constituents and help them pursue their dreams and aspirations.
I thank you for the opportunity to testify on this
important matter.
And I yield back any time I may have left.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. This is the Rules
Committee. Endless time.
I now yield to Chairman Thompson.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BENNIE G. THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF MISSISSIPPI

Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. Thank you, Chairman McGovern
and Ranking Member Cole.
Mr. Chairman, 16 years ago the bipartisan 9/11 Commission
recommended that Congress should create a single principle
point of oversight and review for Homeland Security. That there
should be one permanent standing committee for Homeland
Security in each Chamber. At the time, the Commission
acknowledged that their recommendation to reform congressional
oversight was the most difficult to realize, but was among the
most important of its recommendations.
When the 109th Congress convened on January 4th, 2005, the
Committee on Homeland Security became the 20th standing
committee of the House and the first new one since 1974. At
that time, the Committee Black letter jurisdiction statement
reflected the reluctance of other committees to relinquish
jurisdiction to this new committee.
The structure of Committee of Homeland Security's
jurisdictional statement is unlike any other authorizing
committee. It does not include broad subject matter authority
like, for instance, the Armed Service Committee has over common
defense generally.
Instead, it utilizes a novel structure where it mostly
limits Committee on Homeland Security Black letter jurisdiction
to six narrowly-drawn activities within DHS.
Over the years, the inadequacy of this jurisdictional
statement has been criticized in independent reports by a host
of groups, including the bipartisan Policy Center, the Heritage
Foundation, the Brookings Institution, George Washington
University's Homeland Security Policy Institute, and the Center
for Strategic and International Studies.
A 2013 task force report by the Aspen Institute and
Annenberg Foundation concluded that fragmented jurisdiction
impedes DHS's ability to deal with three major vulnerabilities:
the threats posed by small aircrafts and boats, cybersecurity,
and biological weapons.
Yet, over the past 15 years, under both the Republican and
Democratic leadership, that statement has remained unchanged.
It concluded that DHS should have an oversight structure
that resembles the one governing other critical departments,
such as defense or justice and their committees' claim in
jurisdiction over DHS should have overlapping membership. And
just this past August, Mr. Chairman, the Atlantic Council and
its future of DHS project recommended reform explaining that
more than 90 committees and subcommittees have jurisdiction
over all or part of DHS, and that the best window of
opportunity for this will be during the 90-day window between
the November 3rd election and the start of the 117th Congress
on January 4, 2021.
Chairman McGovern, I could not agree more. There is no
question that the moment is right for reforming CHS's
jurisdictional statement in the 117th Congress. Next year marks
the 20th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks, a catastrophic event
that drove the creation of the Department of Homeland Security,
and, in turn, my committee.
Further, 15 years have passed in which there has been more
than enough evidence to support the conclusion that our initial
and current jurisdictional statement is inadequate and
undermines CHS's ability to fully execute its critical role as
DHS's authorizer.
Finally, we are in a moment where public trust in the
Department is at an all-time low, given its role in the
President's cruel immigration agenda, and, more recently, on
the streets where protesters and calls for reform have grown
more and more urgent.
DHS does not need dismantling, it needs reforming. But for
that to happen, the Committee on Homeland Security must have
adequate legislative authority to produce and bring to the
floor a DHS reform package.
I have been on the committee since its earliest days, and
am proud of the work we have been able to accomplish despite
our jurisdictional limitations. However, the committee's
woefully inadequate jurisdiction causes many functions of DHS,
a wide-reaching agency with collaborative missions in many
fields, to fall under the jurisdiction of far too many
competing congressional committees. The resulting web of
referrals has bogged down important legislation to shape the
future of the Department, and to reign in bad policy decisions
and the leadership of various administrations.
Without effective leadership from Congress, including
consistent reauthorization of the Department, Secretaries have
been able to carry out wrong, ineffective, and dangerous
policies. I am proposing, as chairs on both sides of the aisles
have in past, that Congress reorganize the committee's
jurisdiction to bring it in line with the goals of the 9/11
Commission's recommendation, and give the Department a true
authorizing committee with the authority to advance reform
legislation, and put it on a positive path.
I recognize the challenge it presents, and remember the
difficulty in simply creating the committee in the first place.
However, it is the right thing to do and believe that the time
has come to do it.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back. And thank the committee
for the opportunity to present my position.
[The statement of Mr. Thompson follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Langevin.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JAMES R. LANGEVIN, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF RHODE ISLAND

Mr. Langevin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me
okay?
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Langevin. Very good. Well, good afternoon, Chairman
McGovern, Ranking Member Cole, and members of the committee.
Let me begin by thanking you all for your commitment to
listening to member feedback as you consider rules changes for
the 117th Congress. As I am sure all of my colleagues on this
distinguished panel may be well aware, cybersecurity has been
an issue of great importance to me for more than a dozen years.
And for more than a decade, I have made protecting our Nation's
critical infrastructure from our healthcare system to our power
grid to our elections a top priority.
I currently serve as the chairman of the Intelligence
Emerging Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee on the House
Armed Services Committee, and serve as a senior member of the
Committee on Homeland Security's Subcommittee on Cybersecurity,
Infrastructure Protection, and Innovation. Congressman Mike
McCaul and I also cofounded, and we still, to this day, co-
chair the Congressional Cybersecurity Caucus.
I come to you today as a representative of the Cyberspace
Solarium Commission to share our recommendations to improve the
Nation's cybersecurity posture. Congress created the Solarium
Commission in the fiscal year 2019 NDAA, and I had the honor of
being appointed to this Commission by Speaker Pelosi.
Congress charged the Commission, which comprised 14
members, four of whom were legislators, four Deputy Secretary
level members of the executive branch, and six private sector
experts with developing a strategic approach to better
protecting the United States from cyber attacks of significant
consequence.
We met for a year before releasing our report on March 11
that calls for an approach of layered cyber deterrence. In
addition to this strategic vision, we delivered 82
recommendations on how the government can implement it. More
than 50 of those recommendations are directed to Congress.
Thanks to no small part to your leadership, Chairman McGovern,
the House has included more than 20 of these bipartisan
recommendations in this year's NDAA, including integration of a
national cyber director within the Executive Office of the
President.
So I would like to reiterate my thanks to you and your
staff, particularly Lori Ismail, in working with us to ensure
that these important proposals were presented to the full House
for debate. However, one of the Commission's most critical
legislative recommendations is directed not at the
administration, but at Congress itself.
Recommendation 1.2 of the Commission Report states,
Congress, and I quote: ``Congress should create House Permanent
Select and Senate Select Committees on cybersecurity to
consolidate budgetary and legislative jurisdiction over
cybersecurity issues as well as traditional oversight
authority,'' end quote.
So this is the proposal I put forward with my solarium
House colleague, Congressman Gallagher, for your consideration
today. The challenges of cybersecurity jurisdiction were on
full display earlier this week when we considered three
suspensions relating to grid cybersecurity.
Chairman Thompson was absolutely correct in the concerns
that he expressed on the floor during debate that the bills did
not reflect the views of the interagency and could increase
silos in protecting this critical infrastructure sector.
Chairman Pallone was correct in his assertion that
jurisdictionally, the bills were squarely in the remit of the
Energy and Commerce Committee. Of course, underlying this
debate was the fact that had Energy and Commerce included
language to avoid the silos that the Solarium Commission warns
against, the bill could have been referred to any number of
additional committees.
So I can think of no clearer example on how the committee
structure is broken than that it incentivizes the kind of silos
that are antithetical to the whole-of-Nation approach we need
to combat growing cyber threats.
So our proposal today directly counters the stovepiping by
centralizing jurisdiction around cybersecurity matters. Among
its many benefits, it will increase congressional cybersecurity
policy making capacity by encouraging staff and member
expertise; it will streamline oversight from the dozens of
committees and subcommittees that currently claim some
jurisdiction over cyber; and it will help Congress act with the
speed and agility needed to have any hope of keeping up with
the pace of technological innovation.
Mr. Chairman, I understand that matters of committee
jurisdiction are extremely sensitive. I recognize that this
proposal would represent a sea change in how we handle
cybersecurity policies. However, I believe that it is
inevitable.
We have seen cyber attacks like NotPetya that have felled
national economies. We have seen our adversaries invest in
their offensive cyber capabilities. And we remain the country
that, because we best take advantage of the internet, we remain
most vulnerable in cyberspace. Whether in the form of a massive
cyber incident or a more sustained death-by-1,000-cuts
campaign, I believe this Congress will recognize we could have
done more, and that the current committee structure is actively
undermining our ability to do so.
Mr. Chairman, what I am hoping you and your esteemed
colleagues will do with the next rules package is take a page
out of the Solarium Commission's playbook. From the outset, we
aimed to have the impact of the 9/11 Commission without the
precipitating event of a national tragedy on the scale of that
9/11 event. No small task. But as former DNI Coats had said,
and I quote, ``The warning lights are blinking red, again,''
end quote.
This organizational change will not, by itself, prevent a
disaster, but it will position Congress to ensure the internet
is free, open, interoperable, and secure in the decades to
come.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, let me say something about Chairman
Thompson's remarks that we just heard a few minutes ago. First
off, I wish to fully associate myself with Chairman Thompson's
remarks. DHS is hurting, and congressional dysfunction around
the jurisdiction is, quite frankly, part of the problem.
Secondly, while I believe a cyber committee is inevitable,
I appreciate that it is a big step. If the Rules Committee
feels more comfortable consolidating jurisdiction within an
existing committee, I believe that will significantly improve
the situation, and I believe the Committee on Homeland Security
is the only sensible home.
So, again, I thank Chairman Thompson for his leadership on
many issues and his comments earlier. Again, I associate myself
with them. With that, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you.
I yield back and look forward to answering any questions
you may have.
The Chairman. Thank you. And the final person on this panel
is Ms. Eshoo.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ANNA G. ESHOO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Ms. Eshoo. Thank you, Chairman McGovern and Ranking Member
Cole, the two of you, I think, are a source of pride to all the
Members in the House by the way you work together. And all of
the members of the committee, I appreciate being able to offer
my suggestions for updating the House rules for the 117th
Congress.
Specifically, I urge you to consider four changes: The
first is to expand multi-factor authentication requirements.
The second is to establish a working group to combat
surveillance of congressional communications. The third is to
ensure all House documents are machine-readable. And the fourth
is to make permanent electronic submission of legislative
materials.
I certainly appreciate the hard work of the House staff to
protect our cybersecurity, but I think we have more work to do.
As just one example of where we are, you might notice that the
ID cards that our staff wear have a chip except it is not an
actual chip. It is an image of a chip, and this measure is
called security feeder.
So I urge the committee, first of all, to require multi-
factor authentication for all access to the House network.
Executive branch employees have IDs with real chips, which they
insert into their laptops for multi-factor authentication. We
currently require multi-factor authentication for remote
access, but our requirements are actually incomplete. I would
be happy to share vulnerabilities with the committee privately
so as not to publicize them.
Secondly, I urge the committee to establish a working group
to study and to combat potential surveillance of congressional
communications. On August 28th, I wrote to the Director of
National Intelligence, the DNI, and the NSA Director expressing
my concerns regarding recent allegations that Edward Snowden
surveilled communications of Congress while he was an NSA
contractor.
I asked how often the intelligence community has surveilled
Congress, or whether it has technical safeguards to prohibit
such surveillance. And most frankly, the responses to my letter
really ignored answering the questions. We have all received
letters like that, so I think you know exactly what I am
talking about.
But sadly, this isn't the first time that the IC has
surveilled Congress.
In the 1970s, the CIA maintained files on 75 Members of
Congress. So we know that our Constitution established three
coequal branches of government with a separation of powers, one
branch being able to spy on another is totally unacceptable.
Now, press reports also indicate that Washington is littered
with sting rays. These are devices used to intercept cellular
communications, and while DHS confirms the problem, it is not
clear who is operating the devices.
Third, I urge the committee to require all legislative
material to be posted in a machine-readable format. Today, the
bills are posted to Congress.gov in a machine-readable format,
but the materials for mark-ups are posted online as PDFs, and
sometimes they aren't even searchable PDFs. And why does this
matter?
If we receive amendments in the nature of a substitute 24
hours before marking up lengthy bills, we can't compare the
amendments to original bills without manually reading the
documents line by line. It is the 21st century, so we need to
do something about this. With machine-readable formats,
members, their staff, and the public can easily analyze
amendments.
And finally, I ask that the committee make permanent
procedures for submitting legislative materials to the Clerk
electronically. On April 16th, the Clerk announced procedures
for secure process to introduce legislation, add cosponsors to
bills, and insert statements to the Congressional Record
electronically. This decision remains essential for the safety
of members and staff. And my observation is the process is
working quite well.
So making this change permanent makes our operations more
efficient. An electronic time stamp also means we have a paper
trail as to when items were filed.
So, again, I want to thank the committee for considering my
recommendations. I welcome any questions that the committee
might have for me moving forward.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Well, thank you very much. I want to thank
all of you for your testimony. There are, I think, some really
important ideas here. I want to associate myself with the
suggestions of the majority leader. I do think congressionally
directed spending is something we should try to get back to,
not just because we know our districts better I think than the
executive branch, but also, because I think if the past is any
indication, when people have skin in the game, when people know
that passing certain bills will actually make a difference in
their districts, we tend to get more bipartisan support.
So I look forward to this discussion continuing, and again,
Majority Whip Clyburn who is also in favor of this, was very
direct and persuasive about the value of that. Chairman
Thompson and Mr. Langevin, I appreciate your recommendations,
and we will work with you.
I think the issue, when you talk about committee
jurisdiction, is always a little bit delicate because sometimes
when you want to expand your jurisdiction, it means somebody
else is diminishing theirs. And even though this makes sense,
it is not always easy to get everybody reading off the same
sheet of music, but we will--in the coming weeks, our staff
will work with your staffs to just to see where we can begin
these conversations to see whether we get a consensus amongst
committees that may be impacted by a consolidation on Homeland
Security that maybe we can come to some sort of accommodation.
Ms. Eshoo, I think all of your suggestions are--but we will
work with you. Some of these, I think, are rules changes, some
of them may not necessarily be rules changes, but maybe helps
the administration or something. But we will work with you to
try to make sure they are all, to the extent possible, adopted.
So I appreciate your testimony very, very much. Mr. Cole.
Mr. Cole. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
begin in joining you in thanking all the members of the panel.
This may be the most distinguished panel that has appeared
before the Rules Committee. These are really substantive and
significant members from leadership through every person on
this panel. So I thought all the suggestions were well-thought
through.
Let me make a couple of remarks as well. I am going to
broadly agree with the majority leader about congressionally
directed spending. As an appropriator, I don't think he will
find that a shock. I will slightly disagree that I think it is
any worse in terms of the loss of power with this President as
opposed to any previous President.
This, to me, is a primarily institutional question. I
always point out our former President, President Obama, I think
requested the most earmarks of anybody in Congress when he was
a United States Senator, but as soon as he became President,
decided they were inappropriate and was happy to be rid of
them. I think any President would be that way, but--and let me
emphasize, I speak only for myself. I don't speak for my
conference. I certainly don't speak for my leadership, but my
opinion is we lost an important tool.
I think the majority leader's exactly right. We lost an
important tool. Whip Clyburn made this point, too, to both help
our constituents who they send us here and many of them are not
in a position to get paid lobbyists. They rely on their member
to look after their interest. That is part of the job, I think.
And I agree with, again, both the majority leader and
majority whip that who both made the point face, cards have to
be appropriate.
There is no question there has been abuses here in the
past. We have members that went to prison for abusing this
system. So the idea of publishing, making them accountable, not
being able to airdrop congressionally directed spending
projects into conference bills, all those things make a lot of
sense to me.
And the idea of moving away from profit-making institutions
make a lot of sense. Although I will add this: Just as Majority
Whip Clyburn pointed out a really important program that, you
know, encourages African-American males to go into teaching
began with a single congressionally directed spending project.
That is true of one of our most important weapons systems, the
predator drone, which actually the Pentagon resisted, and this
was a case where Congress actually had a much better idea than
the bureaucracy, and our former colleague, Jerry Lewis, had a
lot to do with making sure that particular weapons platform is
available for our use. It has been very valuable.
Controversial, I will grant you, but unquestionably valuable.
So, again, this idea of shipping power over to the
executive branch, I think, is a mistake. I think it is a failed
experiment. I had these discussions frequently with our former
colleague, former United States Senator, my late friend, Tom
Coburn, who was famous in opposing earmarks, liked to call them
the great gateway drug to spending, but I actually made the
point in one of our discussions. Look, when we actually had
earmarks, we actually balanced the budget. We have gotten rid
of them. How close have we come to a balanced budget since
then?
I am not suggesting that earmarks or congressionally
directed spending result in a balanced budget. I am just saying
there is not any relationship between the two. That has become
a way to demagogue things, and it has cost us a tool and it has
cost us power. So I very much agree with that.
Very much interested in Chairman Thompson's point about
Homeland Security. Hal Rogers, as many of you know, is one of
my great friends, and he has wrestled with the appropriations
side of this issue. I think those are really important
suggestions. They are difficult, I will grant you.
I see this same sort of thing, Mr. Chairman, probably
should submit an idea to the Rules Committee, but I will give
you a perfect example of this happening within the
Appropriations Committee itself.
We have the Indian Healthcare Service funded in the
Interior Approps Subcommittee, because it mostly deals with
Indian issues. That seems like it makes sense, but it really
ought to be in the Labor, Health, and Human Services, because
it is part of Health and Human Services. It is the only part of
that agency that is not controlled and has two practical
consequences. The first is that Indian Health is always
underfunded. It is the largest item in the interior budget,
which is only about $32 billion. You move it over to an agency
that has $190 billion, or a committee within its purview, you
have a much better chance of getting that to where it needs to
be.
Second thing, and this is a separate problem, but I have
actually presented it to the Budget Committee, under both
Republicans and Democrats, it is the only healthcare agency,
number 1, that we don't use mandatory funding in except just
third-party payment. So it is really subject to the limitations
of the appropriations process, and that needs to be looked at.
Number 2, because it is an appropriated item, for instance,
when we had sequester, and we held Medicare and Medicaid except
for very small part of provider payments exempt from cuts,
Indian Healthcare was cut, and it was already the most
underfunded part of the--and I don't think that was deliberate,
by the way, on anybody's part. We just treat it differently.
So there is some real merit to these suggestions in terms
of looking at redistributing authority, because they have real
life consequences. This isn't just a power game on Capitol
Hill. Where you happen to be placed in the appropriations
budget, since each one of those subcommittees has a different
top line, really determines what your prospects are. As I have
told my friends in Indian country on many occasions, you will
never get IHS funded appropriately as long as it is stuck in
Interior because there is too many responsibilities within that
agency, and too little money. And that is actually an area
where the two parties have worked very, very well together for
over a decade now trying to do the best they could under that
limited section.
So, again, I know I have droned on, but just thought I
would take the occasion to put my particular favorite in front
of people that might be able to actually help me down the line
as we work through this.
But I want to thank each and every member for their
testimony. I thought this was exceptionally thoughtful, good
suggestions. A lot of areas here, Mr. Majority Leader, where
you and I agree, and where I hope we can work in a bipartisan
manner because, again, as the chairman pointed out, this is
about institutional appropriate power, and constitutionally
derived power. This isn't about trying to score political
points against anybody, and I very much appreciate the spirit
in which these suggestions were offered.
I think they all have considerable merit and look forward
to working with my colleagues to try and implement as many of
them as possible.
Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Perlmutter, any questions or comments?
Mr. Perlmutter. Yes. Just a couple. Thank you. And I am
like 100 percent with Mr. Cole on this, both on the directed
spending. Also, I do think, Mr. Cole, you want to present some
kind of a rule change as to that Indian Health because it has
come up on a number of occasions. So I think you brought it up
here, and we ought to formalize it a little more.
I remember we had two colleagues, one of them became my
Senator, Mark Udall, who was opposed to earmarks, and Jeff
Flake, was very much. And he would go down to the mic and he
would make his statements. And they were wrong then, and I told
them so. And I think it really has hurt our institution. A lot
of us took pride, and I know almost everybody took pride in the
ability to provide an irrigation project, you know, help
channel some kind of a difficult ravine, or help with a
laboratory at a local college. And, actually, you can take
ownership of that. So as a personal matter as well as a
community matter, it is very beneficial.
So Mr. Clyburn, you are absolutely right. Because I felt
personally like I was more effective and more connected to my
district with the ability to do some of those things for a Boys
and Girls Club or something like that.
I am with Mr. Thompson. I served on Homeland Security many
moons ago with Mr. Thompson and Mr. Langevin. I don't know if
they remember that, but we had similar problems back then as to
not being able to really do all the things that are required of
that committee because we kept bumping into jurisdictional
issues. And so, I would be supportive of you two gentlemen and
your request.
And to Jim Langevin, that would affect Financial Services
because we have a cybersecurity component to that when it comes
to the financial sector and the hacking potentially, and the
disruption of the financial sector. So, we should all get
together and do that. And then, Anna Eshoo seemed to be
specific and easy to do.
So I just appreciate the testimony, but particularly on the
directed funding. I think we did ourselves a disservice by
doing away with that.
And I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Woodall.
Mr. Woodall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We always are able to
make time to do those things that are in our wheelhouse,
community jurisdictions, congressionally directed spending. I
liked Ms. Eshoo's concerns. We are so resistant to increased
security measures in this place, whether it is showing your ID
when you pass the congressional entry points instead of
expecting people to recognize you, or whether it is two-factor
identification when you are logged into your computer. By the
time we all come together on Ms. Eshoo's concerns, it is going
to be too late because something awful will have happened.
We have to exert, in the name of protecting the
institution, some disciplined inconvenience ourselves in ways
that Ms. Eshoo has taken the time and, in fact, made a career
of understanding and highlighting for those of us who do not
understand them, and, again, will not until it is too late.
So, I just want to particularly thank her for that and it
is not in our wheelhouse. We are uncomfortable going down this
road sometimes, and it is easy to put it on the back burner
until it is too late. And I hope we will take her advice and
her very pointed solutions to heart, and make sure that we
benefit from those.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you. I
liked all the remarks of my colleagues in thanking such a
distinguished panel. I do want to note, parenthetically, I find
it hard to imagine anyone who served on a standing committee
with Ed Perlmutter would have forgotten that experience. So I
won't ask for any show of hands, but I find that hard to
believe.
But I just wanted to note--I was thinking back as Mr.
Leader and Mr. Whip were making their comments. I think about
the Clinical Translational Science Building at the University
of Rochester, or the Historic Eastman Theater where my dear
friend, Louise Slaughter's memorial service was at the U of R,
or the Center for Immigrating Manufacturing Studies, or the
Sustainability Institute at RIT, MAGIC Spells Studios at RIT,
which was for students in the nationally ranked gaming, film
and animation schools, a hospital's dialysis.
Those are all things that I was able to actually get funded
when I was a member of the New York State legislature and what
we called member items, which is effectively the same--
different terms, same thing that relates to directed spending.
I don't think there is any question that you could meet
both objectives of ensuring transparency and accountability and
yet allow members who know their districts, know their
communities the very best to make decisions on priority
projects in their regions.
I thought Mr. Clyburn's discussion of what he had been able
to do in South Carolina was so right on the money, because each
of us, each community has challenges, but each are different
than every other community. And so, I would be a strong
supporter of doing that. And as I said, I don't think it is
mutually exclusive that we have transparency and
accountability, as well as congressionally directed spending.
And, frankly, I think it is so inherent in Article I
responsibilities of the Congress and the power of the purse. So
I would agree with my very eloquent colleagues who have spoken
before and thank the panelists.
I did have, if it is okay, I will admit to not having very
much of a knowledge base on jurisdictions, and I suspect I
appreciate very much the chairman's acknowledgement of the
sensitivity of jurisdictions. But if I could just ask Chairman
Thompson, can you just give me sort of an example of how you
and your colleagues on the committee feel constrained in ways
that would help give me some clarity around what it is exactly
that you are asking to do without divulging too much, but
perhaps you could just give me some instance of an example?
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. Well, thank you very much.
I will give you a good example, is one of the challenges we
have now is natural disasters. FEMA is one of those 22 agencies
that is in Homeland. But before FEMA can move any resources
pertaining to a hurricane, flood, wildfire, tornado, or
anything like that, the Stafford Act has to be engaged that
gives FEMA the authority to go out and perform its mission.
Mr. Morelle. May I interrupt you? Do you mean the FEMA
staff itself or other staff?
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. The Stafford Act, which is----
Mr. Morelle. Oh, I am sorry, I am sorry.
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. Right. Which is the trigger
that provides the resources.
Well, the Stafford Act is in another committee. It is not
in Homeland. So FEMA is sitting here with all the resources
marshalled to address the natural disaster, but they are in
neutral because they don't have the authority to go and help
American citizens. And sometimes our experience has been those
authorities are sometimes days, if not weeks, before they are
engaged. But if that authority was within Homeland, FEMA could
do its job day one. And so it is those kinds of things.
The other thing, give you a good example, is with ICE,
Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Well, if you have a
problem in your district with ICE, that jurisdiction is in
another committee because it is considered interior
enforcement. But guess what? ICE is in Homeland because part of
their mission is border security.
So I get the call from many of my colleagues saying, ``We
have this issue with ICE in our district,'' and then when I try
to explain jurisdiction, the first thing they said, ``But
aren't they in Homeland?'' ``You are correct.''
So what I am trying to do is we need to get the authorities
and jurisdictions to match. And I am done after this.
Armed Services. Anything pertaining to the military goes to
Armed Services. That is it. Agriculture. Anything that goes on
related to agriculture is in Agriculture. And I am trying to
get--not trying to--you know, I am just trying to connect the
mission with the authority and responsibility.
Mr. Morelle. Those are very good examples, and I appreciate
that.
So I do note that--again, my background is in the State
legislature and we have sort of pretty discrete jurisdictions
for the various committees, although at one point I chaired the
insurance committee. I had a colleague who chaired the health
committee. And so health insurance ended up being, depending on
which section of law, could be in the insurance committee,
could be in the health committee. So I am familiar.
And I guess there is no perfect way to divide that up. I
even note here in the House, healthcare could be, if it is
ERISA, it would come under Ed and Labor. It comes under Energy
and Commerce. If it involves tax provisions, Ways and Means.
Is the situation you face more acute than some of the
jurisdictional challenges that would face us on some of the
issues like healthcare, et cetera? Do you think it is unique
and more of a bright line?
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. Oh, absolutely. And it is a
matter of function. You want the agencies to work. So much of
what we do is predicated on being able to respond in a timely
manner. And so that response is limited simply because the
agency that you are located in does not have the authority to
execute on that issue.
And so I will give you another example. I am done after
this. Family separation, that we had a big issue separating
families from others. Well, that authority is not a Homeland
authority, per se, it is vested in another committee, but the
agency that created the problem is in Homeland.
And so we are just trying to, to the best that we can, tie
the authorities and functions with the agencies and nothing
more than that.
Mr. Morelle. I see.
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. And if the committee would
like, I can provide you with several other examples of what we
are talking about, just so we can serve the American people in
a timely manner.
Mr. Morelle. Well, I will say--and I apologize for the
extended questioning. Thank you, this has really been very
helpful.
And I apologize, Mr. Chair.
I assume that some of this came out of the fact that, as
you mentioned, 9/11 really gave rise to the Department of
Homeland Security. As a New Yorker, I am particularly grateful
for that. So I assume some of this is the developing of an
agency and a committee that follows it. So you are sort of
getting shoehorned into existing law and existing wires that
pre-existed 9/11 and the committee.
But I think you make a compelling case, and I really
appreciate it. I can't imagine the frustration of having to
have agencies that are under the jurisdiction of my committee
or that you have oversight for, but you can't really affect or
you can't connect with on the issues that colleagues are and
the American public is talking about. So I really appreciate
very much your leadership and your comments here.
The last thing I would say is, I agree with my other
colleagues. Ms. Eshoo, I think you make compelling arguments on
the issues of electronic submission and cybersecurity.
Oh, and I am sorry, just to go back for 1 second, I
apologize. The notion of creating a select committee would, if
we were able to address the Homeland Security Committee issues
in the way that you, Mr. Chairman, Chairman Thompson, have
suggested, would you then simply create potentially a
subcommittee on cybersecurity? Is there no conflict between
what you are recommending and what Mr. Langevin was
recommending?
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. No, absolutely. We created
CISA, which is a cyber entity that has responsibility across
the Federal agency platform. And so what we are saying is, keep
the mission of Federal agency cybersecurity within that agency.
The minute you pull it out, we would start creating the same
problem we had before we created Homeland, which is the siloing
of information that ended up with 9/11.
And so we are trying to avoid that by creating a system
where everyone is here talking to each other and not everybody
trying to come with a turf issue.
The other thing I can say is, all the recommendations of
the 9/11 Commission report spoke to that issue, and the only
one we have not completely fulfilled is this notion of
jurisdiction for the Homeland Security Committee.
Mr. Morelle. Fair again.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I apologize for the length of my
questioning, but I really appreciate all the panelists and the
opportunity to speak. I yield back.
The Chairman. All right.
Mrs. Lesko.
Mrs. Lesko. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. No questions.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Shalala.
Okay. Did I miss anybody who is----
Ms. Shalala. No, I am fine. I have just got a couple of
things.
First of all, I agree with directed spending, and I
absolutely agree with Representative Eshoo's recommendations.
And for Mr. Cole, Mr. Cole, I would love to see the Indian
Health Service in Labor-HHS. I struggled trying to get
resources for the Indian Health Service, as well as the Food
and Drug Administration, which was stuck in Agriculture because
they just were not high priorities for those committees. Even
when I went and personally testified, it was just very
difficult to get proper resources. So I would even think about
the Bureau of Indian Education being moved to Education just to
get some attention to these really important agencies.
Frankly, the only reason the Indian Health Service, during
my years at HHS, and the Food and Drug Administration, the FDA,
ever got significant resources was because I was Ted Stevens'
doubles partner, and he helped me get resources for those two
agencies, because it was hard to get the attention of those
committees. So I just think that thinking through the right
alignment is just the right thing to do.
Mr. Cole. Will the gentlelady yield for a question or
comment?
Ms. Shalala. Yes.
Mr. Cole. Well, number one, thank you for your focus on
this in your time in the executive and your continued focus on
it.
But to your point, this is actually an area, I will tell
you, where I would compliment both Democrats and Republicans on
Indian Health in the Interior Subcommittee of Approps for over
a decade. They have really actually exceeded consistently what
Republican and Democratic administrations have suggested. There
is just not enough money there. It is just a matter of what
their total pot is.
Ms. Shalala. Well, exactly.
Mr. Cole. And the second area that I should have mentioned
earlier and that your opinion on would be really valued, a
number of years ago we made the decision, I think it was a
smart decision, to forward-fund veterans' health so it is never
at risk if we are in some sort of political spat up here. We
haven't done that with Indian healthcare, and we ought to do
the same thing, particularly if we are going to keep it within
the discretionary budget.
You know, that, again, is something we just simply ought to
do, so that if there is a squabble up here, all of a sudden
there is not a dramatic decline in the availability of
healthcare on some remote Indian reservation where people there
have done absolutely nothing wrong, we just haven't gotten our
job done up here.
So, anyway, I put that. But, again, thanks for your work
and your commitment. You have such a distinguished record, and
it is much appreciated.
Ms. Shalala. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentlelady yields back?
Okay. So are there no other questions of this panel? Then I
want to thank this panel, and you are all now dismissed. Thank
you.
Calling up our next panel, Mr. Davis, Ms. Wasserman
Schultz, Mr. Cline, Mr. Castro, and Mr. Crist.
Thank you for providing testimony today.
Any written materials that you have you can submit to

[email protected]
before the conclusion of this
hearing, and without objection, it will be entered into the
record.
I now recognize the gentleman from Illinois, Mr. Davis.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. RODNEY DAVIS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Davis of Illinois. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Sorry about
that. I wanted to make sure I was unmuted.
I appreciate being here. Chairman McGovern, Ranking Member
Cole, good afternoon, and to the rest of the committee. Thanks
again for allowing me to testify today.
The 116th Congress has been full of surprises, and although
there have been endless challenges, the silver lining is our
ability to learn from them, to adapt, and to make our
institution work better for the American people.
I am here this afternoon to highlight three buckets of
changes that the House could adopt to not only strengthen our
operations, but pave the path for continued improvement.
The first set of changes is a clarification----
The Chairman. Mr. Davis, excuse me, could you put your
video on?
Mr. Davis of Illinois. I thought I had it on, sir. I
apologize.
The Chairman. There you go, you are on now. Yeah. You were
in stereo and now in technicolor. Okay, great.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. You don't want me to reread the rest
of it, do you? I will start at the same point.
I do want to say the first set of changes that I am asking
for is a clarification of current House rules regarding the use
of proxy voting. During this committee's hearing on H. Res.
965, I warned that proxy voting would likely be abused by
members if authorized. I was assured that controls would be in
place, and it was being implemented in order to assure member--
in order to ensure member, family, and staff safety.
However, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member, today, 4
months later, the trends are emerging that signal abuse of this
option. As infection rates stabilize and in many States fall,
proxy voting is being used in increased numbers by up to 20
percent of all members, and often inconsistently, with members
picking and choosing when they want to be in D.C.
We are also seeing increased use of proxy voting on
Fridays, a sign that members are using it to take a long
weekend back home.
These practices show us that the use of proxy voting is no
longer being utilized in the spirit in which it was
implemented--safety--but rather in the spirit of convenience.
Americans deserve better. They deserve their members to
show up to work, and I would encourage the next Congress' rules
package include additional guardrails if the proxy voting
remains at all.
The second bucket is an acknowledgement of the work of the
Select Committee on Modernization of Congress, in which I and
my peers passed our final report of nearly a hundred
recommendations last week unanimously. These recommendations
emphasize the need for the House to increase transparency,
streamline operations, and improve accessibility so that all
our constituents can engage in the work that we do.
Rules changes to require our legislative documents be
publicly shared in a machine-readable format and for all
committee votes to be recorded and compiled into a publicly
accessible database are concrete, realistic improvements.
Similarly, making permanent some of the technological
advancements we have made in facing the pandemic, such as
continuing the Clerk's use of the e-Hopper and allowing the
electronic sponsorship and cosponsorship of bills, not only
saves our staff time, but saves the taxpayers money.
I would recommend we also expand electronic signatures for
discharge petitions.
Lastly, modernizing our institution to be accessible by
those with disabilities is a duty and priority in which we are
behind. We have dedicated considerable resources to making our
campus physically accessible, but need to put the same emphasis
on accessibility for those that interact from afar.
There are many changes we need to make. Two at the top of
the list are ensuring that all congressional websites are
accessible to the disabled and that all video products of the
House have closed captioning.
I encourage you and your team to read the Select
Committee's final list of recommendations for more details on
each of these proposed rules changes and dozens more.
The final bucket I encourage this committee to consider
when crafting the rules for the 117th Congress is the need for
continued modernization. As a previous staffer and now a member
who has had the honor to serve on both the Committee on House
Administration and this Select Committee on Modernization, I
see opportunities before us to better this institution and to
do it in a bipartisan manner.
The efforts of the Select Committee need to continue. I
know there are different ideas on what form that should take,
and I am open to the various options, including authorizing
another Select Committee, creating a subcommittee of House
Administration, or a less formal structure. The most important
thing is that we continue the momentum that has been created.
Again, thank you, Chairman McGovern and Ranking Member
Cole, for holding this hearing. A rules package not only guides
us, it can push us all to be better. I applaud this committee
for soliciting input from all members and look forward to
continuing to work together. And at this time, I will yield
back.
[The statement of Mr. Davis of Illinois follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Thank you very much. And let me just assure
you that we do take the recommendations of the Committee on
Modernization seriously. We created the committee and we
extended the life of the committee because we thought that the
work was important. So we will look at those things.
Some of the recommendations would require rules changes.
Some of them we don't need rules changes to do. We need to get
various other committees to act on them. But I assure you we
take it very seriously.
I am now happy to yield to Ms. Wasserman Schultz.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DEBBIE WASSERMAN SCHULTZ, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Ms. Wasserman Schultz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking
Member Cole, and appreciate the opportunity to present my
proposals before the House Rules Committee to my colleagues.
This really is a fantastic opportunity at the beginning and
onset of the 117th Congress for us to really continue to make
the entire process that we go through each and every day more
transparent and more inclusive.
In 2011, Congress chose to surrender a great deal of its
power of the purse to the executive branch. And I associate
myself with the remarks of Leader Hoyer, Whip Clyburn, Mr.
Cole, and many others who have testified this afternoon that it
is past time that we take back the power that we surrendered.
Banning congressionally directed spending and giving that
power to the executive branch has made the appropriations
process less accountable and more arduous. It has contributed
to a lack of comity, and too many members feel too little
direct impact in their districts and are consequently not able
to be as involved in the process.
I believe the ban on congressionally directed spending is
one of the factors that contributes to breakdowns in the
process and delays that end with frantic year-end negotiations
and government shutdowns.
And prominent leaders on both sides of the aisle, in and
outside of Congress, have realized this. They recognize that
the Constitution granted Congress the power of making important
decisions about spending. John Hudak of the Brookings
Institution astutely recognized that, quote, ``The removal of
congressional earmarking does not make earmarking go away. It
simply transfers that power and that practice from the
legislative branch to the executive branch.''
It does not make sense for Congress to surrender control
over Federal funding to unelected bureaucrats in the
administration--and I mean any administration. Members of
Congress are in the best position to know the needs of our
district and the needs of our constituents.
The ban does not exist in law or in House rules, as you
know, but only in practice, and it can be easily changed next
Congress if there is only the political will to do so.
But we need to do this, as many of my colleagues have
testified, the right way. We need to add additional
requirements that will ensure transparency and good governance
while prohibiting wasteful spending, and that will require
changing the rules. So I offer the following proposals to start
us off on the responsible pathway towards restoring our
constitutional authority.
One, prohibit congressionally directed spending for for-
profit entities.
Two, post congressionally directed spending on the
committee's website, in the Congressional Record, in bill
reports, and on members' personal websites.
Three, establish an online, searchable congressionally
directed spending database that is publicly accessible and
media friendly.
Four, direct the Government Accountability Office to submit
an annual audit that examines the public benefits of enacted
congressionally directed spending and the efficacy of the
proposed transparency and accountability measures.
Six, direct inspectors general to regularly review a sample
of congressionally directed spending for waste, fraud, and
abuse.
Seven, require that all restrictions on congressionally
directed spending be enshrined in House rules and that any new
disclosure requirements will apply to all legislation at all
times, as has been discussed by other members this afternoon.
Currently, many legislative vehicles are left out of the
requirements, including floor and self-executing amendments,
amendments between Chambers, and legislation considered under
suspension of the rules.
With a robust congressionally directed spending platform,
Congress could reassert its authority in a clean and
transparent manner while allowing members to better represent
and secure targeted resources for our districts.
Restoring congressionally directed spending won't fix
everything wrong with the appropriations process, but it can go
a long way towards ameliorating the difficulty we experience in
negotiations over funding the government.
Second, Mr. Chairman, I also want to mention my support for
restoring the Select Intelligence Oversight Panel. The 9/11
Commission report included several recommendations aimed at
increasing oversight of appropriations for the intelligence
community.
That responsibility is really only handled by the Defense
Appropriations Subcommittee right now, and that is why the
House established the Select Intelligence Oversight Panel in
the 110th Congress. I was proud to be a member of that panel.
Unfortunately, the panel was abolished in the 112th
Congress. We should consider bringing it back. Revisions to the
process and structure of the committee could be made to update
the panel's approach and ensure that it is able to conduct a
vital oversight role. The panel studies the budget requests and
provides advice and feedback to the Defense Appropriations
Subcommittee to help prepare the classified annex.
Now more than ever we need additional accountability over
the black budget. With an administration that continues to
abuse its outlay authorities and defy the congressional intent
of appropriations bills, making sure that we have this
important layer of accountability and oversight in the black
portion of the budget of appropriations is absolutely
essential.
And this panel would be useful no matter which
administration is in power. It is important that Congress
assert our authority over the intelligence budget and ensure
that responsible funding decisions are made, and made
thoroughly, with a lot of eyeballs.
And it is just so important for us to make sure that in
terms of protecting our national security, which numerous
members coming before the committee today have raised as being
an ever-increasing threat, having an Oversight Committee, once
again, that would be specifically focused on the oversight of
the administration's budget requests and the intelligence
spending that we do for our entire Nation would be a critical
oversight component that would allow us to make sure that we
can continue to improve our national security.
Thank you for the opportunity to present my suggestions,
and I yield.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Cline.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BEN CLINE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF VIRGINIA

Mr. Cline. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Cole.
I really appreciate you holding today's hearing to listen to
concerns and proposals from your colleagues regarding the rules
of the House. Hearings like this are critical to the effective
function of Congress, and I sincerely appreciate this
opportunity to testify on practices that can improve the
legislative operations of this body.
Many of the House rules that are in place provide the
necessary transparency and accountability in the legislative
process, but, unfortunately, these rules are often worked
around or waived when it matters most. I am here today just to
highlight practices already established that I believe we
should be exercising to increase transparency and
accountability. Accordingly, by following these well-thought-
out rules, we can rein in the crippling dysfunction that has
plagued the legislative process.
The 72-hour rule was established so that Members of
Congress and the public have time to read and review
legislation before having members vote on it. Unfortunately,
this rule can be waived in the Rules Committee or can be worked
around by amending an existing bill, typically by an amendment
in the nature of a substitute.
Sadly, these occurrences are frequently used on
appropriations and larger authorization measures. For example,
last week the text of the continuing resolution was introduced
less than an hour before members had an opportunity to vote on
it. This flies in the face of responsible governance.
Measures like these should not be passed under suspension
of the rules. Managing it in that manner takes away any
feasible transparency to the voters of where their member
stands on specific spending measures.
The abandonment of adhering to the spirit of the 72-hour
rule has been happening well before this Congress. Admittedly,
both sides of the aisle have utilized this tactic while in the
majority. That is why I have introduced a House resolution with
one of my fellow freshman Democrats to tighten this rule's
instances where a bill is stripped of its text and replaced by
new language to skirt the 72-hour rule.
It is not just a matter of transparency that members should
have time to read bills they will be voting on, it is a matter
of respect, respect that all members have a right to read the
legislation, not just those who are in leadership drafting it.
In addition to the ability to read bills before voting on
them, members should be given the opportunity to offer
amendments on bills that they were not able to help draft.
Way, way back in the day I was a staffer here on the Hill,
and in the 1990s we considered more appropriations in larger
authorization bills under open rules, or modified open rules,
and this allowed members who did not have an opportunity to
amend bills when they were in committee an opportunity to do so
on the floor before having to vote on it.
There have been no open rules on the House floor during
this Congress, and the last time an open rule, or revised open
rule, was reported out of the Rules Committee was in the 114th
Congress.
Many members sincerely do want to participate in the
legislative process. We genuinely believe we have serious
amendments to improve legislation. I have 16 years in the State
legislature working with colleagues on both sides of the aisle
to improve legislation throughout the process, and my
colleagues on both sides of the aisle should have the chance to
improve legislation here in the Congress.
The last area for improvement that I would like to
recommend today is the importance of individual bill
consideration when it comes to appropriations measures. And
while it is not specific to this committee, this committee does
have great sway and influence, and I would urge you to help
encourage regular order when it comes to appropriations bills.
Each of the Appropriation subcommittees work hard to
produce a bill, and members should be afforded the opportunity
to vote on and offer amendments to individual appropriations
bills.
As was said earlier by my colleagues, Article I, section 7
of the U.S. Constitution establishes that revenue bills shall
originate in the House. This is one of the most important and
serious responsibilities that the House has.
When these bills are passed as massive packages or funding
is pushed through as a continuing resolution, that impacts
members' ability to thoughtfully consider legislation. The
American people should expect more fiscal responsibility and
focus from Congress instead of relegating those duties by
passing expansive appropriations packages.
Congressional leaders need to return to a regular order
appropriations process, and the Rules Committee should
encourage leaders to produce appropriations measures that are
reported to the floor as their individual bills instead of as
packages.
These are all issues that can easily be fixed by using the
existing processes and respecting the rules that are
established. These changes are within our power as members to
make and would establish a baseline of respect that all members
deserve in this Chamber. It also extends that same respect to
the voters who elected each of us to thoughtfully represent
them here in the House of Representatives.
Thank you for the work that you do, and I look forward to
working with the Rules Committee to bring about more
transparency and accountability in the legislative process.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Castro.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. JOAQUIN CASTRO, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Castro. Thank you to Chairman McGovern and Ranking
Member Cole for holding this important hearing.
Today I am here to discuss a proposed change to the rules
package for the next Congress that would institutionalize the
Tri-Caucus Witness Diversity Initiative.
As you all know, the Tri-Caucus is composed of the
Congressional Asian Pacific American Caucus, the Congressional
Hispanic Caucus, and the Congressional Black Caucus.
This year, the Tri-Caucus launched this important
initiative to track the diversity of the expert witnesses who
testify before House committees. Our announcement included
support from Speaker Pelosi, Majority Leader Hoyer, Whip
Clyburn, the Women's Caucus, Congresswoman Sharice Davids, co-
chair of the LGBTQ+ Caucus, and from Congresswoman Deb Haaland,
co-chair of the Native American Caucus.
While a witness diversity initiative has never existed as
part of the core functions of the House, two parliamentary
bodies in the United Kingdom are already leading this work in
Westminster and in Scotland. Our Tri-Caucus Initiative has in
large part been modeled after their work to track the gender
diversity of their witnesses.
And while this is the first initiative of its kind here,
research on this topic as it pertains to gender does exist. For
example, an American University report published earlier this
year shows that during the 2017 hearings on tax reform, less
than 19 percent of the witnesses who testified were women.
As you know, the 116th Congress is the most diverse
Congress in our Nation's history. Yet too often our witnesses
do not reflect the Nation's diversity. Unfortunately, for many
years, many communities have often been underrepresented,
including Latinos, African-Americans, Asian, women, and LGBTQ
folks.
In this moment of national reckoning on racism in America
and as a global pandemic disproportionately harms communities
of color, now is the time for change and for our rules to
reflect our values.
As Congress continues to draft legislation to support our
country's fight against COVID-19, it is critical that Members
of Congress hear from diverse witnesses in that process. The
institutionalization of this important initiative will make
clear to the American people the House's commitment to
diversity and transparency in Congress.
With each Congress, we should aim to reform and improve on
the ways in which we serve the American people. I believe this
proposal is an important step toward a more just, a fairer, and
a more inclusive Congress.
And with that, I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
The last on this panel, Mr. Crist.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. CHARLIE CRIST, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mr. Crist. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Can you hear me all
right?
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Crist. Great. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I
would like to thank you and Ranking Member Cole, along with all
the members of the Rules Committee. You all work so very hard,
and the entire House are grateful to you.
Earlier this summer, Americans from big cities and small
towns across our country took to the streets to peacefully
protest racial injustice in the largest demonstrations in
American history.
Between income inequality, wealth inequality, educational
achievement gaps, criminal justice inequality, discrimination
in lending and appraisals, voter suppression, maternal health
disparities, and armed White supremacists proudly marching
through American streets, the American people said, ``Enough.''
Americans of all shapes, sizes and colors said, quote,
``Black lives matter,'' and committed to fight racism. We
committed to dismantle systems of racism that hold Black
Americans back instead of just going about business as usual.
Being on autopilot while the American experience continues
to fail our Black citizens is no longer going to cut it. It is
on all of us to do whatever we can to truly deliver equal
opportunity and equal justice under the law.
We, as legislators, should be aware of and intentional
about the racial impact of the policies we make. That is why I
am proposing a small, but potentially significant change to the
rule of the House for the 117th Congress.
Just as committee reports are required by House rules to
include items like a Congressional Budget Office score for
budgetary impact, we should also ask for a score on racial
impact of legislation the House is considering.
Awareness will be important tool for fighting racism,
however insidious or accidental in our policies. This
information will help members who want to tackle racial gaps,
and it will help members who, at the very least, don't want to
make things worse.
The Congressional Budget Office already has this capability
and already provides this analysis upon request. I ask that we
work together, the party of Lincoln and the party of Obama, to
say that although we may fall short sometimes, we as the House
are committed to try. A racial impact score won't end
injustice, but it will be a good start.
I thank you for your consideration and welcome any
questions about my proposal. And briefly, before I yield back,
Mr. Chairman, I want to associate myself with my good friend
and fellow Floridian, Congresswoman Stephanie Murphy, for her
amendment to raise the threshold for motions to recommit.
Thank you again so much, and I yield the balance of my
time, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you all very much for your testimony,
and I have no questions.
I do just want to point out for the record, though, Mr.
Davis, that you mentioned that infection rates have been
stabilized. The latest news reports show that infection rates,
in fact, are going up. So we are not out of the woods with
regard to this terrible virus, I am sad to say, in large part
because we have not had a national strategy to manage it
appropriately. But in any event----
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Davis of Illinois. Mr. Chair, I agree there are pockets
where we are seeing increases. I was referring to overall in
the last 4 months there are many areas that are going down.
But I would urge this committee also, I agree with you, we
haven't prepared the House either. I think we need a
comprehensive plan to be able to get the House back to work and
be able to begin implementing some of the same measures that
have helped stabilize other parts of the country.
The Chairman. And I think we should do what we can to
better protect this Chamber. But I also don't believe the
answer is to make it more challenging for members to
participate during a pandemic.
In fact, my counterargument would be that I think it is
really sad that the minority has decided to enforce against its
own members a demand that they not participate in proxy voting,
which has basically disenfranchised hundreds of thousands of
voters.
I mean, you have members, depending on what week it is, a
considerable amount of Republicans that don't show up, but they
can't vote because, with the exception of one, your leadership
says they can't.
So let's figure out how we go forward. I hope that this is
not an issue in a few months, but that all depends on how the
Nation handles this.
I now yield to Mr. Cole for any questions he may have.
Mr. Cole. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Just on that last point, I do want to say I do agree very
much with what Mr. Davis said. There are legitimate cases where
people can't be here, I respect that, and while I didn't agree
with the methods we adopted, we adopted them, and that was done
by a straight majority vote. That is fair enough.
I am concerned a lot of members are abusing them. A lot of
members just simply are not----
The Chairman. Would the gentleman yield to me for 1 second?
Mr. Cole. I would certainly yield to my friend.
The Chairman. Let me just say that if members are abusing
this, if members are using this just based on convenience, that
is certainly not what I had intended, and I think that that is
wrong. And I certainly, every chance I get, reinforce that
message. This is not about convenience. It is about necessity.
And if it changes----
Mr. Cole. Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman [continuing]. Then that is unfortunate.
Mr. Cole. Well, please don't think that I question you at
all, because I don't.
The Chairman. Oh, I know.
Mr. Cole. And I know you take it seriously, I know that. I
just think it is worth thinking about what we can do on that
score, because it seems like a legitimate problem to me.
But I want to get back, number one, thank the panel. A lot
of really great suggestions here. A couple I don't agree with,
but broadly I do.
And so I have both a couple of comments for specific
members and a question. Particularly I want to go first to my
good friend, my fellow appropriator, Ms. Wasserman Schultz, who
I had the pleasure when I first got on Approps of being on her
subcommittee that she chaired on Leg Branch, and then later
have her as my ranking member when I was fortunate enough to
chair that committee, and there is just not a better
appropriator. There is nobody more thoughtful from an
institutional standpoint.
So, number one, I want to associate myself with the very
thoughtful comments she had about congressionally directed
spending and the safeguards and the ability to evaluate the
effectiveness. I think if they are ever coming back, those kind
of tools are actually indispensable in providing the public
with some confidence that these things are being used, as they
are 95 percent of the time or more, in an appropriate and
productive way.
What I do want to also ask my friend, she talked about
bringing back the Select Committee on Intelligence, and I have
said on Defense Appropriations we do a lot of great work there.
But, again, I take my friend's suggestion very seriously.
Can you tell me why we did away with that? What was the
rationale for not continuing that Select Committee?
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. So when it was done away with, it
was done away with by the new Republican majority. So I am not
sure what their motivation was, and so I can't speak for
Speaker Boehner at the time. I think it was Speaker Boehner
that did away with it.
Mr. Cole. Yeah.
Ms. Wasserman Schultz. But it was in place and working
effectively, so that we had--and if you recall, the Select
Committee was a subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee,
but it was a special select subcommittee that combined intel
authorizers and appropriators from across the Appropriations
Committee, and it was a combined pair of more scrutinizing
eyes.
We held hearings and reviewed the budget, the budget
requests. We would go more deeply and specifically into the
black portion of the budget than the Defense Appropriations
Committee is really able to do, because, I mean, the Defense
Appropriations Subcommittee has such a huge responsibility
being 50 percent of the discretionary funding.
My understanding why it wasn't brought back was that it had
some cumbersome elements of it, that perhaps it wasn't
functioning in the most efficient way.
So my proposal isn't specific to replicate it and bring it
back exactly the way it was, but that there does need to be a
Select Intelligence Subcommittee Panel recreated, perhaps new
and improved, so that we can make sure that there are either
combined authorizers and appropriator eyeballs together, or
maybe just appropriators, so that we can really have more
attention paid than, frankly, the defense appropriators are
really able to----
Mr. Cole. No, I think there is considerable merit to what
you are talking about. Speaking as a defense appropriator, you
are exactly right, it is a vast budget, and honestly, most of
the intel hearings we have--of course they are classified, so I
am not getting into detail--but the reality is what we are
doing is consuming intelligence, we are being given
intelligence, but we are not overseeing the intelligence that
we are being given and asking the tough kind of questions.
So, again, nobody admires and loves Speaker Boehner more
than me. He wasn't exactly the Appropriations Committee's
biggest fan in Congress. And it doesn't surprise me that we are
talking about congressionally directed spending and this
particular item now that he is gone. And, again, I say that
with great affection and respect for my friend, the former
Speaker.
But this is a good idea, I think, and I would really like
to think about this, associate myself with you, because, again,
just speaking as a defense appropriator, you are exactly right.
We are just not able to get into the detail of this vast budget
any way you can when you are dealing with Interior and $30
billion. It is a function of the dollars, and I don't think you
could probably have too many eyes on this particular area, and
I say that with no disrespect to any administration. Frankly, I
think the bureaucracy needs to be watched as much as
administrations do as well. So it is a good idea.
Let me move now, if I could, to my friend, Mr. Cline, and
just tell you, as an appropriator, I couldn't agree more, and I
bet every appropriator would want each bill to come
individually. That is the way we treat them in the
Appropriations Committee itself. We have unlimited amendments
in the Appropriations Committee. Obviously, any member, either
side of the aisle, got a good idea, can offer those amendments.
I long for the day when we did that in the full House.
I will tell you, there are two problems, and they are
bipartisan in nature. The first one is the absolute explosion
of the number of people that decide they want to add amendments
to the appropriations bill. And so it gets down, from a
management question, how much time do you want to spend on
appropriations? How much floor time do you want to give us?
We are happy to take it. But I don't know, when you--we
have 100, 200, 300, 400 amendments, that is a problem. And how
you have discipline that--it is actually a problem for this
committee, too, the Rules Committee, but it is an enormous
problem before we took it, just from the management.
The second thing I will tell you--and I will also tell you
both sides are equally guilty--the number of ``got you''
amendments have multiplied extraordinarily in my time here,
and, frankly, the fear of voting on those amendments by
members.
When the Republican majority came back in, one of the
things it actually did do was restore open rules on
appropriations bills. But we actually got to a point, I
remember it was on a--very well--it was on a Confederate flag
issue, of all things, over national monuments, and it blew
apart a bill. And members were then afraid.
I mean, when I originally got here, you would literally, if
you were a Republican, you would vote on the amendments however
you wanted, but you would always vote for the final Republican
bill. It was just kind of assumed because it was considered to
be better. Democrats were the same way when they were in the
majority.
But if you have got any thoughts about, number one, how to
control the number of amendments.
And number two, again, we have lots of Republicans, I will
just be honest with you, that won't vote for Republican
appropriations bills, because they don't want to vote for
anything other than defense and veterans. And if you have that,
you can't move the bill, because you can't expect Democrats to
do the work that a Republican majority is supposed to do.
This is a real problem inside our party. And, again, I have
no problem with people voting against bills if they exceed what
the budget cap has done. I have never seen Republicans do that.
I mean, we write the budget, we write the bills within our
budget.
So there has got to be, again, some way of dealing with the
sheer number of amendments. And, again, I am all for them. I
like individual bills, and I like open rules. So I agree with
you.
But have you got any suggestions for how we avoid ``got
you'' amendments and how we say, ``Okay, after you have had a
crack at your amendment, we do have to govern the country''?
That means the Defense Department needs to be funded. That
means Health and Human Services needs to be funded. You can't
only vote for the things you like. You have responsibility to
govern here. You can't expect the other party to do it when you
are in the majority. That is a problem.
So, anyway, that is a lot of rambling thought. You are one
of our brightest members. I am very interested in what you have
to say.
Mr. Cline. Well, I appreciate the question, the opportunity
to respond.
The Appropriations Committee does a great job. And I think
the answer is to get skin in the game on the parts of the
various members regarding the bills, to get broader support,
and getting them to vote for amendments definitely gets their
skin in the game.
I would say, in 16 years in the State legislature, when we
had amendments that went on and on, on the floor, we had to sit
through them all.
So I would say, if you just asked for people to submit
amendments by a date certain and then offer them on the floor
in the order received and the ones--and you have to sit through
all the amendments before you get to offer yours, then you will
have a lot of people giving up on their amendments.
Mr. Cole. That is actually a very clever idea. I am not
sure I want to subject myself to it, being a responsible
member. There are a lot of members that offer pretty frivolous
amendments, and they are not confined to either side. But an
interesting thought.
Anyway, again, appreciate the testimony, appreciate all the
testimony.
Yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you. And when you were just having that
give-and-take with Mr. Cline, I was thinking of the time that
Jeff Flake offered several hundred--500 amendments, all on an
appropriations bill, all reducing the amount by, like, a small
amount.
Mr. Cline. Mr. Chairman, that is when you penalize him by
putting him on Appropriations.
The Chairman. Yeah.
Mr. Cole. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Yeah.
Mr. Cole. Can I respond to that? They tried that. It didn't
work. They even booted Labor-H out of the subcommittee because
we had two members that wouldn't vote to move a bill out of
subcommittee that cut the top line by 14 percent because it
wasn't enough.
So, yeah, please just send us real appropriators, Democrat
or Republican alike, not people that you think will learn
there, what people that want to be there, like my friend Ms.
Wasserman Schultz. And I am sure you would be a great
appropriator if you chose to be.
Mr. Cline. Thank you.
The Chairman. Let me see what I do.
Mr. Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thanks, Mr. Chair.
And just on that last subject, Mr. Cline, I remember on the
Rules Committee we were doing appropriations by an open rule.
Our chair at the time was a guy named Dave Obey, and he had
been going for 24 hours straight because so many amendments had
been offered. And he finally--I don't know if, Mr. McGovern, if
you remember this----
The Chairman. I do.
Mr. Perlmutter. But he always had about five pencils in his
pocket, and he had broken them all, he was so mad. And he came
to us, and he said, ``I quit, unless you guys go back up and
limit this appropriation bill.'' He said, ``I will do a hundred
amendments, that is it.'' And we had to leave the floor and go
back and change the rule, because he felt like he had been----
Mr. Cline. It is like break that filibuster. Make them sit,
make them sleep there.
Mr. Perlmutter. Well, he felt like he was being punished,
and he didn't deserve to be punished.
Mr. Cline. Right.
Mr. Perlmutter. And he said it and we agreed.
So there has been some real abuse of this. And so I would
like to change--I want you to know that. And that is why there
has been limitation, and Mr. Cole has recognized it, we have
recognized it. You may have some points as to a limiting
factor, you got to have your amendments in so many days in
advance, you have got to sit there through all of them. And
that may make it a better approach and people feel that they
are more involved. But I can tell you, there has been real
abuse on that process and I hear you.
Mr. Cline. And I appreciate that. And I have combined
talking about the two issues in my testimony. But the open
rules apply to nonappropriations bills as well, and I think a
more open process would put more skin in the game on the part
of members and get them supporting the bills on final passage.
We have Jefferson's rules in Virginia, where if you
contribute to the product, you are bound to vote for the
product.
Mr. Perlmutter. Well, and that is another issue here
because you could get an amendment and still vote against the
bill, and that has been something else that we watch closely.
But I hear you, and I recognize what you are suggesting.
I did want to respond to the Chairman and Mr. Davis and Mr.
Cole, and then sort of in advance to my friend, Mr. Morelle,
because I am a little bit in disagreement with all of you on
the proxy voting piece of this thing.
The way the rule was written--and I have it in front of
me--is that proxies are only available during a covered period.
And a covered period is defined very specifically as a period
where there has been a pandemic declared and the Sergeant at
Arms and the House Physician have to advise the Speaker, who
then says this period is--this covered period will now last for
45 days.
So you are in a very restrictive time to be able to use a
proxy. So this isn't a proxy that we would have when it is
sunny and warm and everybody is healthy and there is no
pandemic.
Now, we may want to actually offer proxies or some virtual
voting, but that is not the system that we created, and it is
very restrictive. And there isn't, Mr. Davis--and I know Mr.
Morelle had the same concerns--but there isn't a call for a
doctor's note to be able to say, ``I get to do proxy voting.''
That is not what is required. What is required is a declaration
of a pandemic, which, in my opinion, is far more restrictive.
So I just wanted to say that. But I do believe, and I would
say to the chair and to Mr. Cole, we really do have to look
closely again at what we did, sort of in an emergency measure,
with respect to proxies, with respect to virtual voting, and
with respect to that whole Rule 25, which is the rule on the
continuity of government in the event of a catastrophe and how
we continue the legislature in place.
So I will leave it at that. Obviously, I am for the
congressionally directed spending. But I do think our committee
has to take a good look at, I guess it is Rule 20, it is when
we have a quorum, but it is really the catastrophe of an attack
or a pandemic.
So with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Woodall.
Mr. Woodall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In true Rules
Committee fashion, we have outlasted many of our witnesses.
I think that Mr. Castro's testimony on diversity during
testimony, which I think is incredibly important but probably
more so now that I am in the minority than when I was in the
majority, but as we talk about faith and trust in institutions,
the majority has the privilege of setting the agenda. But when
we have these panels that include five majority witnesses and
one minority witness, it does appear that we are preparing for
a press release more than we are preparing for shedding light
on difficult and partnered subjects.
So I would not only like to see the metrics that Mr. Castro
has been focused on, but also that diversity of ideas as we
enter eras where I hope we will have fewer Republican ideas
versus Democratic ideas and just more good ideas versus bad
ideas. I think there is an opportunity for that.
I wanted to find out from Mr. Cline, you know, the first
open rule I got to be a part of was in 2011. We took up the
entire appropriations package at once, the entire omnibus
appropriations bill. We went from Tuesday to Saturday morning,
so 5 days, 24 hours a day, and considered every amendment that
any member had to offer on anything in the entire 12
appropriations bill package. Exhausted, as you suggested,
ultimately won the day.
But we will now have more amendments offered under a
structured rule, from the Rules Committee, than were offered
under an open rule in the late 1980s. So there is a habit that
has been formed, both as Mr. Cole suggested, that members are
offering frivolous amendments that are designed to take down
bills instead of build up bills, and leads to a reluctance to
vote on tough amendments because we don't have any experience
voting on tough amendments. The leadership sorts all those out
ahead of time so that members can be more comfortable on the
floor.
But secondarily, we have lost those relationships with our
committees. As a young freshman member, I don't need to offer
my amendment on the floor of the House. I need to take it to
the chairman 2 weeks before the committee bill gets marked up
so that I can get it included in the base text so that it will
survive conference down the road.
As you have struggled with these issues, have you seen any
steps to get members back in a good habit? Because I fear if we
flipped the switch tomorrow and made things the way you and I
would like for them to be, we would encounter the exact same
uncomfortable situations that have brought leaders on both
sides of the aisle to shut the process down.
Mr. Cline. Well, I appreciate the question. And you all,
with respect, have been here a lot longer than I have.
From my experience there at the State level, for example,
there is a lot more contact between the chairman and the
ranking member as bills are constructed. So maybe the ranking
member does go to his members on his committee and say, ``The
chairman has asked for input. Here is your opportunity for
input.'' Not on the floor. Members may ultimately refuse to
acknowledge that. But if earlier input is solicited from both
sides and they feel invested in the product as it comes out of
committee, the less likely you get these efforts to gum up the
process just for the sake of gumming up the process.
There may be a legitimate issue as a bill goes to the
floor. But as a freshman, I feel like my opportunity to weigh
in is at committee, especially on issues of jurisdiction, which
I serve on, not floor to a bill where I didn't see it come
through committee and I don't have any--you know, maybe I have
a good idea, but I should have weighed in at the committee
level to make that point.
Mr. Woodall. Yeah. I was a big fan of open rules when I
arrived here, and having watched that broken process continue I
now see the wisdom of providing some structure, even if it is
giving the, as we have done many times, giving the chairman and
the ranking member on the floor the ability to consider 30
extraneous measures of their choice, providing some form of
parameters.
But the excuse I always here is we don't have enough floor
time. And as you and I both know, we start sometimes fairly
late and end sometimes fairly early. I believe we can make time
on the floor. We might not have enough pencils for David Obey
on the floor because the chairman and the ranking member do
bear the brunt of that workload when it happens.
I think we would be derelict not to try to move back in
that direction. I don't think there is any member of this
Chamber who believes shutting your colleagues down leads to a
better work product than including their colleagues in it. And
so I appreciate those suggestions.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Cline. And, Mr. Chairman, I would just say, if you had
one open rule on any--it doesn't have to be an approps bill--
each year, you kind of learn the lessons, and the freshmen get
to learn the lessons over again of why you don't necessarily
have open rules on every bill and why structured rules have
benefits.
The Chairman. I appreciate that, but I think the problem we
have is deeper than just an open rule versus a nonopen rule. We
do have a problem, and I think it is fair to say that there are
Members on both sides who look at their role very differently.
And so, another problem, quite frankly, with appropriations
bills is, we do everything perfectly here, but if you do not
have a product in the Senate, you are back to, well, we don't
want to be here making these big omnibus bills, because
otherwise, there is no way to move forward. And so, I don't
know how we resolve that problem in the short-term, but----
Mr. Cline. I share that frustration.
The Chairman. So anyway, thank you.
I now yield to--I don't know if Mr. Morelle has any
questions.
Mr. Morelle. Just a couple of questions or, maybe just
thoughts. I, first of all, don't feel that I know enough about
the appropriations process, or even, frankly, lawmaking yet
here. I am trying to unlearn everything I learned in New York
for decades, but I do think the problems in any legislature
have been well-articulated, which is the balance between trying
to allow as much as participation and many good ideas from
Members, but also, to your point, Mr. Chair, you actually have
to enact laws, you have to pass bills, and you have only got so
much time here to do it and we have got some big issues.
So I would be delighted to with all my colleagues and Mr.
Cline in trying to figure out how to balance better perhaps
those interests and end up with hopefully better product. I
wasn't going to mention, but since Mr. Perlmutter uttered my
name, I would say this, as it relates to proxies. I think two
conditions ought to be met.
Mr. Perlmutter rightly points out that when we created the
rule around this pandemic, one condition had to be met, and
that is, you essentially had this national emergency, which we
recognized would make it very difficult for Members to be here
physically in Washington voting, but we did not want to
disenfranchise them or, more importantly, their constituents.
But I actually think if we were to pursue either a
temporary or permanent rule in the 117th Congress, that two
conditions ought to be met: The first is, that the national
emergency, that declares there to be a covered period, has to
be met, and that would be the same individuals who need to
confer to declare a national emergency that we did in the 116th
rules, even if it is not COVID-19, if it is a future disaster
of some kind, but I also think a second condition, and that is
the failure to appear to vote in person and to use the proxy
ought to be, by virtue of your inability to be here because of
the national emergency. And I think my concern, which I
expressed, I think, when we were first talking about this, and
when we implemented the rule, which I voted for, but some
concern that we could be down a slippery slope. And I don't
think simply meeting the first test is enough. I think, you
know, I could have said, for instance, Gee, I don't want to
fly. It is an hour flight from Rochester, but the drive is 6\1/
2\ hours each way. Yet since the beginning of March, I have
driven virtually every week with one exception. So I spend 13
hours in a car to come down and back.
That is, in my mind, an inconvenience. I suppose I could
say, well, it is a covered period, I don't want to spend 13
hours in a car to come down and vote for a few days and go
back. But to me, that is an inconvenience. There is not a
reason because of the covered emergency which would prohibit
me, or prevent me from being here. And I think that ought to be
the second condition or test that needs to be met when we----
The Chairman. Will the gentleman yield to me one second?
Mr. Morelle. Yes, of course, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Right now, I mean, if you want to vote by
proxy, you have to sign a letter that says that you cannot
physically be here due to the pandemic. Now, I mean that is the
requirement. We have that requirement.
Mr. Morelle. But I don't think it is in the rule. And,
frankly, I am not sure--well, you know, I would always defer to
the chair.
The Chairman. The deal is, we are trusting Members to abide
by the regulations that we have put out there. And so the point
is well-taken, and if there are people who are doing this
simply out of convenience, that is not appropriate.
Mr. Morelle. Right.
The Chairman. And, again, I think that is something that we
need to think about. Thank you.
Mr. Morelle. And I would simply just say tightening it up
perhaps, or putting it in the actual rule. And, by the way, I
think, by and large, this has been used very effectively, and I
think people have been very, very good about observing not only
the letter, but the spirit of the rule, and hope that would
continue and maybe some small adjustment to help ensure that
would make our friends on the other side of the aisle more
comfortable.
And with that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Ms. Shalala.
Ms. Shalala. No questions. Thank you.
I have enjoyed the discussion.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Did I miss anybody?
Mr. Perlmutter. Mr. Chair, I did have one question for Mr.
Crist. Could I ask that question?
The Chairman. You may.
Mr. Perlmutter. Mr. Crist, I am trying to figure out in the
racial and ethnic impact score. What is it--is there something
like that that exists today not so much in the Congress, but
maybe Florida does something like that, or someplace--I don't
know--I am trying to figure out what it looks like.
You are muted, Charlie.
You are still muted. We can't hear you.
Mr. Crist. There we go. Yeah. I understand that it does
exist in the Congress presently, if requested, and this would
make it more of a mandatory thing so that, you know, any
legislation that we would put forward, it would give us an idea
about whether or not the legislation is going to be
disadvantageous, if you will, to a minority or not.
Mr. Perlmutter. Okay. All right. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Crist. Thank you for the question.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. No other questions? This
panel is dismissed.
Thank you very much.
We go to our next panel, which is Mr. Kilmer, Mrs. Murphy,
Ms. Davids, Mr. Taylor, and Mr. Woodall. And we will begin with
Mr. Kilmer.
And let me just say before I yield to Mr. Kilmer, I want to
thank Chairman Kilmer and Vice Chair Graves, in particular. I
want to take a moment to congratulate both of you on an
incredibly successful Congress. Under your leadership, the
Select Committee on Modernization did important work on
analyzing how Congress could work more effectively and
efficiently on behalf of the American people, identifying
specific recommendations somewhere, I think, near 100, I
believe, to do just that. A feat unto itself. Your staff must
be exhausted.
Mr. Chairman, you and Vice Chair Graves went even further
and pushed the committee's recommendations into results. As all
of our colleagues will recall, the Select Committee ushered in
two critical resolutions with the help of the House
Administration Committee. While we may not have known at the
time, the Select committee's recommendations to improve House
technology systems, enhance and unify telework practices, and
just generally push the House into the 21st century, helped
pave the way for key technology changes that were critical to
ensuring that the House could work, and do it safely in the
wake of this terrible pandemic. And you did it all while having
to endure ``Nickelback,'' whatever that is, and Woodall, who we
all know so well. But we will have more time for this in the
coming weeks. To Mr. Woodall and Mr. Graves, thank you both for
your service for your Nation.
I know Chairman Kilmer and Ms. Scanlon, our Rules
colleague, and the rest of the Modernization Committee, I hope
that you are all proud of the work that you have done. And I
think it has had a lasting impact, and we thank the hard-
working staff of the Modernization Committee. I think you have
improved this institution, and so, I am grateful for your
leadership.
Anyway, I just wanted to say it because, I think, a lot of
people may not appreciate the extent of your work and how hard
you worked, and the fact that this is the way this place should
work where Democrats and Republicans come together and try to,
you know, do things for the good of the institution.
So let me thank you, and I will now yield to Mr. Kilmer.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. DEREK KILMER, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF WASHINGTON

Mr. Kilmer. Thank you, Chairman McGovern, and thank you for
your kind words. And thank you, Ranking Member Cole.
I appreciate you hosting the Members' Day hearing, and
appreciate the opportunity to share with you some ideas for
improving the House rules for the 117th Congress.
Two years ago in testimony before this committee, I
proposed as part of the House rules for the 116th Congress, a
committee to consider measures to improve the operation of
Congress, and as an independent and coequal branch of
government. And under your leadership, the Select Committee on
the Modernization of Congress was created as part of the rules
package for the 116th.
As chair of the Select Committee, I am here to say thank
you for your guidance and support over the past 2 years. I am
very grateful to you and to your staff. And with that help, the
Select Committee unanimously passed 97 bipartisan
recommendations to make Congress work better for the American
people.
And I am proud of what we achieved and I am grateful for
the opportunity to lead the effort, along with Vice Chair Tom
Graves and in partnership with Mr. Woodall and Ms. Scanlon from
your committee, who served very ably.
I am also going to share with you some of the bipartisan
recommendations the Select Committee recently passed that would
improve the way the House functions.
The Select Committee spent a lot of time focusing on ways
to reclaim Congress' Article I powers, and made a number of
strong recommendations in that space. And the first proposal I
would like to highlight will help restore Congress' Article I
power of the purse. We recommended, on a bipartisan basis, a
community-focused grant program to reduce dysfunction in the
annual budgeting process, and restore Congress' unique
constitutional authority to appropriate Federal dollars to
support projects that have the broad support of local
communities across the United States.
This competitive grant program calls for transparency and
accountability and supports meaningful and transformative
investments in the communities we represent. Taxpayer dollars
will be spent more efficiently and transparently on local
projects with guardrails against abuse.
And the Select Committee believes that this program could
help end the era of government shutdowns, and I urge the
committee to include it as part of the 117th Congress' rules
package.
In addition to the community-focused grant program, I would
like to share a couple of ideas designed to strengthen
Congress' Article I powers. The first has to do with
encouraging the Article I principle of debate and deliberation.
The Select Committee recommended establishing a pilot for
weekly Oxford-style policy debates on the House floor.
Debate exposes us to perspectives that are different from
our own, and requires us to really think through our positions
in order to build the best arguments we can. It requires the
ability to listen, as well as speak, and that is incredibly
important. My Select Committee colleague, Emanuel Cleaver,
constantly reminded us that how we treat each other matters,
and these Oxford-style debates could showcase passionate but
civil exchanges about the issues of the day, and we should
encourage more of that.
Along the same lines, the Select Committee recommended that
committees experiment with alternative hearing formats to
encourage more bipartisan discussion. Committees should try
questioning witnesses in ways that encourage discourse rather
than grandstanding. We also recommended that more committees
follow the Select Committee's lead, and experiment with mixed
seating arrangements, where Democrats and Republicans sit side
by side rather than on opposite sides of the dais.
These simple experiments encourage dialogue and civility
and ultimately strengthen Congress. Including these ideas in
the next House rules package would help Congress restore
Article I capacity. Another way to build capacity is to build
efficiency into the congressional schedule.
Between committee work, floor work, running a personal
office, and constituent work in the district, the demand for
time is constant, so the Select Committee tried to find ways to
reduce frustrating conflicts. We focused on committee work and
recommended that the House establish specific committee-only
meeting times when Congress is in session.
We also recommended that the House establish specific days
or weeks where committee work takes priority. Creating a common
committee calendar portal to help with scheduling could also
reduce conflicts. These ideas will make Congress work more
efficiently and productively on behalf of the American people.
Finally, I would like to thank you for your continued
attention to a number of operational issues the Select
Committee has recommended. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, we
recommended that the House update its procedures to allow
Members to electronically add or remove their names as bill
cosponsors. We are happy to see this now in effect and think it
should be permanently authorized. Same goes for our
recommendations to expand the use of digital signatures, and
make permanent the option to electronically submit committee
reports.
We should adopt procedures that make Congress more
efficient, rather than reserve them for emergencies. The COVID-
19 pandemic has forced us to take a hard look at continuity
issues, and think about how we can better prepare for the
unexpected. The Select Committee recommends that committees
establish bipartisan telework policies, and update systems to
encourage in-person electronic voting and other modern
technologies.
Cybersecurity, telework, and emergency preparedness
training should also be given to all Members of Congress. By
taking these steps, we can ensure that Congress is fully
prepared in the event of another crisis. Continuity of
government plans should be built into our procedures and happen
as a matter of course.
From day one, the Select Committee's guiding principal has
been to make Congress work better so that we can better serve
the American people. That simple but profound goal has guided
all of our work, some of which I have shared with you today.
Vice Chair Graves and I believe the bipartisan ideas that
we proposed to improve the House rules can help build capacity,
and ultimately strengthen Congress, and we hope they will be
implemented.
For that matter, our committee generally agreed that the
work to modernize and improve the People's House should be an
ongoing effort, not done once every 20 or 30 years or so. And
so, I would encourage this committee to consider how, if at
all, to ensure that the work of improvement continues going
forward.
On behalf of the Select Committee, I appreciate your
consideration. I am happy to provide additional information to
support your work and thank you, again, for your leadership,
partnership, and for the opportunity to speak before the
committee today.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mrs. Murphy.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. STEPHANIE N. MURPHY, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF FLORIDA

Mrs. Murphy of Florida. Chairman McGovern, Ranking Member
Cole, and the members of the committee, thank you so much for
this opportunity to testify about my views on the rules that
will govern the operation of this Chamber in the next Congress.
So, my first set of recommendations involve fiscal
discipline and transparency. First, I respectfully request that
we retain the paygo rule in Rule XXI, clause 10 of the current
House rules. This rule was also in effect for the 110th and
111th Congresses' when Democrats were in the majority. In
general, it prohibits the consideration of direct spending or
revenue legislation that is projected to increase the deficit
over two discrete time periods. Second, I would recommend that
we strengthen the transparency around this rule.
If the Rules Committee reports a special rule providing for
a consideration of a bill, the accompanying committee report
should be required to include a specific statement indicating
whether the special rule waives the paygo rule, in particular,
as opposed to a vague statement waiving all points of order
against the bill. This can be accomplished by amending Rule
XIII, Clause 3, and my office is preparing draft language, and
will share it with your staff.
Third, I would like to work with the committee on crafting
a carefully calibrated amendment to the House rules that would,
except in exigent circumstances, prohibit the House from
considering a bill unless CBO and JCT have prepared and
published a cost estimate of that bill.
I seek these three changes for a simple reason. You know,
contrary to wishful thinking in some corners, deficits and debt
do matter. They matter to our economy, they matter to our
security, and to our children and grandchildren's future. And I
recognize that deficit spending to combat the health and
economic consequences of COVID-19 is necessary, and I support
that spending.
But Congress will need to bring spending and revenues into
better balance once the pandemic is behind us. And we shouldn't
keep digging ourselves into a deeper fiscal hole. And if we do,
we better be upfront with the American people about it.
My second set of recommendations involves the motion to
recommit provided for in Rule XIX. Unlike some of my
colleagues, I do not believe we should eliminate the MTR, which
I view as an important tool for the minority party in an
otherwise majoritarian institution.
At the same time, I recognize that the MTR is frequently
used by the minority party to engage in, you know, cynical
politics and campaigning on the House floor, rather than as a
part of a genuine effort to improve a bill.
The text of the MTR does not undergo committee review, or
otherwise get vetted through regular order, and so it is often
poorly written and confusing, and Members rarely have the
sufficient time to review the language and to determine what it
actually does as opposed to what the minority party claims it
does. And I think this is a recipe for bad legislating.
So for those reasons, I believe we should retain the MTR,
but require two-thirds support for the MTR to pass rather than
the current requirement of majority support. This would put the
MTR on the same plane as a suspension bill.
Finally, I recommend that we continue to find new ways to
foster bipartisanship in the House by facilitating floor
consideration of bills that have a critical mass of bipartisan
cosponsors. At the urging of myself and other Members, the
House established the consensus calendar in Rule XV, Clause 7
of the current rules, and I am deeply grateful to you and your
staff for helping make that happen.
In the coming weeks, my office will propose specific ways
to strengthen the consensus calendar, and to otherwise promote
bipartisan cooperation during these otherwise highly partisan
times. I think the American people want their representatives
to work across party lines, and House rules should reward
lawmakers who conduct themselves in that spirit.
With that, thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
I should just point out for the record, though, that in the
current Rules Committee reports, we don't just say ``waive all
points of order.'' We actually, in the section on explanation
of waivers, if we waive paygo, it specifically says in our
report that we waived clause 10 of Rule XXI, which is the paygo
provision.
So the Rules Committee report is pretty explicit about
waiving paygo or not waiving paygo for that matter. So it is
there. But in any event, thank you. I now turn to Ms. Davids.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. SHARICE DAVIDS, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF KANSAS

Ms. Davids. Thank you. And thank you, Chairman McGovern and
Ranking Member Cole for holding this hearing and allowing us
the opportunity to comment on proposed House rule changes for
the 117th Congress.
So, my recommendation for rule change is pretty
straightforward. I propose that the director of the
Congressional Budget Office be invited to provide an address or
report to Congress on the fiscal state of the Nation each year.
And, you know, while right now we are in a crisis which
necessitates spending to keep our economy going, our Federal
budget is on an unsustainable trajectory. And I believe this is
the sort of report that could provide a common baseline for my
colleagues and I to work from using the same data and operating
under the same budgetary assumptions year to year.
You know, as this body formulates budgets and votes on
appropriations packages each year, it would be helpful to have
the general input and objective position--have that general
input of an objective position so that we can set goals based
on facts. And I also think this sort of annual report could
help remind our colleagues of the very real effects of
congressional spending and, perhaps, facilitate a conversation
on how we could direct Federal resources in a responsible way.
And, of course, we should be adhering to the existing House
rules, the Pay-As-You-Go, which we were just talking about, or
hearing about, rule which requires Congress to pay for
legislation we are proposing and voting on--you know, budgeting
is about priorities, and deciding what is important and what
price we are willing to pay for it, and that principle is at
the fundamental core of paygo, which is why I support its
inclusion and its continued inclusion in the House rules for
this Congress and the next Congress.
We have seen the disastrous consequences of fiscal
irresponsibility with deficit financed tax cuts for the wealthy
and out-of-control budgets, and it is worth noting, and we have
already heard this, but I will reiterate, that we are going
through a pandemic right now, and this--the spending that we
are doing and the relief that people need is very real and
necessary, and this is the kind of crisis where paygo rules
might need to be waived. This is a good example of that.
When we are in a crisis, we need to make sure that the
people of this country are being cared for, and it is also
times like these that we see a real demonstration of the
necessity for greater fiscal responsibility in normal times, in
times that are good. And so, we are setting ourselves up to go
through times like this.
So I would encourage the adoption of this rule change, and
any other changes that would help promote the adherence to
fiscal responsibility as we aim to use our taxpayer resources
in the most effective way possible.
And with that, I will yield back. Thank you for having me.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Mr. Taylor.
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Can you hear me?
The Chairman. Yes. Yes.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. VAN TAYLOR, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF TEXAS

Mr. Taylor. Great. Okay. Well, it is great to be with you,
and the ranking member and all the members of the Rules
Committee. And I just want to say that I am a big believer in
rules and process, and the process that we have, I think, is
really important. And so one statistic that kind of strikes me
is in the 100th Congress--this is when I was in high school--in
1987/1988, 8 percent of all bills that were filed actually
became law. And now, in this Congress, we are at about 1
percent. And that is because we are filing about 50 percent
more bills, but we are passing many fewer bills. So the
percentage of success is dropped, as well as the number of
bills that are being filed has gone up.
And so, I am concerned that the ability for Members to--
when I say ``play small ball'' to do small, commonsense piece
of legislation, and get those all the way through the
President's desk have been impaired.
So I am going to offer three solutions, and I have talked
to some of the Rules Committee staff about this, and this has
been a discussion within the problem-solver caucus. The first
one is to build on the 290 rule that was successfully
implemented in the last Congress. And that is to have 290--to
apply that same rule to Senate bills.
So most legislative chambers in this country, even though
they are State legislators, have a provision that allows House
Members to support Senate bills, Senate bills to support House
bills. And so that--so you would have to create that mechanism
in order to do 290 for Senate bills, but allow Members not only
to advocate for a bill and to take credit for it, but also for
Members to then, in turn, be able to take that--get behind a
Senate bill, and then actually compel it to get on the floor
and get on the consensus calendar, and really expand what I
think has been a big success.
And your staff has been very complimentary of the problem
solver's success in getting the 290 rule into effect and seeing
it work.
A second thing I wanted to talk about is what I call four-
fifths/two-thirds. And that is, again, allowing bills that are
modest in intent, and then are singular in focus to be able to
come to the floor of the U.S. House.
And so, if a bill gets four fifths of the committee members
to sign on to the bill, so 80 percent of the committee members.
So in the Armed Services Committee, there is 60 members. So you
are getting 50 members, you would then, in turn, be able to
actually bring that bill to the floor of the U.S. House, and
then it would basically be a suspension bill. You would have to
get two-thirds vote. I put it on the consensus calendar, and we
could have discussions about some of the details about--but,
again, you are trying to allow a bill that is--and you would
have to get four fifths of the committee of jurisdiction.
And there are some bills that are big and complicated that
get referred to many, many committees of jurisdiction. And I
think we would probably have to have some mechanism to allow
committee chairs, if they wanted to, to waive it. Or if they
didn't want to, say no, I want four fifths of my committee,
then they would have that power.
And then finally, the third idea is trying to make sure
that bills, again, that are commonsense, where they have passed
the House and the Senate actually, go to the President's desk.
If you believe that most Congresses, there are half a dozen
bills that pass the House, pass the Senate, they are companion
legislation, but actually don't get to the President's desk.
So what about a half a dozen State legislators have done is
they have a rule process called ``over ineligible'' where they
will take the--this is a very difficult one to explain. It is
very simple in practice.
But basically, if you have a Senate bill that comes over,
it is in the House, the House companion has passed committee
and it is now on the floor. The House author of the House bill
can say, you know what? I am going to take my bill, set it on
the table. I am going to pull the Senate bill, which is here,
it has passed. It is in this Chamber. It is down at the well. I
am going to pull that up and so now we are going to vote on the
Senate bill. It is a way to expedite the Senate bill.
Some State legislators actually have it automatic. So
wherever--when the Senate bill comes over to the House, it is
automatically moved to whatever point in the process it was in.
So, again, this doesn't take any--no one loses any power per se
and, one of the ideas that I have is to protect the House
Member, the author of the bill, to say, you know what? I want
to use the Senate bill and move this on so it goes on to the
President's desk. And, again, there is a small number of bills
every Congress--one other thing this will do is it will
actually encourage Members to do more to work on companion
legislation so that, in turn, it will improve the probability.
I have actually talked to a member of the Senate about
having a similar bill, an over ineligible rule, over on the
Senate side. Say, Hey, we are doing this to help expedite your
bills, you should do this to expedite our bills. And I have
gotten a favorable response from Republicans and Democrats that
I have spoken to about all of these rules as I have discussed
it with my colleagues in the problem solver caucus.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Woodall.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. ROB WOODALL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF GEORGIA

Mr. Woodall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know ours is not
supposed to be based solely on competition, our business, but I
just think it is worth pointing out that while serving under
your leadership here on the Rules Committee, I have voted 100
percent of the time against Ms. Scanlon, and her against me.
While serving under Chairman Kilmer's leadership on the Select
Committee, Ms. Scanlon and I voted 100 percent of the time
together. And so, I don't know if there is anything that Mr.
Kilmer has to add that he wasn't comfortable sharing in open
session about how you might bring people together here on the
Rules Committee as he has been bringing people together on the
Joint Select Committee, but I did want to put that out there
and, tell him how much I appreciated his leadership.
I will tell you, Mr. Chairman, I think we were
disadvantaged by not having Ms. Davids and Mrs. Murphy on our
committee. I support both of their ideas, and they sounded very
similar to some of the ideas that you and I and the committee
had worked on throughout the year.
Mr. Chairman, my amendment is to some of the good work that
you did at the very beginning of this Congress, by requiring
that bills be reported out of committee before they are
considered here in the Rules Committee. And I would go one step
further, add a section 3 to--paragraph 3 to the Section 103(i)
that was passed in H. Res 6. It said it shall not be in order
to consider a rule or order that waives the application of
paragraph 1 after the bill or joint resolution has been
referred to committee for 15 legislative days.
The point of this change, Mr. Chairman, is to say that we
have found reasons and there are always reasons to waive the
rules, including brand-new rules that were done with the best
of intentions as this one that you promulgated. If a bill has
been sitting in committee for 15 days, clearly there is not an
emergency that requires that it move forward without a hearing.
If it has just been sitting in committee and no one has
been acting on it, surely it doesn't need to be rushed to the
floor with no input from the committee whatsoever. I recognize
that no matter who is in the majority, we have emergency
measures and, in fact, the rule, as it exists today, makes an
exception for emergency-designated legislation, but this would
further the building of trust in the committee process that you
began by saying we are not going to use this process to short-
circuit a committee process; we are only going to use it to
expedite things that are simply coming so quickly, they haven't
had an opportunity to be dropped in committee and the chairman
hasn't had an opportunity to have the hearing or the markup.
Making the point that the reason we don't follow your rule
isn't because we don't want to, it is because we haven't had an
opportunity to. If the opportunity is presented, then we need
to be able to say yes to that opportunity as your rule was
designed to achieve.
It requires that the point of order under this paragraph
be--the question of consideration shall be debatable for 10
minutes, and the member initiating the point of order and an
opponent to have that time, but shall otherwise be decided
without intervening motion, except for one that the House
adjourn.
And, again, this is not intended to disadvantage the
majority, which is in charge of running this institution. It is
only intended to complement the effort that the Rules Committee
chairman made at the beginning of this Congress.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. I think that is the last person on this
panel, Mr. Woodall. So let me just say, I appreciate your
words, Mr. Woodall, with regard to the McGovern rule. Let me
just say before that, there was no such rule. There was nothing
in place. And I said when we were doing this that we would try
to do as well as we can, but it wouldn't be perfect, because
there would be times when it would be difficult to do that.
I think we were much better at it last year than this year,
but this year, to be fair, we are in the middle of a pandemic,
and there is a lot of things that aren't normal, right. So--and
we will continue to try to do better.
I really do believe, in principal, that it is a mistake to
short-circuit the committee process, but I think we have been
making a concerted effort, and a fairly effective effort in
trying to comply with that. And, again, in my perfect world,
that is the way this place should run. I mean, there should be
hearings and a markup in committee before it comes to the Rules
Committee, and then we can bring a bill to the floor. So I will
try to do better.
Anyway, having said that, I think there are some really
good ideas that have been presented here today, and we will
obviously be working with the members who are here today and
their staffs to try to figure out how we can move forward on
some of these. And, again, we might have to do some tweaks here
and there, but I really appreciate your time.
Let me yield to Mr. Cole. Oh. I am sorry. Let me yield to
Mr. Woodall for any questions. Maybe you might want to question
yourself.
Mr. Woodall. I do, Mr. Chairman. I have been conflicted
about several things. I am hoping we are going to be able to
sort those out together right here. The only other thing I
wanted to mention, Mr. Chairman, is whether or not there is a
process related to attaching unrelated legislation to a message
between the Chambers without bipartisan concurrence. That is
something you and I have talked about in Rules Committee on
many occasions, and I have tried to work out some language, but
it does have to be incredibly nuanced to protect the ability of
the majority leader to continue to operate the floor while
still protecting minority rights.
I appreciated Ms. Davids--I believe it was Ms. Davids--
mentioning the motion to recommit in the nature of the--was it
you, Mrs. Murphy? The motion to recommit as being that one
opportunity that the minority has, as you recall, from the
media articles when the majority leader decided he was going to
start attaching unrelated legislation as messages between the
Chambers. Folks celebrated that as being this wonderful new
procedural tool that has been crafted to prevent the minority
from getting in the way of--with their messaging motions to
recommit.
Again, I recognize the need to attach legislation, and I
recognize the need for the desire for the expedited process
between the Chambers. I certainly wouldn't want to craft
something that was so restrictive, the majority could not
assert its agenda. But I do think, because there has been so
much consternation about that process throughout the year,
whether it is celebrating on one side or bemoaning on the
other, that it is worth looking at. These habits that we get
into, not passing appropriations bills individually, not having
open rules, not sending things through committee.
Again, you took major steps at the beginning of this
Congress to try to get us out of some of those bad habits that
we had spent a couple of decades getting into, and I put
messages between the Chambers in that category. And I
appreciate you recognizing me.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Mrs. Torres, any questions?
Mrs. Torres. No questions, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Mr. Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. I have a couple. To the Modernization
Committee members, the question I had, and we have seen it in a
number of different proposals that we have had is how to
streamline and modernize the calendar, and be more efficient in
our travel, and more efficient in our workdays, if you will. I
am curious what you all concluded. In our kind of summary of
what you proposed, it is pretty general. We have got some more
specific proposals, but generally, what did your committee come
up with?
Mr. Kilmer. Maybe I will take first crack at that, and then
if either of your Rules Committee colleagues who served on the
Select Committee want to weigh in as well, I welcome that.
So we focused primarily on principles rather than on
proposing a specific calendar. And one of the principles that
we proposed was that there should be more days in session than
travel days. I think last calendar year we had 65 full days and
65 travel days in session. And, you know, again, if the notion
is, how do we have Congress work best for the American people,
I would argue we need to increase time legislating. And so,
reducing the amount of time in transit is important.
The other thing we looked at, though, was the productivity
of the time that we have, and the bipartisan policy center did,
I think, a very strong report looking at the conflicts that
exist between committees. They looked at one day, and found on
just one morning, 131 members of the House had a conflict
between two or more committees.
And so, the concern, of course, is, you know, if--and I
don't raise that as an individual member who feels like I need
a clone to attend all my committee meetings, but rather, as
someone who thinks that important learning and work is intended
to happen in committees. And that work is challenged when folks
aren't there, and that can negatively impact the ability of
Congress to deliver.
And so, we made recommendations in that space as well to
create--to encourage blocked scheduling when committees meet,
to create a common committee calendar portal, so the committees
can have visibility into other committee activities and
potential conflicts for their members, you know.
Over COVID, you have actually seen the House do committee-
only weeks, and I think that has been very positively received
by members where you have days that are committee activity only
without floor activity. So we recommended continuing that, as
well just to try to drive as much productivity as possible.
The other thing, and I will mention quickly, and it may not
seem like a big deal, but related to the calendar, we also said
that the Congressional Calendar should accommodate a bipartisan
member retreat, because actually having Democrats and
Republicans engage one another to try to advance an agenda and
to try to enhance civility was something that the 12 members of
our committees all felt were important efforts.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you.
And for Mrs. Murphy, a question. You might be--the two-
thirds proposal on MTR, kind of your logic behind that, please.
Mrs. Murphy of Florida. Sure. So, MTRs are often presented
at the very last minute on the floor with very little time
available for members to consider what the MTR is actually
saying. And I have to say, having had to do that all Congress--
those MTRs are so poorly written sometimes, it is hard to read
it and figure out exactly what the MTR is trying to do, bumping
it up against the legislation that it is--the law that it is
trying to change.
So, one, MTRs are written a bit hazardly. They are
introduced with very little time for members to review and
understand the impacts. And then, finally, if you are going to
make a change to a bill that has already come through the
entire process and had, you know, consideration debates, and
you are going to throw something on at the last minute, it
really shouldn't be passed and be a part of that bill,
successfully be a part of that bill, unless it meets a higher
threshold, I think.
And we just picked the threshold that a suspension bills do
that. With the suspension bill, that is the level would say,
Okay, this is harmless enough, enough people would agree with
this that we should make this last--this change. And I just
think, you know, when you allow a bill to be added with just
simple majority, when it has gone through this very short and
sloppy process, it makes--it ends up making for bad
legislation.
We have a process for a reason. I don't want to take away
minority rights at all, and I think--I don't want to eliminate
an MTR, but I think if an MTR is going to have the impact of
law, then it should pass a higher threshold than a simple
majority.
Mr. Perlmutter. Thank you.
And the last question for you, Mr. Taylor. So, you know,
there is a desire, and I think we all share the same desire to
see legislation move through both Chambers and get to the
executive and signed, and I don't care whether it is a
Democratic Senate or a Republican Senate, we have all--I
remember my first 4 years here, we had a Democratic Senate, but
we would send stuff and it would kind of get all boxed up over
there.
And how do you think in the proposals you are suggesting--I
mean, I don't want it to just be a one-way street that we pass
everything that the Senate sends to us, but everything we send
to them gets bottled up. So how do you think this helps that?
Mr. Taylor. Well, again, I think we are in a position to
start going to the Senators and saying, Look, we are doing a
290 rule for your bills, you should do something like that for
our bills. We are doing an over ineligible rule for your bills
to expedite your bills. To improve the probability of your
companion legislation passing, you should do a similar--I have
already had that conversation, saying, Look, I am going to
offer this in the House. This is a commonsense thing, nobody's
cut out, everybody gets their say. The committee chair, the
Speaker gets their say, the author gets their say, but I think
we--one of the divides as I described it to my constituents--
partisan divide. What they don't see is the camel divide.
There is a lack of interaction between the two legislative
Chambers that is striking to me. Actually, before I got here, I
read the House rules and the Senate rules, because I wanted to
see who had floor privileges. Could I go on the Senate floor?
Could the House Senators come on the House floor? And I
actually got in an argument with two members that had worked
here for several Congress' who insisted to me that Senators
couldn't be on the House floor unless they were former House
Members. And under no circumstances could House Members go on
the Senate floor. No, no. You are wrong. Senate rule 27, we can
go on their floor. But even if that is technically true,
culturally it is not true. We have a lack of interaction
between the Chambers.
What is the chance of both over ineligible and 290 is it
encourages Senators to come and work their bills, to come to
the House floor and say, Hey, I really want your signature
because I am at 270 signatures. If you sign on, I can finally
get the 290 and get this thing on the President's desk.
And also, it encourages companion legislation. Over
ineligible encourages companion legislation. One of the
advantages of companion legislation--I was a State legislator
in Texas--one of the advantages is that sometimes you, in your
Chamber, can't figure out where the problem is, but the
companion legislator figures out where the problem is, and they
send you--I found out where the problem is, and they wouldn't
tell you because of these reasons. But I found out what the
problem is, and so I put this amendment on and now it is good.
So here we go. You are ready to go.
So I think you have to begin with a step of faith, and just
start working on their stuff, and let's just say--I will say
this, for every 10 bills that are sent from the House to the
Senate, the Senate sends one back. We are a far more effective
legislative body from a volume point of view than they are.
There could be no debate about that. I believe that that is
because our consent calendar is basically a 95 percent consent
calendar. Their consent calendar is unanimous. And having an
incredibly high bar makes it very difficult for them to play
small ball, to do smaller things. Until they drop that from
unanimous to 90 percent, or 80 percent, or some other more
reasonable number, we will continue to have bills get blocked
because somebody wants a better cubby hole over in the Capitol,
and that has happened.
Mr. Perlmutter. All right. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you. Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I, frankly, just want to
thank each of the members. I think their suggestions, while I
may not also agree with each of them, I think they are very
thoughtful, and appreciate their participation. I also want to,
if I can, at the risk of signaling out Mr. Kilmer and the
members of Modernization Committee, there is a lot to take in
on the list that I have in front of me, but obviously, some of
the changes that would allow us to have an electronic system
for many of the things that right now have to be done in the
physical world, I would embrace. I think they make a whole lot
of sense.
The other thing that I would just say, just as a general
observation of what Mr. Kilmer talked about, is the ability for
members in committees to really take advantage of witnesses who
are in front of the committees and engage in a little more
thoughtful dialogue, instead of what at times to me appears to
be making speeches as to--one of the things that I particularly
appreciate about this committee is the ability to have more
back and forth, and to really ask questions, and that is why I
value these opportunities. And whenever a rule is before the
House or before the committee, so I appreciate his
thoughtfulness on that.
As well with that, I will yield back, Mr. Chair.
The Chairman. Ms. Scanlon.
Ms. Scanlon. I am going to pass. Thank you.
The Chairman. Ms. Shalala.
Ms. Shalala. No, I will pass. Very thoughtful.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Did I miss anybody who wanted to ask a
question?
Okay. I think we are all set. I want to thank the panels
for being here. You are now dismissed. And now we are going to
be calling--our next panel will be Mr. Schneider and Mr. Lieu.
And as they are getting ready to testify, I want to ask
unanimous consent to insert into the record testimony from Miss
Kathleen Rice, Garret Graves, Katie Porter, Emanuel Cleaver,
Josh Gottheimer.
[The statements of Miss Rice, Mr. Graves, Ms. Porter, Mr.
Cleaver, and Mr. Gottheimer follow:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. I also ask unanimous consent to insert into
the record the regulations to accompany H. Res. 965.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. And I will now turn this over to Mr.
Schneider.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. BRADLEY SCOTT SCHNEIDER, A REPRESENTATIVE
IN CONGRESS FROM THE STATE OF ILLINOIS

Mr. Schneider. Thank you. I very much appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you. I want to thank Chairman
McGovern, Ranking Member Cole, and members of the committee,
for hosting today's hearing to solicit ideas for members on
Rules for our next the 117th Congress. I would like to discuss
my views on the motion to recommit as outlined in Rule XIX.
As a majoritarian institution, the MTR represents one of
the last opportunities in the House for those in the minority
to influence legislation being considered on the floor. In
principal, I support the MTR as a procedure that keeps debate
alive and retains minority rights within the House. In
practice, however, minority party, both Democrats and
Republicans, use the MTR as a partisan cudgel, or just as
often, an attempt to artificially create a wedge issue.
Using the MTR as a wedge along partisan fault lines is
certainly the prerogative of the minority party. And, again,
both Democrats and Republicans have used MTR toward that end
over the decades. But what has been different this Congress and
what I find not just reprehensible but, in fact, dangerous is
the Republican use of American Jews, Jewish heritage, and the
long-fought battle against the scourge of anti-Semitism to
divide us.
The great seal of the United States bears the motto, E
Pluribus unum. Out of many, one. It reflects the national ethos
that has long given strength to our Nation. It should be a
principle that unites us. So it is concerning when any group of
Americans is used as a prop to sow division. Using American
Jews, who have long faced bigotry and very real threats of
violence, is something altogether different.
The Alt-Right Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville in
2017, and subsequent attacks in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and
Poway, California, are examples that dominate the news, but
they are just the tip of the iceberg.
According to the Anti-Defamation League, or ADL, anti-
Semitic incidents increased by 12 percent in the United States
in 2019, and marked the highest number in ADL's four decades of
recordkeeping.
I have no doubt that all my colleagues, on both sides of
the aisle, oppose bigotry and hatred in any form, including
anti-Semitism. And so no party should ever assert that there is
anything but unanimous opposition within the House against
anti-Semitism. To do otherwise raises the risk of empowering
those who traffic in hate and who would like nothing more than
to believe that they have allies within the U.S. Congress who
support their anti-Semitic views.
I want to repeat myself. The MTR provides a venue for
debate on worthy issues of divergent opinions. But when action
on the floor of the U.S. House of Representatives dehumanizes
any group, in this case, American Jews facing anti-Semitism, it
diminishes the institution and does a disservice to our Nation.
The cynical ploy of weaponizing anti-Semitism for political
gain is as offensive as it is dangerous. Again, MTR should be a
tool to insert healthy debate within the legislative process,
and parties may choose to use it to push their agenda, or put
the majority party on the record.
My minority party should not, however, cynically use any of
our citizens or group of citizens as a wedge or a pawn. We
don't know who will be in the majority in the next Congress. I
believe, therefore, that we can now take this opportunity to
prohibit the use of MTRs next Congress until there is a
bipartisan agreement that, while we can and often shouldn't
vote controversial issues on policy disagreements, we must
never use the MTR to subvert our common goal of condemning
anti-Semitism.
I support the MTR as a way to retain the minority's voice
in the legislative process, but I refuse to condone how it has
been used by Republicans this Congress to infer Democrats, or
any Member of this body, are not sufficiently opposed to anti-
Semitism. I also support proposals to require a high bar for
passage of an MTR, such as requiring two-thirds the vote for
passage, similar to suspension bills.
When we are legislating on the fly, as is the case with
MTRs, it is important that we get the details right.
Thank you for providing me the opportunity to speak on how
MTR has been used in this Congress.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Mr. Lieu.

STATEMENT OF THE HON. TED LIEU, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS
FROM THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA

Mr. Lieu. Thank you, Chairman McGovern and Ranking Member
Cole for holding this Members Day and for all the members of
the committee for your time.
I am going to talk about two subjects. The first is my
proposal on inherent contempt, and the second is about the MTR.
Inherent contempt is a power that the House of
Representatives already has. The Supreme Court has repeatedly
upheld this power, Congress has repeatedly used it in the past.
My proposal simply puts in procedures in the House rules to let
us execute this power.
Specifically, inherent contempt gives us the ability to
enforce congressional subpoenas. And in my proposal, it does
that through the imposition of a fine for witnesses who do not
comply with congressional subpoenas. And this is not a partisan
issue. We have seen Congress, over time, cede way too much of
our power to the administrative and executive agencies, and to
the executive branch, both Democratic/Republican
administrations have thumbed their noses at congressional
oversight, although I have to say the Trump administration has
done it way more than other administrations.
And what this rule change does is it [inaudible] witnesses
in this process. So, for example, it creates a process for
dialogue between the witness and the committee. It puts in
procedures for the witness to lodge objections. It puts in
procedures for the administration to lodge privileged
objections. [Inaudible] the witness to negotiate, but at some
point, it allows the committee to then forward a resolution to
the House floor where the chairman of the committee will
present and then members can ask questions. And at some point,
it allows the House to vote on imposition of a fine. And if
that passes by a majority vote, then the witness will, in fact,
be fined in the first increment of up to $25,000.
But, again, before that can be imposed, it puts in another
20-day delay for negotiations to continue.
So there are numerous due process protections for
witnesses, for the administration, but at the end of the day,
if the administration or a private witness is going to simply
not comply with the congressional subpoena, then the full House
can impose a fine of up to $25,000 in first increment. And if
it continues, then we can impose a fine of up to $100,000 at
the end of the day.
So that is my proposal. And it is, again, also not partisan
in a sense that I fully believe Joe Biden's going to win in
November, and I think many of you do as well. This would apply
to the Biden administration. And so, I would seek favorable
consideration of this proposal. And then, I would like to talk
about the motion to recommit. First of all, it is just a stupid
way to govern.
What does this process do? It literally hides language from
the Members of Congress and then the language is dropped in and
gives us about 15 minutes to cast a vote. That is not really
governing. That is called a game. That is what makes the
American people hate us, that we play these games. And it was
wrong when we did it to you. It was wrong when the Democrats
were in the minority and we did this to the Republicans. It is
wrong that you do this to us. This is not to, actually,
substantively influence legislation; this is simply to play
games on the taxpayers' dime. That is what makes it so
offensive.
And I also reject the notion that somehow, this is ability
for the minority party to speak. It is not. The minority party
has numerous ways to influence legislation. You get to
participate in committees. You get to introduce amendments in
committees. And then when the bill leaves the committee, you
get to introduce amendments in the Rules Committee. If, in
fact, there is a problem with a bill that is about to be voted
on the floor, then what happens is, the whole purpose of when a
person of your committee--you are on the Rules Committee is
allow amendments to that bill. And then the minority party gets
to speak about the bill on the House floor. The minority party
can go to the press. There is so many ways to influence
legislation.
The MTR is not designed to do that, and in practice, it
doesn't even do that. None of the MTR proposals are real or
actual substantive changes; they are just designed to be
``gotcha'' moments for the Members of Congress. And, again,
this is a procedure where literally the language is hidden from
the vast majority of Members of Congress, and then we are asked
to vote on it.
We just have to get rid of motion to recommit, stop playing
these games on taxpayers' dime. It doesn't make any sense to
continue any form of motion to recommit. We should not be
playing these games. We should be trying to actually make
substantive legislation and not do an end round around the
Rules Committee.
With that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much for your testimony.
Look, I appreciate your work. Just on the inherent contempt
issue, I have been frustrated as well at the lack of
cooperation with subpoenas that have been issued by committees
here in the House.
But if we imposed a fine, I mean, I don't know what that
fine would be, but to compel some of the people who don't want
to comply with subpoenas in this administration it would have
to be very, very high, because all these people are
multimillionaires and billionaires, and you just wonder whether
they would just rather pay the fine.
And then, on the other hand, you have to consider if you
had a different Congress and they were trying to compel a
government worker to come and testify, but that government
worker may be told by his or her adviser not to come, and here
is somebody on a government worker's salary, whether or not
they would be bankrupted if it were abused.
And I am just trying to figure out, I think we need to do
something, because we can't--what has been going on, with lack
of compliance and lack of respect for Congress, is
unacceptable. I just want to make sure that we have thought
this out and that we are doing this in the way that it is most
compelling. And I don't know if you have any response to that.
Mr. Lieu. Thank you for those questions.
You are absolutely right that if someone is super wealthy
then this isn't going to work. That is also a function of our
capitalistic system. People who are super wealthy, for example,
get tax breaks that none of us on this committee get.
And so, yes, that is a problem. I am not sure we can fix
that. And people who are super wealthy do get certain
advantages.
However, the vast majority of people subjected to
congressional subpoenas are not like Wilbur Ross. They are not,
in fact, super wealthy. So I think this would have a deterrent
effect.
There is room in this proposal to allow the head of the
agency to be fined. We can do it so that we go after the head
of an agency if, in fact, they are the ones that are ordering a
subordinate to not come. So that is a modification that can
definitely be made.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Woodall.
Mr. Woodall. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will start where
you left off with Mr. Lieu.
I think it is absolutely critical that we are able to
compel the executive branch to comply with congressional
subpoenas. I think our challenge has been the partisanship here
in our Chamber.
It was obvious to you that the Trump administration was
practicing this obstruction more than any other. I came to town
in 2011, so my first vote along these lines was our criminal
contempt resolution against Attorney General Holder, which
passed the House, was referred to the Justice Department, and
then the Attorney General decided he was not going to pursue
the criminal contempt resolution against himself.
It passed in a largely partisan way. I think we had 17
Democrats vote with us. But the problem was not that we were
not able to issue the subpoena or pass the contempt resolution.
It is that the enforcement, which ought to be zeroing out
somebody's budget, making sure the head of the agency doesn't
get their pet project funded, all of these things that we ought
to be doing together we end up being divided on, and I fear
collecting those fines would be yet another one of those
things.
Given that you have spent some time thinking about this and
constructive ways to solve it, did you come across something
that would lead to us passing more of these subpoenas and
contempt resolutions in a partnership fashion than in the
fairly partisan fashion that we have seen?
Mr. Lieu. So thank you, Representative Woodall, for your
question.
You are absolutely right, and I noted in my opening
statement both Democratic and Republican administrations have
thumbed their noses at Congress. So to me this is not a
partisan issue. It is simply taking back--it is not even taking
back our power. We already have this power. The Supreme Court
has, in fact, upheld it, and Congress has used it in the past.
I am just putting in procedures to allow us to execute it
if we want to. We still don't have to execute this power next
term, but at least there is an option to do that. And right now
it just seems sort of silly for us to have no ability to
execute that option even though we have the power to do so.
And it is my hope that we could get more subpoenas issued
on a bipartisan basis. I think that would, in fact, be better
for the institution.
Mr. Woodall. You may recall Republicans grappled with this
when we were in control and went down the line of creating
procedures to zero out an individual government employee's
salary if we didn't like the way they were treating Congress,
and to Mr. McGovern's point, creates an incredibly punishing
tool to just your average government worker, who had no idea
they were getting ready to get dragged into a congressional
fight.
But I do hope that we can solve that because I believe that
we are both, irrespective of who leads the Congress,
irrespective of who leads the White House, we are all
disadvantaged as Americans when Congress becomes feckless in
its attempts to do oversight over the executive branch.
Let me go now to the motion to recommit. You know, they
taught me in freshman orientation 10 years ago that that was
just a procedural motion, it had no policy aspect to it
whatsoever, and so just vote no. And so I recognize that that
is not the sign of something that is valuable legislation. That
is the sign of something that you would think could go by the
wayside.
But in our very new era of having almost all closed rules
all the time, right, not a single open rule in Paul Ryan's
administration, not a single open rule now in Speaker Pelosi's
operation, there is no opportunity sometimes for the minority
to have input on the House floor.
If we had open rules the challenges would be very much the
same as the ones you pointed to, Mr. Lieu. Those amendments are
offered, dropped right there on the floor, can be written on
the back of a cocktail napkin, no opportunity for legislative
drafting and perfection. Folks don't have time to consult with
their staff. And under the 5-minute rule, 10 minutes later you
could be asked to vote on a very consequential amendment that
had not been seen before.
So last-minute legislative language used to be a hallmark
of this institution. Wasn't used to disrupt the institution. It
was just common as a function of the legislative process.
I remember once on our prescription drug bill last year the
majority saw, in its wisdom, the ability to offer the minority
an amendment in the nature of a substitute. And in exchange the
minority said, then we are not going to press for our motion to
recommit. We traded away what you and I would both agree was
not a particularly effective legislative tool, and in exchange
we got a very substantive conversation about how we wanted to
reform prescription drugs in the country. I support that.
I am particularly concerned about Mr. Schneider's concerns,
because I raised the very same issues in the Rules Committee
last night, Mr. Schneider. We were talking about a bill that
was--a resolution that was intended to speak out against
horrific treatment that has been alleged of noncitizens in the
country after they have been detained by Federal forces.
And the resolution, I believed, was designed to divide us
on something that we should have been speaking in one voice to
condemn, that there is no benefit in America of having it
appear that someone condones inhumane treatment by Federal
authorities against noncitizens.
So is it clear to you that there is a difference, the
occasional majority bills that are brought to the floor for a
vote that are designed apparently to divide us, as opposed to
unite us, versus the motion to recommit, which I would
absolutely concede is often designed as something that makes it
appear that we are divided when, in fact, we may not be so?
Mr. Schneider. No. Thank you. I appreciate the question.
The distinction I would draw here is, it is never good to
divide us. But that is part of the politics and part of the
process here. It is using a group as a pawn, as the wedge to
create that division, to try to create a false impression of
antagonism to a group or an individual that doesn't actually
exist, that I think becomes so dangerous.
And my concern specifically with respect to the use of
American Jews and the issue of anti-Semitism in our country,
which, as noted with the ADL numbers, is on the rise in the
country as it is around the world, we are empowering groups
that are trafficking in anti-Semitism, and we are diminishing
groups that are being used as the wedge.
Mr. Woodall. I think back on some of those motions to
recommit that I am sure you are referring to. I would often say
we were talking about protecting this group or that, groups
that rightfully need protection, and the motion to recommit
said, yes, those things are important. But someone needs to
speak out against anti-Semitism, and they are not. Someone
needs to speak out against anti-Israel sentiment, and they are
not. Someone needs to do these things, and so we are going to
do this. We can't move legislation to the floor on our own, and
so we are going to put it in, in this context.
In our last panel we heard members on both sides of the
aisle talk about the need to protect the motion to recommit. I
do hope that we can find a way to make it more valuable as a
legislative tool.
But I could not agree with you more that the politics of
division that we play have dangerous consequences in many ways.
Again, I believe not being able to speak with one voice on
behalf of noncitizens in U.S. custody is dangerous because it
suggests that something is acceptable when it, in fact, is not,
and that is certainly true as it relates to anti-Semitism.
And so I would be happy to work with you in a Republican
majority, as we are sure to see in January. I want you to know,
I will be just as willing to partner with you as I am in a
Democratic majority today.
Mr. Schneider. I appreciate that. In all our interactions
we have always had good comity, and I think it is that comity
that allows us to put forth policies that advance the interests
of the Nation.
There will be arguments, and there will be divisions of
opinion, but we should never use individuals or groups of
individuals as a pawn in advancing that cause.
Mr. Woodall. I will just share with you, I don't believe
our conversations in the Modernization Committee are privileged
any longer. We tried not to out one another while those
conversations were going on. But we grappled with the motion to
recommit because folks did have such strong feelings about it.
And while it was not--while reforming it was in our final
recommendations, I thought one of the more fruitful places was,
how can we encourage the minority to surrender that motion in
favor of getting a more substantive legislative alternative
path?
Let's not use--let's not eliminate the motion to recommit
to silence the minority. Let's change the motion to recommit to
empower legislative discussion and just give the minority one
opportunity to take it where they would like to take it. And so
your counsel is well taken.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mrs. Torres.
Mrs. Torres. No questions or comments. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Perlmutter.
Mr. Perlmutter. I have a couple comments, and I would like
to start where Rob and Brad just left off.
I had not opposed MTRs before as a general principle, but
the MTR from a week ago on anti-Semitism really bothered me in
a whole range of ways. And, obviously, as a member of the Rules
Committee, we say, oh, it is procedural, you know, and I sort
of went down that path and I voted against it. And then it
passed.
And then we vote on the bill, as amended by the MTR, and
every single Republican voted against the bill, with that
amendment.
And we had Mr. Cline on just a few minutes ago, and he
talked about the Virginia rule, where if you amend something,
then you vote for the bill. Well, that doesn't seem to be
commonplace around this place.
After that vote I was making some calls, and a guy answers,
he says, ``Why did you vote--why are you anti-Semitic?'' He
didn't say it quite like that. ``Why did you vote against the
anti-Semitism amendment, Ed? I don't understand.''
I said, ``It was procedural.'' I said, ``But then I voted
for the bill, so it was part of the bill.'' And I said, ``All
those guys who presented the amendment, it was just a phony-
baloney stunt because they all voted against the bill.''
And it did create precisely what Brad is concerned about,
that I could say all the Republicans were anti-Semitic and he
could say he was worried that any Democrat who voted against
the amendment was anti-Semitic. And it just really went right
to--right here for me. I mean, that is a core value thing for
me.
And so I have to admit, I am attracted to Mr. Lieu's
proposition here on MTRs, that what is the value of them. You
know, is this really something important that it is the last
word for the minority? Is that really something? Or is it a
gotcha thing? And we certainly did it. You know, we would do
MTRs.
So I have some reservation about these things that I didn't
have until about last week. And so I just--I want to raise
that.
And I guess my other comment to Mr. Lieu on the inherent
contempt is the enforcement component that Mr. Woodall raised,
that what are we going to do, add to the Capitol Police, are we
going to get fines, are we going to sell somebody's house on
the courthouse steps? I mean, I just don't understand how we
have the--I don't understand what you would put into place to
actually enforce something in some substantial way.
So I guess I am just presenting that to you, Mr. Lieu,
because I do have some skepticism about this.
Mr. Lieu. Could I answer that?
Mr. Perlmutter. Sure.
Mr. Lieu. All right. So right now, in fact, our
congressional subpoenas can be enforced, as Mr. Woodall pointed
out when they went after Attorney General Holder. Towards the
end, that was enforced. It just took many years, Because the
way we enforce it, we have to litigate it through the courts--
meaning the district court, the appellate court, and the U.S.
Supreme Court. So it literally takes years to enforce a
congressional subpoena.
Now, the difference with this proposal is, let's say you
assess a hundred thousand dollar fine ultimately on a witness,
and, yes, it will be litigated through the courts. But at the
end of the day, if the witness is wrong on the issue and the
courts find that, yes, we have the ability to enforce this
subpoena as lawfully ordered, that witness will be on the hook
for a hundred thousand dollars.
So it flips the burden, where the witness now knows if they
ignore the congressional subpoena they could, in fact, be on
the hook for a lot of money at the end of the day.
Take the Don McGahn case, for example. We have been
litigating that issue through the district court, through the
appellate court, it hasn't gone up to the Supreme Court yet. At
some point there will be a decision. And let's say we in
Congress win. Well, what happens? Don McGahn then comes in and
he testifies.
But if there was also a threat that he might think, ``Oh, I
might also be on the hook for a hundred thousand dollars,'' I
don't know if he actually would ignore the congressional
subpoena.
So that is the difference. It puts this burden on the
administration that if they lose, they could be on the hook.
Mr. Perlmutter. So I guess I would just follow up, and then
I would yield back.
So let's say we get a hundred thousand dollars. So that in
your scenario the court said, yes, it is a hundred thousand
dollar fine, and then we have got to go collect through the
courts. That is what I was saying, auction it on the courthouse
steps? I mean, do you think we are going to do that?
Mr. Lieu. Right. It would be the same way that the courts
right now impose fines on people who ignore court orders. And,
yes, there would be at some point a collection would occur.
Mr. Perlmutter. Okay. Thanks. I appreciate that. I just
have a little--I am not sure that we have the staying power to
do that. But I hear you.
And I yield back to the chair.
The Chairman. Ms. Scanlon.
Ms. Scanlon. [Inaudible.] Thank you.
The Chairman. Mr. Morelle.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just want to add my
thanks to Mr. Schneider and Mr. Lieu for their thoughtful
comments and for the opportunity to have them in front of us. I
will yield back.
The Chairman. Ms. Shalala.
Ms. Shalala. No questions, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
And I think Mr. Raskin may have some--see if Mr. Raskin----
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Yes? Mr. Raskin.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just--I wanted to
say a word about Mr. Lieu's proposal, which I think is----
The Chairman. And put your video on, please.
Mr. Raskin. Sorry. Okay. Can you hear me now, Mr. Chairman?
The Chairman. I can hear you, but we can't see you. We need
your video.
Mr. Raskin. Oh, okay. I thought it was on. Okay.
The Chairman. There you go.
Mr. Raskin. Here we go. I just wanted to say a word on
behalf of Mr. Lieu's proposal.
At a certain point earlier in this Congress I looked at the
Supreme Court precedent governing contempt of Congress, going
back to Anderson v. Dunn. And this really goes back to the
beginning of the Congress, and the Supreme Court has been very
clear from the beginning that Congress has the same
institutional authority to impose sanctions for disobedience of
its orders that a court has.
And as a body equal in stature and powers to the Supreme
Court, we have the authority to enforce our orders. And if we
don't have that, then the lawmaking function is fatally
compromised because it is inherent in lawmaking that we have
the power to obtain the information that we need.
And James Madison was very clear about this when he said
that those who mean to be their own governors must arm
themselves with the power that knowledge gives. And so what
does it mean for us to have the power to legislate over all of
these subjects, over war and foreign policy and commerce and
bankruptcy and piracy and banking and you name it, if we can't
get the information that we need?
So the lawmaking power implies the power to go out and
collect information, the power of subpoena, the power to have
people come and testify before us. And if we get an executive
branch, if we get a President of whatever political party or
persuasion who decides to thumb his nose at Congress or give
the finger to Congress, that is a crisis in our form of
government.
And so we need to have the full panoply of powers to
enforce our own orders. And, obviously, that is something that
goes way beyond any particular party or any particular
President.
But we are the preeminent branch of government, the reason
we are in Article I, and we come first, like the First
Amendment and all of its rights comes first. And the reason why
the Congress has the power to impeach the President and the
President doesn't have the power to impeach us is because we
are the lawmaking power and the representatives of the people.
So with all that, I just want to say, I am in very strong
support of what Mr. Lieu is doing, and I think that we have got
to move a process forward that allows us to make the inherent
contempt power not just latent within our arsenal but something
that is explicit and right there so people understand it.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
Does any other member of the committee wish to ask a
question?
Seeing none, I want to thank our witnesses for their
testimony. You are now excused.
Are there any other members who wish to testify on proposed
rules changes for the 117th Congress?
Last chance.
Seeing none, this closes our Members' Day hearing. So
without objection, the committee stands adjourned. Thank you,
everybody.
[Whereupon, at 4:30 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
