- A MAJOR TEST: EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON THE FUTURE OF HIGHER EDUCATION

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A MAJOR TEST: EXAMINING THE IMPACT
OF COVID 19 ON THE FUTURE OF
HIGHER EDUCATION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE INVESTMENT

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, JULY 7, 2020

__________

Serial No. 116-60

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the: https://edlabor.house.gov or www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
41-115 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR

ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman

Susan A. Davis, California           Virginia Foxx, North Carolina,
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona              Ranking Member
Joe Courtney, Connecticut            David P. Roe, Tennessee
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio                Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Tim Walberg, Michigan
Northern Mariana Islands           Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Frederica S. Wilson, Florida         Bradley Byrne, Alabama
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon             Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark Takano, California              Elise M. Stefanik, New York
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina        Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania
Donald Norcross, New Jersey          Jim Banks, Indiana
Pramila Jayapal, Washington          Mark Walker, North Carolina
Joseph D. Morelle, New York          James Comer, Kentucky
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania             Ben Cline, Virginia
Josh Harder, California              Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Lucy McBath, Georgia                 Steve Watkins, Kansas
Kim Schrier, Washington              Ron Wright, Texas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois           Daniel Meuser, Pennsylvania
Jahana Hayes, Connecticut            Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
Donna E. Shalala, Florida            Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Andy Levin, Michigan*                Gregory F. Murphy, North Carolina
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota                Jefferson Van Drew, New Jersey
David J. Trone, Maryland
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Susie Lee, Nevada
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Joaquin Castro, Texas
* Vice-Chair

Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION AND WORKFORCE INVESTMENT

SUSAN A. DAVIS, California, Chairwoman

Joe Courtney, Connecticut            Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania,
Mark Takano, California                Ranking Member
Pramila Jayapal, Washington          Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Josh Harder, California              Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Andy Levin, Michigan                 Elise Stefanik, New York
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota                Jim Banks, Indiana
David Trone, Maryland                Mark Walker, North Carolina
Susie Lee, Nevada                    James Comer, Kentucky
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts           Ben Cline, Virginia
Joaquin Castro, Texas                Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona            Steve C. Watkins, Jr., Kansas
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Dan Meuser, Pennsylvania
Northern Mariana Islands           Gregory F. Murphy, North Carolina
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina
Donald Norcross, New Jersey

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Hearing held on July 7, 2020.....................................     1

Statement of Members:
Davis, Hon. Susan A., Chairwoman, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and Workforce Investment.........................     1
Prepared statement of....................................     5
Smucker, Hon. Lloyd, Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Higher
Education and Workforce Investment.........................     6
Prepared statement of....................................     8

Statement of Witnesses:
Harper, Mr. Shaun, Ph.D. President, American Educational
Research Association, Los Angeles,CA.......................    52
Prepared statement of....................................    55
Pierce, Ms. Sharon J., ED.D, M.S.N., President, Minneapolis
College, Minneapolis, MN...................................    10
Prepared statement of....................................    12
Pulsipher, Mr. Scott, President, Western Governors
University, Salt Lake City, UT.............................    31
Prepared statement of....................................    34
White, Mr. Timothy P., Ph.D., Chancellor, The California
State University, Long Beach, CA...........................    18
Prepared statement of....................................    21

Additional Submissions:
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina:
The Myth of State Disinvestment in Higher Education......    66
Omar, Hon. Ilhan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Washington:
Prepared statement.......................................   106
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', a Representative in Congress
from the State of Virginia:
Prepared statement from American Council on Education
(ACE)..................................................   107
Prepared statement from National Education Association
(NEA)..................................................   114
Prepared statement.......................................   116
Questions submitted for the record by:
Sablan, Hon. Gregorio Kilili Camacho, a Representative in
Congress from the Northern Mariana Islands.............   121
Mr. Scott................................................   118
Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California

Trone, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Maryland

Walker, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of North Carolina

Responses submitted for the record by:
Mr. Harper...............................................   127
Ms. Pierce...............................................   130
Mr. Pulsipher............................................   134
Mr. White................................................   137

A MAJOR TEST: EXAMINING THE IMPACT
OF COVID-19 ON THE FUTURE OF
HIGHER EDUCATION

----------

Tuesday, July 7, 2020

House of Representatives,

Subcommittee on Higher Education,

and Workforce Investment,

Committee on Education and Labor,

Washington, DC

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 12:00 p.m., via
Webex, Hon. Susan Davis (Chairwoman of the subcommittee)
presiding.
Present: Representatives Davis, Courtney, Takano, Harder,
Levin, Trone, Lee, Trahan, Castro, Grijalva, Sablan, Bonamici,
Adams, Norcross, Scott (ex officio), Smucker, Guthrie,
Grothman, Stefanik, Banks, Cline, Watkins, Meuser, Murphy, and
Foxx (ex officio).
Staff Present: Tylease Alli, Chief Clerk; Katie Berger,
Professional Staff; Ilana Brunner, General Counsel; Christian
Haines, General Counsel; Sheila Havenner, Director of
Information Technology; Ariel Jona, Staff Assistant; Stephanie
Lalle, Deputy Communications Director; Andre Lindsay, Staff
Assistant; Jaria Martin, Clerk/Special Assistant to the Staff
Director; Katelyn Mooney, Associate General Counsel; Max Moore,
Staff Assistant; Mariah Mowbray, Staff Assistant; Jacque
Mosely, Director of Education Policy; Veronique Pluviose, Staff
Director; Katherine Valle, Senior Education Policy Advisor;
Banyon Vassar, Deputy Director of Information Technology;
Claire Viall, Professional Staff; Cyrus Artz, Minority Staff
Director; Amy Raaf Jones, Minority Director of Education and
Human Resource Policy; Hannah Matesic, Minority Director of
Operations; Carlton Norwood, Minority Press Secretary; Alex
Ricci, Minority Professional Staff Member; Mandy Schaumburg,
Minority Chief Counsel and Deputy Director of Education Policy;
and George Littlefair, Minority Staff Assistant.
Chairwoman Davis. The Subcommittee on Higher Education and
Workforce Investment will come to order.
Welcome, everybody. I note that a quorum is present.
The committee is meeting today for a hearing on a major
task for higher education, how Congress can help students and
institutions cope with COVID-19.
As this is a completely virtual hearing, I would ask that
all microphones for Members and witnesses participating
remotely be kept muted as a general rule to avoid unnecessary
background noise. Members and witnesses will be responsible for
unmuting themselves when they are recognized to speak or when
they wish to seek recognition. And, further, per House
Resolution 965 and its accompanying regulations, members are
required to leave their camera on the entire time they are in
an official proceeding, even if they step away from the camera.
While a roll call is not necessary to establish a quorum in
official proceedings conducted remotely, whenever there is an
official proceeding with remote participation, the Clerk will
call the roll to help make clear who is present at the start of
the proceeding.
At this time, I ask the clerk to call the roll.
The Clerk. Chairwoman Davis?
Chairwoman Davis. Present.
The Clerk. Mr. Courtney?
Mr. Courtney. Present.
The Clerk. Mr. Takano?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Ms. Jayapal?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Harder?
Mr. Harder. Present.
The Clerk. Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. Present.
The Clerk. Ms. Omar?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Trone?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Lee?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Trahan?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Castro?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Grijalva?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Sablan?
Mr. Sablan. Present.
The Clerk. Ms. Bonamici?
Ms. Bonamici. Present.
The Clerk. Ms. Adams?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Norcross?
Mr. Norcross. Present.
The Clerk. Chairman Scott?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Smucker?
Mr. Smucker. Here.
The Clerk. Mr. Guthrie?
Mr. Guthrie. Here.
The Clerk. Mr. Grothman?
Mr. Grothman. Here.
The Clerk. Ms. Stefanik?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Banks?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Walker?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Comer?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. Here.
The Clerk. Mr. Fulcher?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Watkins?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Meuser?
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Murphy?
Mr. Murphy. Here.
The Clerk. Mrs. Foxx?
Ms. Foxx. Here.
Chairwoman Davis, this concludes the roll call.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you very much.
Pursuant to our Committee Rule 7(c), opening statements are
limited to the Chair and the Ranking Member. This allows us to
hear from our witnesses sooner and provides all Members with
adequate time to ask questions.
I recognize myself now for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
Today, as we know, we are examining how the COVID-19
pandemic is straining our higher education system and
discussing what Congress must do to support students and
institutions through this difficult time. Across the country,
the rush to suspend on-campus activities and switch to online
learning has exacerbated preexisting systemic inequities in
higher education.
For example, the on-campus resources that many students
from low SES backgrounds normally rely on, like computer labs
and reliable internet, are now unavailable to those students.
The suspension of on-campus activities is also threatening many
students' access to basic essentials like food and housing. And
for these students, going to school had been their primary way
of meeting these needs.
A survey from earlier this year found students of color are
disproportionately suffering high rates of food and housing
insecurity due to the closure of campuses. Research also
indicates how most students do not perform as well in online
classes. Now, imagine how students who have already started off
with fewer resources are more likely to struggle and face
greater obstacles--
Mr. Scott. My name is Robert Scott.
Chairwoman Davis.--under these new educational conditions.
To address these disparities, Congress secured $14 billion
in emergency relief funding for higher education in the
bipartisan CARES Act, and half of this funding was allocated
specifically for direct student emergency aid. Additionally,
Congress provided immediate relief to student loan borrowers by
suspending student loan payments and freezing interest on all
direct and federally held student loans.
Unfortunately, instead of quickly disbursing these urgent
relief funds to students, however, according to the law that we
had passed in March, Secretary DeVos created arbitrary
eligibility requirements for students trying to access this
support. These restrictions not only prevent relief funding
from quickly reaching students, but they exclude several
underserved groups of students who cannot apply for Title IV
aid, such as undocumented students and veterans.
In response, the State of Washington and the California
Community College System, which includes the San Diego
Community College District, sued Secretary DeVos. Thankfully,
these lawsuits have temporarily stopped the Department from
denying California community college students and students
across Washington access to the emergency student aid that
Congress secured.
But setting aside the delays and the unnecessary
restrictions created by the Department, we must also address
how the CARES Act simply did not go far enough to prepare our
institutions for this looming economic recession. Due to the
pandemic, institutions are facing unprecedented State and local
budget shortfalls that will trigger drastic funding cuts for
higher education, and they are facing massive revenue losses
due to decreased enrollment and suspended activities.
On top of all of this, institutions are still dealing with
the residual effects of State funding cuts that were made
during the Great Recession. For many educational institutions
in America, these cuts and revenue losses mean severe
reductions in services and programs that many vulnerable
students need to complete their degree and find fulfilling
careers.
We know that the worst of these consequences are going to
fall on Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Tribal
Colleges and Universities, minority-serving institutions, and
community colleges, which have the fewest resources despite
serving most of our country's low-income students and students
of color.
Impending budget shortfalls are also putting many
institutions under pressure to permanently reopen their
campuses, even at the risk of exposing students, educators, and
communities to COVID-19.
The evidence is overwhelmingly clear. Congress must do more
to support our students and our institutions.
The HEROES Act would take a critical step in the right
direction. It provides nearly $1 trillion to help State and
local governments avert massive budget shortfalls and cuts to
education. It also provides over $35 billion in direct relief
funds for public institutions and other institutions that have
suffered financially, including almost $2 billion for HBCUs,
TCUs, and MSIs.
Beyond extra funds, however, Congress must also protect
students from predatory for-profit schools. These institutions
have a record of using taxpayer dollars to target vulnerable
students during economic downturns, often leaving them with
worthless degrees and debt that they cannot repay.
Simply put, the COVID-19 pandemic is testing not only our
students and our institutions, but Congress' commitment to
ensuring all students have access to safe, affordable, and
quality education. Today, with the help of our witnesses--and
we appreciate your being here--we will discuss whether we can
live up to that commitment.
I now yield to the ranking member, Mr. Smucker, for an
opening statement.
[The statement of Chairwoman Davis follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Susan A. Davis, Chairwoman, Subcommittee on
Higher Education and Workforce Investment

Today, we are examining how the COVID-19 pandemic is straining our
higher education system and discussing what Congress must do to support
students and institutions through this difficult time.
Across the country, the rush to suspend on-campus activities and
switch to online learning has exacerbated pre-existing systemic
inequities in higher education. For example, the on-campus resources
that many students from low-SES backgrounds normally rely on - like
computer labs and reliable internet - are now unavailable. The
suspension of on-campus activities is also threatening many students'
access to basic essentials like food and housing. For these students,
going to school had been their primary way of meeting these needs.
A survey from earlier this year found students of color are
disproportionally suffering high rates of food and housing insecurity
due to the temporary physical closure of campuses. Research also
indicates how most students do not perform as well in online classes.
Now imagine how students who already started off with fewer resources
are more likely to struggle and face greater obstacles under these new
educational conditions.
To address these disparities, Congress secured $14 billion in
emergency relief funding for higher education in the bipartisan CARES
Act. Half of this funding was allocated specifically for direct student
emergency aid.
Additionally, Congress provided immediate relief to student loan
borrowers by suspending student loan payments and freezing interest on
all direct and federally held student loans.
Unfortunately, instead of quickly disbursing these urgent relief
funds to students, according to the law we passed back in March,
Secretary DeVos created arbitrary eligibility requirements for students
trying to access this support.
These restrictions not only prevent relief funding from quickly
reaching students, they exclude several under-served groups of students
who cannot apply for Title IV aid, such as undocumented students.
In response, the state of Washington and the California Community
College system, which includes the San Diego Community College
District, sued Secretary DeVos.
Thankfully, these lawsuits have temporarily stopped the Department
from denying California community college students and students across
Washington access to the emergency student aid that Congress secured.
But, setting aside the delays and unnecessary restrictions created
by the Department, we also must address how the CARES Act simply did
not go far enough to prepare our institutions for this looming economic
recession.
Due to the pandemic, institutions are facing unprecedented state
and local budget shortfalls that will trigger drastic funding cuts for
higher education. They are facing massive revenue losses due to
decreased enrollment and suspended activities. On top of all of this,
institutions are still dealing with the residual effects of state
funding cuts during the Great Recession.
For many educational institutions in America, these cuts and
revenue losses mean severe reductions in services and programs that
many vulnerable students need to complete their degrees and find
fulfilling careers.
We know the worst of these consequences will fall on Historically
Black Colleges and Universities, Tribal Colleges and Universities,
Minority Serving Institutions, and community colleges, which have the
fewest resources despite serving most of our country's low-income
students and students of color.
The impending budget shortfalls are also putting many institutions
under pressure to prematurely reopen their campuses, even at the risk
of exposing students, educators, and communities to COVID-19.
The evidence is overwhelmingly clear. Congress must do more to
support our students and institutions.
The Heroes Act would take a critical step in the right direction.
It provides nearly $1 trillion to help state and local governments
avert massive budget shortfalls and cuts to education. It also provides
over $35 billion in direct relief funds for public institutions and
other institutions that have suffered financially, including almost $2
billion for H-B-C-Us, T-C-Us, and M-S-Is.
Beyond extra funds, Congress must also protect students from
predatory for-profit schools. These institutions have a record of using
taxpayer dollars to target vulnerable students during economic
downturns, often leaving them with worthless degrees and debt that they
cannot repay.
Simply put, the COVID-19 pandemic is testing not only our students
and institutions, but Congress's commitment to ensuring all students
have access to safe, affordable, and quality education.
Today, with the help of our witnesses, we will discuss whether we
can live up to that commitment. I now yield to the Ranking Member, Mr.
Smucker, for an opening statement.
______

Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Chairman Davis. It is great to see
you.
Before I discuss the topic of today's hearing, I just like
to mention the importance of doing our work in person. I and
several of the Members--
Chairwoman Davis. Mr. Smucker, your--
[Audio difficulties]
Mr. Smucker. Sorry about that, Chairwoman. Does that sound
better now? Are we good to go?
Chairwoman Davis. Yes.
Mr. Smucker. So, again, before I discuss the topic of
today's hearing, I just did want to talk about the importance
of doing our work in person. I and several other members are
here in the hearing room. Leader McCarthy had recently written
in a letter to Speaker Pelosi that our Congress, which is
literally a coming together of people and ideas, it works best
when it happens in person, face-to-face. And while I know that
we have all learned how to Zoom and Webex and all of this, I
really do think that we could be operating here in person. And
so I will make the same request that Ranking Member Foxx made
at the start of our last hearing, which is let's return to
congressional precedent and hold our hearings here in person.
Turning to the topic of today's hearing, COVID-19 certainly
has disrupted nearly every aspect of American society,
including our higher education. And it was back in early March,
the University of Washington became the first school to cancel
in-person classes. Today, over 1,000 colleges and universities
have switched to online-only instruction.
From abrupt school closures to remote online learning,
students and educators have faced overwhelming challenges
during this pandemic, and that is why Congress and the
Department of Education took several steps to ease the burden
for States, for institutions, and for students. The bipartisan
CARES Act, which was passed in March, included provisions to
help students, schools, and State governments cope with the
changes wrought by the pandemic.
In addition to regulatory relief measures for students and
institutions, the CARES Act provided borrowers with temporary
respite from their repayment obligations. Specifically, the
legislation requires the Secretary to suspend all interest
accumulation and monthly payments on federally held student
loans through September 30 of this year. Most critically, the
CARES Act created and funded the Higher Ed Emergency Relief
Fund, which provided billions in direct aid to students in
postsecondary education institutions, including the HBCUs and
MSIs.
But, of course, that is not to say our work is done. On the
contrary, the pandemic has exposed serious underlying
deficiencies in our education system. Government overreach and
unnecessary intervention has contributed to a bloated
postsecondary education sector at the expense of students.
Tuition and fees have far outpaced inflation for decades.
Federal requirements stifle interaction between businesses and
college campuses.
And, unfortunately, rather than innovating, the Democrats'
partisan HEROES Act really doubles down on what had been failed
policies. This legislation forgives $10,000 of federal and
private student loan debt for some borrowers, which really does
nothing to combat COVID-19 or lower college costs. I really do
recognize that we want to help people struggling to make ends
meet, but we have data from the Urban Institute to prove that,
across the board, loan forgiveness disproportionately helps
high earning, highly educated individuals. Many Americans
facing the greatest financial strain as a result of the
pandemic do not have student loans at all.
The bill also launches a socialist takeover of the private
student loan market by forcing private student loan companies
to offer income-driven repayment terms and conditions that are
dictated by the Federal Government.
In contrast, committee Republicans continue to support
reforms that strengthen innovation and completion, modernize
Federal student aid, and promote student opportunities. By
giving students the tools needed to complete an affordable
postsecondary education, we can prepare them to enter the
workforce with the skills they need for lifelong success
regardless of their background.
However, these reforms won't matter if we don't reopen our
Nation's schools and businesses safely and responsibly. We have
a duty to lead this country back to the pre-pandemic economic
prosperity that benefited millions of hardworking Americans.
Congress can help further unleash our Nation's economic
potential by increasing pathways for Americans to succeed in
the 21st century workforce. Specifically, this means permitting
colleges and universities to leverage employer expertise,
encouraging short-term and stackable credentials, and creating
a regulatory framework for new methods of learning, like
competency-based education.
These types of forward-looking reforms have been championed
by the Trump administration. Just a few weeks ago, President
Trump issued an executive order to prioritize skills-based
hiring within the Federal Government to help strengthen and
diversify our workforce. This action will take our Nation's
workers and students in a positive direction as we recover from
COVID-19, and Congress should follow the administration's lead
on this issue.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about
how we can improve our education system to better meet the
needs of students, families, and workers.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
[The statement of Mr. Smucker follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Lloyd Smucker, Ranking Member, Subcommittee
on Higher Education and Workforce Investment

Before I discuss the topic of today' hearing, I want to talk about
the importance of doing our work in person. Leader McCarthy recently
wrote in a letter to Speaker Pelosi that 'our Congress--a literal
coming together of people and ideas--works best when it happens in-
person, face-to-face.' I couldn't agree more, so I'll make the same
request Ranking Member Foxx made at the start of our last hearing -
let's return to congressional precedent and hold our hearings in
person.
Turning to the topic of today's hearing - COVID-19 has disrupted
nearly every aspect of American society, including higher education.
Back in early March, the University of Washington became the first
school to cancel in-person classes. Today, over one thousand colleges
and universities have shifted to online-only instruction.
From abrupt school closures to remote online learning, students and
educators have faced overwhelming challenges during this pandemic.
That's why Congress and the Department of Education took several
steps to ease the burden for states, institutions, and students. The
bipartisan CARES Act, passed in March, included provisions to help
students, schools, and state governments cope with the changes wrought
by the pandemic. In addition to regulatory relief measures for students
and institutions, the CARES Act provided borrowers with temporary
respite from their repayment obligations. Specifically, the legislation
requires the Secretary to suspend all interest accumulation and monthly
payments on federally held student loans through September 30, 2020.
Most critically, the CARES Act created and funded the Higher Education
Emergency Relief Fund, which provided billions in direct aid to
students and postsecondary education institutions, including HBCUs and
MSIs.
This is not to say our work is done. On the contrary. The pandemic
has exposed serious underlying deficiencies in our education system.
Government overreach and unnecessary intervention has contributed
to a bloated postsecondary education sector at the expense of students.
Tuition and fees have outpaced inflation for decades. Federal
requirements stifle interaction between businesses and college
campuses.
Instead of innovating, the Democrats' partisan HEROES Act doubles
down on failed policies. The legislation forgives $10,000 of federal
and private student loan debt for some borrowers, which does nothing to
combat COVID-19 or lower college costs. The bill also launches a
socialist takeover of the private student loan market by forcing
private student loan companies to offer income-driven repayment terms
and conditions dictated by the federal government.
In contrast, Committee Republicans continue to support reforms that
strengthen innovation and completion, modernize federal student aid,
and promote student opportunities. By giving students the tools needed
to complete an affordable postsecondary education we can prepare them
to enter the workforce with the skills they need for lifelong success,
regardless of their background.
However, these reforms won't matter if we don't reopen our nation's
schools and businesses safely and responsibly.
We have a duty to lead this country back to the pre-pandemic
economic prosperity that benefited millions of hardworking Americans.
Congress can help further unleash our nation's economic potential by
increasing pathways for Americans to succeed in the 21st century
workforce. Specifically, this means permitting colleges and
universities to leverage employer expertise, encouraging short-term and
stackable credentials, and creating a regulatory framework for new
methods of learning like competency-based education.
These types of forward-looking reforms have been championed by the
Trump administration. Just a couple of weeks ago, President Trump
issued an Executive Order to prioritize skills-based hiring within the
federal government to help strengthen and diversify our workforce. This
action will take our nation's workers and students in a positive
direction as we recover from COVID-19, and Congress should follow the
administration's lead on this issue.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about how we can
improve our education system to better meet the needs of the students,
families, and workers.
______

Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Ranking Member
Smucker.
All other Members who wish to insert written statements
into the record may do so by submitting them to the Committee
Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format by 5 on Monday,
July 21.
It is now my pleasure to introduce our witnesses. First is
Dr. Sharon Pierce, Ph.D., president of Minneapolis Community
and Technical College. Since 2016, Dr. Sharon Pierce has been
meeting the effort at Minneapolis College to provide
transformative student experiences. Dr. Pierce has dedicated
her career to advancing the role of community and technical
colleges, in reducing disparities, and providing
underrepresented students with an opportunity to achieve
academic success.
Prior to her higher education career, Dr. Pierce worked as
a clinical nurse for 12 years and was appointed by Maryland's
governor to serve on the State's Board of Nursing. She earned
her bachelor's and master's degree from the University of
Maryland and her doctorate degree in urban education from
Morgan State University.
Our next witness is Dr. Timothy White, Ph.D., chancellor of
California State University. Since 2013, Dr. White has been
leading the California State University, the CSU system, a
system comprised of 23 campuses and 481,000 students and 53,000
faculty and staff. Dr. White is a champion of exclusive
excellence and student success and a proponent of bringing
individualized education to scale to the expansion of proven
best practices.
Prior to becoming the CSU chancellor, Dr. White served as
chancellor and professor of Biology and Biomedical Sciences at
the University of California, Riverside for 5 years, and was
president of the University of Idaho for 4 years. Dr. White
pursued his higher education through Diablo Valley Community
College, Fresno State, CSU East Bay, and the University of
California, Berkeley.
Next is Scott Pulsipher--I hope I have that right, sir--
president of Western Governors University. Since 2016, Scott
Pulsipher has served as president of Western Governors
University, the Nation's first and largest competency-based
university. Under his leadership at WGU, WGU has expanded
access to online competency-based degree programs that serve
students across the country.
Prior to joining WGU, Pulsipher gained extensive leadership
and experience in technology-based, customer-focused
businesses, including Amazon, Sterling Commerce, which is now
part of IBM, and two successful startups. Pulsipher holds a
bachelor's degree from Brigham Young University and a master's
degree from Harvard University.
And last is Dr. Shaun Harper, recognizing him as a Ph.D. as
well, president of the American Educational Research
Association and a provost professor in the Rossier School of
Education and Marshall School of Business at the University of
Southern California, USC. Dr. Harper is also the Clifford and
Betty Allen Chair in Urban Leadership, founder and executive
director of the USC Race and Equity Center, and a past
president of the Association for the Study of Higher Education.
For two decades, Harper has studied racial and gender
equity in K-12 schools, colleges and university, and corporate
contexts. He has been recognized in Education Week as one of
the ten most influential education professors in the United
States. Dr. Harper earned his bachelor's degree from Albany
State University and a master's and doctor's degree from
Indiana University.
We greatly appreciate the witnesses for participating today
and look forward to your testimony. I wanted to just remind you
that we have read your written statements and that they will
appear in full in the hearing record. Pursuant to Committee
Rule 7(d) and committee practice, each of you is asked to limit
your oral presentation to a 5-minute summary of your written
statement. I also wanted to remind the witnesses that pursuant
to Title 18 of the U.S. Code, Section 1001, it is illegal to
knowingly and willfully falsify any statement, representation,
writing, document, or material fact presented to Congress or
otherwise conceal or cover up a material fact.
During your testimony, staff will be keeping track of the
time and will use a chime to signal when 1 minute is left and
when time is up entirely. They will sound a short chime when
there is 1 minute left and a longer chime when time is up.
Please be attentive to the time and wrap up when your time is
over and remute your system.
If any of you experience any technical difficulties during
your testimony or later in the hearing, you should stay
connected on the platform, make sure you are muted with the
mute button highlighted in red, and use your phone to
immediately call the committee's IT director, Sheila Havenner,
whose number has been provided.
We will let all the witnesses make their presentations
before we move to member questions, and when answering a
question, please remember to unmute your system.
It is now my pleasure to first recognize Dr. Pierce for 5
minutes.
Dr. Pierce.

STATEMENT OF SHARON J. PIERCE, Ed.D., MSN, PRESIDENT,
MINNEAPOLIS COLLEGE, MINNEAPOLIS, MN

Ms. Pierce. Thank you.
Chairwoman Davis, Ranking Member Smucker, distinguished
subcommittee Members, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I am Sharon Pierce, president of Minneapolis College. My
testimony will describe the impact of the global pandemic on
community and technical colleges and our students, and the need
for Congress to provide additional aid.
Our college, located in an urban setting, is the only
comprehensive community and technical college in Minneapolis.
We serve students who are unlikely to succeed elsewhere,
provide an opportunity to complete a credential, and elevate
their socioeconomic status and abilities to contribute to the
economy.
Our students face multiple barriers to academic success.
COVID-19 put many students out of work, leaving them unable to
support families or access transportation or social services,
and elevated mental health concerns. Now they must learn to
navigate courses through an online platform, often using a
smartphone, without reliable internet access, creating
difficulties connecting to instructors, classmates, tutors, the
library, and support services.
Our college received $2.3 million in CARES funding for
direct student aid. The guidance for this funding was difficult
to unravel, and distribution plans needed frequent revising,
resulting in more than 2 week delays in disbursement. Ongoing
eligibility rulemaking by the Department of Education created
uncertainty and limited our ability to direct aid to the most
at-risk students.
In response to COVID-19, we transitioned over 900 classes
to alternative remote delivery. Moving forward, technology
investments need to be at the forefront of decisionmaking.
Students need hardware, software, network access, training, and
more. Faculty, especially in career and technical programs,
need training to advance their pedagogy using alternative
deliveries and synchronous and asynchronous formats.
Equitable access to education can only be achieved by
ensuring students have the technology tools they need to
persist in their academics and receive support services whether
they are on campus or working remotely.
To provide a safer campus, we need to invest in facilities
upgrades including contactless hardware, additional cleaning
supplies, personal protective equipment, and to engineer
facilities to allow for physical distancing. We will continue
to reallocate and reduce expenditures as part of our effort to
survive potentially significant revenue losses.
Moving forward, students who already face significant
barriers must navigate a new economic reality. Additional
funding from the Federal Government providing direct aid to
students impacted by COVID-19 will support their continuous
enrollment and aid the academic--economic recovery of our
Nation.
In addition, the importance of ongoing Federal
stabilization funds to help operating costs of institutions
like ours during this trying time cannot be overstated. While
the CARES Act provided badly needed stabilization funding, more
assistance is vital for us to continue to effectively serve our
students, provide remote learning, and prepare to safely reopen
our campus.
According to recent estimates, community colleges face a
collective revenue reduction of $10 billion over the next year.
We want to stress the importance of giving students headcount-
based formula to allocate future Federal stabilization funding
to institutions of higher education. This will allow us to
account for the needs of all of our students, including those
who attend part time.
Thank you for replacing the CARES Act formula with a head-
based formula in the recently passed HEROES Act. We appreciate
your recognition that part-time students need access to the
same resources as their full-time peers. We are committed to
providing access to the transformative power of education
regardless of socioeconomic status.
As the Nation strives to recover from COVID-19, higher
education will be a critical component of rebuilding the
economy. Your unprecedented level of commitment to education is
needed now as your decisions will directly influence students'
ability to achieve their academic goals and support the
viability of communities.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Pierce follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Dr. Pierce.
And, now, Dr. White. Don't forget to unmute.

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY P. WHITE, Ph.D., CHANCELLOR, THE
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, LONG BEACH, CA

Mr. White. Ranking Member Smucker--I need to--am I--okay.
Great.
Chair Davis, Ranking Member Smucker, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for providing me the opportunity to
address you today.
For those who may be unfamiliar with the California State
University, we are the Nation's largest and most diverse 4-year
university system; 23 campuses, more than 480,000 students, and
approximately 53,000 faculty and staff. One out of every 20
Americans with a college degree is a graduate of the California
State University. More than half of our students are students
of color, and one in three are the first in their family to
attend college. 54 percent of our enrolled students, 230,000 of
them, are Pell Grant recipients, and just last year alone,
63,000 of those Pell recipients earned their bachelor's degree.
This dynamic diversity, together with our sheer size and
the quality of our academic programs, makes us one of America's
most powerful drivers of socioeconomic ascent.
Our response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been guided by
twin north stars: Safeguarding the health and well-being of our
students, faculty, staff, and the communities we serve, and
maintaining our students' progress to degree. In March, the CSU
made the massive pivot to virtual instruction, transitioning
over 70,000 classes, together with academic and student support
services, to virtual modalities. We have taken great care to
mitigate the pandemic's impacts to our students, especially our
most vulnerable.
Measures include maintaining on-campus housing and
essential services for students who have nowhere else to call
home, distributing thousands of laptops and tablets, and
offering safe WiFi hotspots to help address the digital divide,
continuing to meet our students' basic needs with no-contact
food distribution, and emergency housing services for students
who are food and housing insecure. Campus counseling services
are offered virtually, serving students presenting with a
variety of mental health issues during the crisis, and
providing necessary flexibility around academic policies for
current students, and adjusting admission policies to mitigate
hardships to prospective students and their families.
We are extremely grateful for the more than $563 million in
financial relief provided to our students and campuses through
the CARES Act. Because Education Department guidance limited
eligibility for CARES Act emergency grants, we have augmented
those funds with campus resources so that all of our students
in need due to COVID-19, including doctorate students and
international students, could receive much needed financial
emergency support.
Informed by the guidance of scientific and medical experts,
along with public health officials, we are planning for a
primarily virtual fall, with exceptions for critical in-person
experiences that can be conducted within rigorous standards of
health and safety. As we plan for the fall and beyond, the CSU
confronts a grim new fiscal reality. Our campuses face soaring
costs and mounting revenue losses associated with the pandemic,
putting our students' well-being and success at significant
risk.
The recently passed California budget cuts our
appropriation by $299 million, 4.2 percent of our operating
budget, unless additional Federal relief funds are forthcoming.
So I ask for additional support in investment during this
historic public health crisis. I do so on behalf of the
Nation's largest and most diverse student body. Keeping these
students, students from all walks of life, enrolled and
graduating with a high-quality degree not only benefits them,
their families, and communities, it is also a vital public good
for the Nation. Supporting higher education at this critical
moment stimulates the deployment for hundreds of thousands of
Americans now and into the future, spurring tax revenue while
reducing reliance on social services.
America, through the economic recovery and beyond, will
require an increasingly nimble, educated workforce. We need
culturally competent problem solvers, comfortable and capable
in the sciences and technology, climate literate and inspired
to lead the world into a sustainable future. We need them to
ensure a vigorous American economy in a changing world of work,
and we need them for a vibrant and more equitable society. We
stand ready to be a resource as you continue to explore ways to
support higher education.
Thank you again for the opportunity to address you today,
and I am happy to answer any questions that you would like.
[The statement of Mr. White follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. White.
And now I recognize Mr. Pulsipher for five minutes. Thank
you for being with us, sir.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT PULSIPHER, PRESIDENT, WESTERN GOVERNORS
UNIVERSITY, SALT LAKE CITY, UT

Mr. Pulsipher. Chairwoman Davis, Ranking Member Smucker,
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity
to share my views on the impact of COVID-19 on the future of
higher education. At WGU, we are compelled by our belief in the
inherent worth and ability of every individual and in the
transformative power of education. We believe that the pathways
to opportunity should be open to everyone.
WGU is a private, nonprofit, self-sustaining institution
founded in 1997 by a bipartisan group of 19 governors who saw
the opportunity to use technology and competency-based
education to expand access to higher education and better align
with workforce needs. Today, we serve over 120,000 full-time
students in all 50 States, over 70 percent of whom would be
classified in one or more underserved categories. We deliver
affordable, relevant, high-quality programs, combined with a
student-centered instructional model entirely online, and that
propels students towards completion, great jobs, and
opportunity.
Recent months have seen life upended for every American and
particularly for the nearly 20 million students enrolled in
higher education. With their immediate and persistent
challenges, students have acute needs for material support to
stay on their path to opportunity, and we need to ensure access
through the online world in which learning now takes place.
Over 21 million Americans, disproportionately people of
color, do not have sufficient bandwidth to stream this hearing,
take part in our civic fight, access education, or participate
in the digital workforce.
There are also many anxious questions about the fall
semester, but students also need us to look well beyond the
fall and address strategic questions facing American higher
education. Higher education entered the pandemic with
preexisting conditions; rapidly escalating cost, widening
disconnect with workforce needs, crushing student debt,
unacceptable racial disparities and outcomes, and low
completion rates. Now the sector is in the throes of
technology-driven disruption, irreversibly accelerated by
COVID-19. Near-term issues are certainly pressing, whether
safely reopening campuses, enabling institutions to online
shift, or the protection of displaced students due to potential
closures.
We must reestablish the purpose and mission of
postsecondary education and modernize the way we invest in it.
We must embrace the technology first approach to teaching and
supporting students. We must move swiftly and radically to not
only get the 20 million currently enrolled students back on the
path to completion, but also upscale many of the 40-plus
million Americans who have been displaced during the pandemic
and the tens of millions more whose work is being reshaped by
technology.
Quite simply, we need to reimagine postsecondary education
as a true lifelong model of providing high-quality, relevant
pathways to both an individual's first and next opportunities.
Even short-term support and accommodations should be designed
to prioritize with the long term in mind.
The written testimony I have submitted includes various
policy ideas that I believe address many of the challenges our
country and its students face as a result of COVID-accelerated
shifts. All of the ideas are based on a few simple guiding
principles. First, students should be prioritized over
institutions. Second, student outcomes matter more than
institutional inputs, and learning or mastering rather than
time should be the critical denominator of education.
In the 1930s, our Nation responded to a great economic
crisis by passing a New Deal. In the 1940s, facing an
unprecedented need for education as young soldiers returned
from war hungry for opportunity, Congress opened the door to
direct Federal investment in higher education by passing the GI
Bill. In the 1960s, facing widespread protests and social
unrest in response to structural racism, we saw a wave of
legislation around civil rights.
Today, we find ourselves at the intersection of several
similar great forces. We face a significant economic challenge
of an unprecedented need for education, [inaudible] workforce,
and, sadly, continue to grapple with inequities which have been
both exposed and widened by the pandemic. We are living in
unprecedented times, times that demand our best thinking, new
frameworks, and a smart investment.
Congress can renew the pathways to opportunity for every
American. We need landmark legislation on education and work, a
new approach that can meet the challenges of this moment and
the future that follows it, that is designed for the digital
and information age and that can fundamentally modernize our
approach to investing in and unlocking the potential of every
individual.
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today and to be of
assistance as you take on the critical questions facing
America's higher education system.
[The statement of Mr. Pulsipher follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Davis. Thank you very much. Appreciate it.
I now recognize Dr. Harper for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHAUN HARPER Ph.D., PRESIDENT, AMERICAN
EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATION, LOS ANGELES, CA

Mr. Harper. Thank you for including me in this important
hearing. It is imperative that we devote serious attention to
the numerous racial equity consequences of reopening campuses.
I present 10 considerations in the written version of my
testimony. I will talk only about nine of them here, as the one
pertaining to student visas and travel bans is outside the
purview of this subcommittee.
Here are nine critical racial equity considerations. One,
disproportionately placing essential workers at risk.
Custodians, food service professionals, and maintenance workers
will inevitably be deemed essential workers when campuses
reopen. Professionals of color are disproportionately
performing these roles. Being required to come to campus and
interact with other workers and students places employees of
color and the family members with whom they live at greater
risk of exposure to COVID-19.
Campus reopening plans must consider the health
implications of employees of color and lower income essential
workers. Federal aid specifically earmarked for the safety of
employees who are deemed essential workers would help
institutions provide PPE, cleaning supplies, contact tracing,
and testing.
Two, the racialization of layoffs and terminations.
Financial effects of the pandemic will force higher education
leaders to make tough workforce reduction decisions.
Inattention to the race of the persons being terminated and
laid off will inevitably yield pronounced negative effects on
employees of color, given the low-level service positions they
disproportionately occupy. Hence, campus reopening plans must
specify ways to avoid even more significant racialized
employment inequities. Federal investments would help minimize
the necessity of workforce reductions at higher education
institutions.
Three, risk of violence for Asian American and Asian
international students and employees. Recent studies document
horrifying acts of discrimination and physical violence towards
Asian Americans and Asian immigrants in the U.S. throughout the
pandemic. Thus, reopening plans must include ways to protect
these students and employees as they return to campuses.
Four, trauma and grief support for persons
disproportionately experiencing loss. COVID-19 deaths are
disproportionately affecting communities of color. Because of
this, students of color and employees of color from these
groups are likelier than are their White counterparts to have
lost a family member, friend, or someone in their community.
The reopening plans must include ways to ensure these persons
have more than adequate mental and emotional support resources.
Five, sending infected students home to vulnerable families
and communities. Many institutions plan to conclude on-campus
living and learning by Thanksgiving in anticipation of a
possible second wave of the coronavirus. Given the
disproportionately higher numbers of COVID-19 infections and
deaths among people of color, it is plausible that students of
color returning home from college could pose an especially big
risk to communities that have already been disproportionately
devastated by COVID-19.
Six, placing Black football and men's basketball players at
a disproportionately higher risk. In 2018, Black men were 2.4
percent of undergraduates enrolled at universities that make up
the five most financially lucrative intercollegiate sports
conferences, yet they comprise 55 percent of football teams and
56 percent of men's basketball teams on those campuses. Thus,
participation in these two contact sports places Black
undergraduate men at a disproportionate risk of COVID-19
infection.
Seven, financial support for chronically underfunded
minority-serving institutions. Investing significant Federal
COVID-19 recovery funds specifically into Historically Black
Colleges and Universities, Tribal colleges, and community
colleges would help them better serve the low-income Americans
they disproportionately educate, most of whom are students of
color.
Eight, addressing racialized digital access inequities. As
we have seen throughout the pandemic, low-income students lack
access to reliable high-speed internet. Many of them are
students of color. As institutions consider reopening in phases
with a fraction of courses meeting on campus and others online,
plans must include strategies and investments in closing
digital access gaps for students of color who continue to
access courses from their homes and lower income communities.
And ninth, upskilling faculty members and teaching students
of color online. Faculty development activities included in
campus reopening plans cannot just focus on creative teaching
tricks to keep all students engaged online. They must also pay
attention to ensuring that students of color are not
experiencing the same racism in virtual classrooms that they
experienced in on-campus learning environments long before the
pandemic.
Thank you.
[The statement of Mr. Harper follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Dr. Harper.
We appreciate all of you and appreciate your staying within
the limits, especially. That is really helpful.
Under Committee Rule 8(a), we will now question witnesses
under the 5-minute rule. I will be recognizing subcommittee
members in seniority order. Again, in order to ensure that the
members' 5-minute rule is adhered to, staff will be keeping
track of time and will use a chime to signal when 1 minute is
left and when time is up entirely. It is a little annoying
charm--chime that we have, but nevertheless, it is helpful to
us. They will sound a short chime again when 1 minute is left,
a longer chime when time is up, so please be attentive.
If any member experiences technical difficulties during the
hearing, you should stay connected on the platform. Make sure
you are muted with the mute button highlighted in red, and use
your phone to immediately call the committee's IT director,
Sheila Havenner, whose number has been provided.
And as Chairwoman, I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
And, again, just putting this in a bit of context as
everyone has done, as evidenced by the last recession, we know
that State higher education budgets are often the first to be
cut during economic downturns as States look to balance their
budgets. A study by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
estimates that States will lose $765 billion over the next 3
years. Already, States across the country have announced cuts
to higher education spending.
For example, California announced a $970 million cut for
the University of California and California State University
systems. These budgets drive up tuition costs that ultimately
place the burden on students and their families and reduce
academic quality. And, of course, we know it is not just the
tuition costs that students bear, but it also is living
expenses and a whole host of other needs to be successful in
their studies.
Dr. Harper, what was the impact of State higher education
budget cuts on students at institutions in the Great Recession?
Mr. Harper. Thank you for that question. The impact was,
for sure, disproportionate on chronically underfunded
institutions like community colleges, Historically Black
Colleges, and Tribal colleges. Certainly, the steep growth to
recovery for them was a much steeper climb than for more highly
resourced institutions. In many instances, the financial pain
of that time period still remains for many of those
institutions as they are seeking to catch up. It is why I am
especially worried about the financial consequences of the
pandemic on those institutions.
We have seen this before, you know, again, with the Great
Recession, so I am hoping that Congress will pay particular
attention in its investments to ensuring that those
institutions don't have as steep a hill to climb in their
recovery.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. And just following up on that,
because I think sometimes people feel that there doesn't need
to be a State--a Federal role here. So why is Federal
investment critical to supporting students in institutions? And
why isn't it the State governments, or in the case of other
schools, enough without that kind of Federal funding? And what
is likely to occur without that immediate Federal action to
address these funding shortfalls?
Mr. Harper. Well, for one, we will see tremendous
unevenness across States in their investments in postsecondary
education. But secondly, and I think most importantly, higher
education is a public good that benefits the entirety of our
Nation and our Nation's position in a global economy.
Therefore, Federal investment into higher education is really
an investment into the economic security, the homeland
security, and the viability of the United States.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you.
I want to turn to Dr. White. Dr. White, how will this
multimillion dollar State budget cut impact CSU's ability to
operate and serve students? And I know you addressed this
somewhat, but focusing on those students already having
difficulty for a variety of reasons pre-COVID. You know, we
have, I think, to deconstruct the reasons why students were
having those difficulties in the past as well. Dr. White?
Mr. White. So in the spring term alone across the
California State University, we lost $337 million in loss
revenue and added costs to pivot these classes and do it in a
healthful way. The State budget that was just approved by our
governor has a $299 million cut in our base appropriation,
which is about 4.6 percent of our operating budget.
Importantly, the Federal Government can play a role here.
[Inaudible] by October 15 provide another financial support to
the States that $299 million will be reversed and given back to
the CSU.
So it does have an effect, these numbers are real, and we
will do our very best to meet the needs of our students, as
many as we possibly can, going forward.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Dr. White.
I think my time is up as well. Appreciate it.
Now I want to turn to Mr. Smucker from Pennsylvania, for
the ranking member to ask his questions.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank all the panel.
Mr. Pulsipher, I have just a question for you in regards to
what has already been mentioned, college affordability, which
is, of course, a top priority for policymakers but certainly
for students and their families. And I know Western Governors
has a track record of keeping costs low, but this pandemic is
adding additional financial burdens on all schools. I have
certainly heard from institutions throughout my home State of
Pennsylvania that COVID-19 is going to lead to increased costs
on students [inaudible] harm students in order to safely and
[inaudible] protocols.
So I sure would like to get your thoughts on that,
including how has Federal action helped the sector so far. And
what role could Congress play, what role should we play, in
helping colleges open responsibly and helping them to reduce
additional costs on students?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Ranking Member Smucker. COVID-19
was surely not in any institution's strategic plan, and so the
costs of adapting are definitely quite large and great for many
institutions. Because of WGU's operating model, WGU itself is
not experiencing any budgetary pressures like many of our peer
institutions. That is primarily because much of our investments
and operating expenses do not include operating buildings and
campuses and many other things that also have been revenue
sources from housing, feeding, or even student life activities
and athletics, et cetera. So with that kind of operating model,
we--our entire self-sustaining operation is dependent on
tuition alone. It has allowed us to continue uninterrupted.
I think these same COVID pressures are highlighting now or
exposing, if you will, the many challenges that exist with the
economic model that we have in higher education in the U.S. And
so I think in general we should be focused, first and foremost,
with this principle on students and how do we consider the
funding and supports necessary to provide the instruction, the
access, the improved digital experiences that they need to
continue in their progress in their programs. And so how do we
ensure that students are not so severely disrupted that they
are stopping out and ends up to where they are not completing?
And so I think that can be a guiding principle as Congress
contemplates how to provide the appropriate aid and stimulus so
that the near-term impact of the pandemic can be managed, but
also we can design for the long term and really reinvent the
economic model of higher education.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you. I know the Department and Congress
have provided institutions some temporary reprieve from
regulatory burdens throughout this crisis, which I believe, we
all believe, was appropriate to help institutions quickly adapt
to the challenges of COVID-19, but what can we learn from that
for the long term? What regulations, what guidance should
Congress reevaluate for the long term in light of what we have
learned from the pandemic?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you for that question. I think those
were appropriate, and surely, the rapid shift from
traditionally classroom or place-based instruction to a
predominantly, or if not, 100 percent online instructional
model, it does require the rethinking of the faculty-student
interaction and requires rethinking about the time of
instruction and credit hour and the pacing of learning. If you
consider many eligibility requirements that are programmed in
an institution, even at the student level for Federal student
aid, they are constructed around a very conventional model of
learning. And so now, when we are having a rapid shift to a
technology-enabled model, those paradigms that we are used to
are being reconstructed.
And so I think it is appropriate to have short-term
accommodation for that. Now it is really informing how we
should think about distance education, how we should think
about pace and the learning progress, assessment of learning,
et cetera, that those models should be contemplated in the
future.
Mr. Smucker. What about--and I am sorry to cut you off. I
am almost at the end of my time. But, you know, we use a number
of accountability metrics, like cohort default rates, financial
responsibility scores, and so on. Should we be looking at any
of those and thinking about which of those we should continue
and which should potentially be changed?
Mr. Pulsipher. We should definitely be looking at primarily
what I would call student success measures. I think there are
elements around persistence and progress and completion rates
and also attainment and placement rates that lead to things
like loan repayment rates as being a good measure of
accountability for the effectiveness of the educational
pathways. I think that is a good example of where focusing on
measures of outcomes as the quality measures of learning rather
than institutional models.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you.
Chairwoman Davis. Okay. Thank you very much.
I now want to turn to the ranking chair of the Education
Committee. I understand, Dr. Foxx, that you would like to go
next.
Ms. Foxx. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair. I was
quite willing to wait till the next person, but thank you. I
appreciate it.
Chairwoman Davis. You are fine. Go ahead. I am sorry. I
actually was going to go to Mr. Courtney, but I just got a
notice that you wanted to be next in the queue. But if Mr.
Courtney is okay with it, we will go ahead and hear from Dr.
Foxx, and then we will go back to Dr. Courtney--to Mr.
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. I am fine. Go ahead, Virginia.
Chairwoman Davis. Okay. Thank you.
Ms. Foxx. Thanks, Joe. I appreciate it.
Mr. Pulsipher, thank you again for your testimony today,
for the work you do to help students, and particularly one
student I know you have helped, I am very grateful for.
Western Governors University has shown competency-based
education, which is an educational program where students
progress based on mastery of skills instead of time spent in
the classroom, as a successful model for many students. CBE can
benefit students by quickening time to a degree, lowering
college costs, building portfolio success. Could you describe
WGU's experience building CBE programs and the success of your
student graduates compared to other institutions of
postsecondary education? I am particularly interested in the
achievement of your low-income, first-generation, and minority
students and how CBE benefited their lives. And, again, I know
of particularly one low-income, first-generation student that
you have been a big help to.
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Ranking Member Foxx. Surely, WGU
was not the inventor of competency-based education, but we are
one of the pioneers of it. We today have over 191,000 graduates
since founding. And the use of competency based as a
pedagogical model was purely a function of our focus on the
student, particularly the working learners that we serve.
And so really, competency-based approach focuses on keeping
the standards for proficiency or learning constant and allowing
a time to vary. And that affords us the ability to better line
learning outcomes or the workforce needs, to personalize the
student journey to increase the probability of individual
student success, and ultimately allows them to both, you know,
leverage prior learning and move at their own pace.
And, you know, for WGU, you know, we are serving students
in all 50 States. We have a 45 percent 4-year graduation rate
at the bachelor's level, which is significantly higher than the
32 percent nationally. We have really high employment rates at
95 percent with 88 percent in fields [inaudible]. And maybe
more importantly, employers are--97 percent of them are saying
our graduates meet and exceed expectations and are ready for
the job.
Particularly to your question about low-income and
underserved students, while we still see gaps in their
attainment versus their White peers and their higher income
peers, the reality is that they are achieving at a higher rate
than we have seen nationally and particularly in low-income,
rural, and military categories of individuals. And so we are
quite proud of our ability to access and serve underserved
individuals.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you.
The Higher Education Act does not have a clearly defined
pathway for the CBE model. How has the flexibility of current
law restrained other institutions from creating CBE programs?
What recommendations do you have to reform the HEA to encourage
the proliferation of high-quality CBE programs?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you. Yeah, as noted in my written
testimony, it is definitely--we believe it is time to fully
embrace competency-based education.
If I recall, according to CBEN, the Competency Based
Education Network, over 600 institutions have pilots or
programs developing for competency-based education, but they
are hampered, like we were, with the disparity with current
regulatory definitions, meaning the design of it. And that
could be trying to shoehorn program considerations into credit-
hour accreditation models, regulatory criteria around full-
time, and pacing, et cetera, that makes it quite difficult to
rapidly innovate and expand access to these highly effective
and aligned program models.
And so we do believe that legislation and regulatory
frameworks should encourage innovation, not just support it.
And if we also focus on student success and outcomes rather
than prescribing a model, our Nation and our American workforce
will be better served.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you.
You have built a strong connection between WGU and
employers. Why did you [inaudible], and how did this outreach
contribute to your students' success? What can other
institutions do to engage employers in their academic programs?
Mr. Pulsipher. Well, I think we simply believe that if
education is to be the surest path to opportunity, then it has
to be aligned with a market that presents those opportunities.
And so we leverage large data sets from partners like MC or
Burning Glass about workforce demands and roles, and that
informs the programs and credentials that we develop and offer.
And then, beyond that, we partner directly with employers and
experts from those fields to design the curriculum so the
learning outcomes directly map to the competencies required in
the workforce.
We do believe that the future of education is based in
skills and competencies, and it is a language that employers
are speaking more fluently. And higher education can invest in
this more workforce-employer partnership model to increase the
alignment and relevancy of educational pathways to opportunity.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much.
Madam Chair, I would like to submit for the record facts
related to funding by various entities and the growth in
spending that has occurred over the years. So we will submit
that separately.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Foxx. And thank you very much. And, again, I appreciate
Mr. Courtney's consideration. Thank you.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you.
I will now turn to Mr. Courtney for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, Chairwoman Davis and
Ranking Member Smucker.
And, Ms. Foxx, always glad to accommodate your schedule.
So, Dr. Harper, you are correct in your testimony that our
committee does not have direct jurisdiction over the State
Department or the Department of Homeland Security. However, the
Higher Education Act does authorize various programs that does
promote exchange students and international, you know, cross-
pollination in our higher education programs with countries all
over the world.
And, you know, strictly from just a pure monetary
standpoint, there are about a million international students
that are enrolled in the U.S. That is about $41 billion in
terms of revenue. The Department of Commerce actually treats
that tuition money as an export for the purposes of our trade
balance.
And, obviously, I think as you, I am sure, can attest, you
know, the policies of this administration, which has pretty
much shut down the visa availability for students wanting to
enroll in the U.S. and then, just this Monday, announcing that
ICE is going to actually deport students from this country
whose schools are only offering online programs, you know, just
really kind of flies in the face of what we are hearing today
about the fact that we need a regulatory structure that needs
to be flexible given the COVID emergency and just to also
recognize that online, virtual learning, partly because of
necessity but also partly because of value, as we just heard
from Mr. Pulsipher, is something that we are in a place right
now where we have to incorporate it.
And having these arbitrary policies that are actually now
talking about deporting people, you know, really puts, I think,
educators in an impossible position about sort of having to
balance things like, you know, staying on the right side of the
Federal Government and trying to protect their students.
So I was wondering, again, if you could touch on that
number 10 point that you mentioned in your opening remarks and
really how we have to look at it in the whole picture,
holistically, in terms of the challenge we are facing right now
for higher education.
Mr. Harper. Sure. I really appreciate you affording me an
opportunity to talk through that 10th point. It is really
important.
You know, those policy actions are not only arbitrary, as
you have noted, but they are also, I am afraid, sinophobic and
xenophobic.
I wrote that particular consideration in my written
testimony before we got the news on Monday about the ICE
deportations. I somehow had a scary suspicion that this
administration would find some way to target Chinese students
and international students from other countries.
It is so important to note that international students make
our colleges and universities better. They afford American
students the opportunity to interact with people who bring
diverse viewpoints. So many colleges and universities
articulate in their mission statements a commitment to
preparing students for citizenship in a global democracy. Well,
if that is the case, we need international students here, you
know, to afford our students, you know, that kind of learning
opportunity.
But we also--you know, I think it is important to, you
know, push against, you know, all of the, you know, xenophobic
and sinophobic actions that we are seeing in this
administration. And, you know, these most recent actions
concerning, you know, ICE and the deportation of international
students is just ridiculous. They require stronger Federal
oversight.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you.
I mean, we have had a lot of press in Connecticut about
student athletes. I think the NCAA calculates there are about
20,000 international students as part of the NCAA. Geno
Auriemma, the Women's Basketball Hall of Fame coach, was in the
press talking about three student athletes that are in his
program--one from Croatia, one from Poland, and one from
Canada--who are now basically unable to get into the country.
But, to his credit, I mean, he pointed out in the press--and I
am quoting him now--``Not just athletes, but kids who are
enrolled here, going to school. What is the issue here? Why
can't we get that resolved? So, what, because they don't make
$20 million a year and play in the NBA or Major League Baseball
or the NHL?'' Because, obviously, ICE has waived and allowed
visas for, you know, athletes who are in professional sports
but not in college sports.
So, you know, again, we are just, sort of, dealing with
these contradictions that are, again, putting pressure on
campuses to reopen more than maybe it is safe, given where they
are located, as well as creating these different classes of
people from overseas that can actually come here and enrich our
country.
So thank you for your testimony.
And with that, I yield back, Susan.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you very much, Mr. Courtney.
Mr. Guthrie of Kentucky, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you much, Madam Chair. I really
appreciate you conducting this hearing.
And my question is for Mr. Pulsipher.
I note in your testimony you said that suddenly 3.3 million
teachers were suddenly grappling with how to teach online. And
I know that Western Governors University is online, and you
have kind of mastered those competencies.
And I actually had the good experience of having my
daughter home this semester, really second half of the
semester, and watching her online. And I am not sure the--
although the price didn't change much, I am not sure the
quality was the same between--and she was at a traditional on-
campus program.
So I guess my question, Mr. Pulsipher, is, what has Western
Governors done to propel students into the workforce that is at
least equal to, if not, I guess in your opinion, would be
superior at least to a traditional student program? What are
the things online that you figured out that other universities
need to do if we move forward this way?
And, specifically, I would like you to address the minority
students, the students of color, particularly with the digital
divide that Dr. Harper has pointed out.
And, in Kentucky, I can tell you, with our K-12 situation,
the digital divide was also rural and urban as much as anything
else, and so--but it is real. It is real for people of color.
It is real with more rural areas.
So, one, what areas have you guys mastered that other
universities need to look for online learning? And how have you
addressed the digital divide?
Thank you.
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Congressman Guthrie. I appreciate
that question.
I think one of the most important things is to simply
embrace the entire capabilities of the medium, if you will. And
by that, what I really mean is, like, you have to have a tech-
first mindset. How does technology enable all facets of the
engagement of a student with the content, with the instructor,
with peer students, everything else like that?
And if you truly consider all the other dynamics that we as
the consumers experience, like, very few of them, if any, would
you argue that the online experience is worse than the
traditional place-based model, whether it is shopping, banking,
et cetera. We believe the same is true for learning.
So some examples of that is, we have disaggregated the
faculty model, because we realized in the teaching and learning
models online, it is about one-to-one interactions as much as
it is about a classroom. And so you have to think about: How
are you providing access to the subject-matter experts and the
instructors that really help on an individual basis? How do you
change the nature of content consumption away from a lecture in
a hall to what are all the videos and mediums and the virtual
courses, et cetera, that you can engage with and that you could
also engage with peers on? So much of the instruction and
learning actually occurs asynchronously outside of the
interaction with the instructor.
And I think there is another simple dynamic, by the way,
that says you have to rethink the concept of time, that now an
individual is in control of the time rather than an institution
setting a lecture schedule and office hours for faculty, et
cetera.
The last thing I would point out is that the data that then
becomes available to an institution to really test the efficacy
of all the different pedagogical approaches, the technology
that has been deployed, et cetera, and you can actually now
measure the impact on student progress and learning.
This extends to our ability to help underserved students
and individuals of color, because you can actually engage with
them, every student, on a one-to-one basis.
And then the last point is, I would extend what Dr. White
has also said in his testimony, is that WGU in like manner has
invested in providing, you know, scholarships that cover
specifically technology like laptops as well as high-speed
bandwidth access, things like that. We have also been
[inaudible] directly invest in infrastructure to address this
digital divide that now exists.
Mr. Guthrie. Okay.
Well, also--so my guess, though, is if you are looking at a
digital model, online model, and you are on the other side of
the digital divide, that you might not see that as an
opportunity for you, even though, as you say, it could be a
better opportunity for you.
So how does Western Governors University reach out to
students that may not even view this as an opportunity for
them, to make sure they know that it is there?
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Oh, I am out of time?
Chairwoman Davis. I think you have had the second bell,
so--
Mr. Guthrie. Oh, okay. I thought that was the first bell. I
am sorry. Okay. I am sorry. I yield back then. I apologize.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you very much.
Mr. Harder of California, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Harder?
Oh, Mr. Takano. Okay. I don't have you--
Mr. Takano. Madam Chair?
Chairwoman Davis. Yes, Mr. Takano, you are next, but I
hadn't had you earlier. So if you are ready to go, go ahead.
Mr. Takano. Thank you. Thank you, Chairwoman Davis, for
convening this critical hearing on the future of higher
education in our country.
During recessions, States typically fund their public
education systems first when they are experiencing--well, they
cut funding to their public education systems first when they
are experiencing budget shortfalls. And these cuts almost
always disproportionately impact low-income students and
students of color. Due to these cuts, institutions will be
forced to provide less resources to help these students.
The $14 billion Congress provided in the CARES Act was an
essential lifeline, but it doesn't come close to covering the
full extent of the need. The American Council on Education had
previously estimated that institutions and students will need
at least $46.6 billion to address the challenges and
disruptions created by COVID-19. And as of last week, ACE now
estimates that institutions may need an additional $74 billion
to cover just the costs of resuming in-person and hybrid
instruction in the fall. In my district, the University of
California, Riverside, has already experienced a revenue loss
of $22 million.
Now, my first question is for Chancellor White. It is good
to see you, again, sir. Can you please tell us about the
revenue losses that the Cal State system has suffered as a
result of COVID-19?
Dr. White? Chancellor White?
Mr. White. I just had to hit my ``unmute'' button.
Nice to see you again.
Yes, so just in the spring term alone, the, sort of, 2-1/2
months from March through the end--I guess 3 months, we had
$337 million in loss across the California State University.
That includes the increased cost of mitigating COVID with
personal protective gear, buying laptops and WiFis and giving
them to students and to faculty and staff and all of that. That
was just a 3-month period of time, so about $100 million a
month. We anticipate that rate to continue these next 12
months.
In addition to that, the State of California has cut our
State appropriation by $299 million, which is 4.6 percent of
our operating budget for next year. However, the Federal
Government can play a role in reversing that. If there is
another Federal stimulus package that is received in California
before October 15--it is a reverse trigger proposal that the
Governor has signed--then that cut in our State appropriation
would be reversed for the next fiscal year, which would be
enormously helpful, as you point out, to students that are
first-generation and often of low income who need a little
extra support in order to stay engaged with their studies.
Mr. Takano. Thank you for that answer, Chancellor White. It
is imperative for Congress to--for the Senate to act on, you
know, future legislation that would address--and I know that we
do much of that in the HEROES Act.
Dr. Pierce, what are the revenue losses at your
institution?
Ms. Pierce. Yes. Thank you for that question.
We are not a system, we are a stand-alone institution, so
our numbers may sound small, but the impact is the same.
We are looking at approximately $850,000 in just parking
and auxiliary services alone. Our original fiscal year 2021
budget was based on our enrollment being flat, meaning that we
didn't anticipate growth nor loss, but now we are projecting a
deficit of anywhere between 10 to 20 percent in enrollment. And
that would essentially mean $4.2 million if we are down 10
percent and $7.78 million if we experience a 20-percent loss.
So that is a significant impact on our overall budget that
we would have to mitigate in ways that would be very
detrimental and painful for our students, faculties, and staff
and have an overall impact on our community.
Mr. Takano. Well, thank you for that, Dr. Pierce.
And, Dr. Harper, my question to you is, what lessons can we
learn from the last recession about the impact that State
budget cuts have on college access, affordability, and quality?
Mr. Harper. Sure. We can certainly learn from the last
time, taking a largely raceless approach to correcting
longstanding inequities is only going to, at best, sustain
those inequities but perhaps even exacerbate them.
So I think, as I documented in the 10 points in my written
testimony, we have to bring a race-forward, race-salient lens
to thinking about COVID-19 recovery. Because the truth is, we
have way too much evidence to confirm that COVID-19 has had a
racially disproportionate impact on communities of color.
Therefore, it would be just really reckless of us to attempt to
remedy those inequities in a largely raceless way.
I am not suggesting that class and socioeconomic status is
somehow unimportant, but there is a way that race and class
commingle in these United States of America to, you know,
really produce disparate outcomes for people of color.
Mr. Takano. Thank you for that response.
I see, Madam Chair, my time is up. I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Takano.
And now we are going to turn to Mr. Grothman, but
beforehand, Mr. Guthrie, if you want to reclaim your 1 minute.
And I guess I should reclaim my 1 minute too. But, Mr. Guthrie,
go ahead if you need an extra minute.
Let's see. Is Mr. Guthrie there?
Perhaps Mr. Guthrie has left, so we will go on to Mr.
Grothman. If Mr. Guthrie comes back later on, he can get his 1
minute again.
Mr. Grothman?
Mr. Grothman. Thank you. I always love these kind of online
things because we can see the beautiful decorating that we have
in our Members' houses. So you do a very good job there. I
appreciate looking at what is behind you. I am kind of in a
boring conference room myself, but next time I will try to give
you more interesting decor as well.
Mr. Pulsipher, is all of your classes online?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes, they are.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do you feel, compared to a traditional
college, a higher percentage of your graduates come out with a
skills-based education?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yes, we do. Based upon the surveys that we
utilize from Gallup and Harris and others is that there is a
pretty good indication from the employers as well as the
graduate surveys that our graduates are better prepared for the
workforce. Ninety-seven percent of employers say that they meet
or exceed expectations. Ninety-seven percent of employers would
hire them again.
I think that our alignment of the curriculum with the
competencies needed in the workforce is significantly
increasing the readiness of graduates.
Mr. Grothman. Can you give me a comparative number, or is
there a comparative number you have for other universities?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yeah. There is, at least in our surveys, if
I flip to our annual report, I would look at things like--so,
in the Gallup--or, in Harris surveys, you know, if we look at
graduates--you know, mentor--you know, was it worth the cost,
our graduates are 77 percent versus nationally 38 percent. Did
it prepare me for a job, 76 percent versus nationally I think
it was below 50 percent. From an employers standpoint, you
know, there is data like 97 percent of graduates from WGU
exceed or meet expectations.
The other Gallup survey is that--you know, I think the
numbers, I think we could provide them and submit them to
testimony after the fact, but I think--specifically on Gallup,
I think it is more than twice as likely that our WGU grads are
performing well in all five dimensions of well-being versus
nationally.
Mr. Grothman. Wow. That is pretty incredible. Do you think
it is because you are online, or do you just think you approach
your job with a different attitude, an attitude of a student-
first attitude? Do you think you could duplicate these
fantastic numbers in a more traditional university if they
would adopt the same interaction with their students?
Mr. Pulsipher. You know, based upon the research from
Gallup and others, there are probably three things that I do
think should be considered.
One is, how do you really think about the faculty
engagement with students and make it more personal in the
interaction, if you will. Like, the office hours and the one-
to-one interaction become vitally important because a lecture
is just content online. And I could--
Mr. Grothman. Do you steer your people more towards a
skills-based education?
Mr. Pulsipher. We are entirely competency-based in our
design, such that as soon as you demonstrate proficiency
against the learning outcomes you can progress. And so it is
very clear that time now becomes a variable in most of our
students' lives, versus sitting in a seat for the prescribed 15
hours a week, you know, for 4 months.
And so I think the mentoring, the faculty engagement model
is highly important. And noted that if you have a faculty who
encourages your dreams and aspirations, I believe Gallup noted
that you are two and a half times more likely to say that your
school is right for you.
I also think college affordability factors heavily into
graduate satisfaction and performance.
And then, of course, designing curriculum and learning
outcomes that are directly relevant and ready a graduate for
success in the workforce, that also dramatically increases
graduate and student satisfaction.
I think we have opportunities to advance education's design
in all of these dimensions.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
I am particularly concerned with the middle-class students.
You know, they don't get Pell grants, so really, in our
society, we really put the middle-class students at a
disadvantage.
How do you deal with student debt? Or do you feel how the
amount of student debt your middle-class students come out with
is higher or lower compared to a traditional university?
Mr. Pulsipher. We know for a fact it is actually lower. So
57 percent of our students at WGU actually utilize aid in some
form or receive aid in some form for their education at WGU.
And, on average, you know, our graduates are graduating--I am
just trying to find the specific statistics really quickly--
they are graduating with just over $12,000 in debt at
graduation. That compares to nationally at $29,000 per
graduate.
More importantly, you can see that our cohort default rates
and loan repayment rates among our graduates are also
performing better than national averages. Our cohort default
rate is just about 4 percent versus nationally at 10.8 percent.
Mr. Grothman. Wow. Well, I guess what it means is we need--
do you ever think about setting up an Eastern Governors
University?
Mr. Pulsipher. The nice thing is, that didn't preclude us
from serving students in all 50 States, so we have more
students in the East than we do in the West.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
I guess you are giving me the hook. Well--
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman.--thank you. And I would like to thank you
again for letting us see your beautiful house. Very wonderful.
Chairwoman Davis. We are happy to hear next from Chairman
Scott, chairman of the Education and Labor Committee.
Chairman Scott?
Mr. Scott. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. And,
certainly, thank you for holding this hearing.
I would like to start with Dr. White.
And you have talked about this a little bit, but can you
tell us exactly what would happen if the cuts go through?
I know we are dealing with this in Virginia. Our General
Assembly passed a budget when we came back for the scheduled,
what we call, veto session, where we consider Governor's vetoes
and amendments. We learned a new word, ``unallocated.'' The 2-
percent teacher raise was unallocated. The counselors in the
schools, the aid to low-income students in community colleges,
construction of colleges, all unallocated because of the
reforecast in revenues.
We assume we will learn another word if the HEROES Act were
to pass and the revenue were restored by Federal assistance,
``reallocated.''
So could you tell us what would happen if--who gets laid
off and what effect it would have on education if the cuts
actually remained?
Mr. White. Yes. Thank you, Member.
I think we have done several things to decrease our costs.
We immediately put in a hiring freeze across the system. We
have also banned travel, initially for health reasons and now
for economic reasons. So when our various constituent groups
gather, they are doing it virtually, going forward.
We also have--during the last 8 years, as I have been
chancellor, we have been in a position to grow, and we have put
aside a reserve during that time, as has the State of
California. And so we are going to be using some of that
reserve, spending that down, in order to mitigate the costs.
But there would also be some employee attrition issues that
will lower our costs as well.
So we think, you know, we will--our enrollments are steady
here in the summertime, and all indications are for the fall
they will remain steady. It is going to be variable across the
campuses. Some of the urban ones are going up; some of the more
rural ones are going down a little bit.
But, overall, the cut from the State budget of $299 million
can be reversed if Congress acts with the next Federal bill.
And that will help us continue to make access in support of our
students generally of low income and middle income, to the last
member's questions, as well as to our students of color.
So we think it is a very vital role for the Federal
Government to play here. Asking the State to maintain efforts,
so the State doesn't further cut us, but as these Federal
dollars come in, it will make a huge difference for our
students, going forward, earning their degrees.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
Dr. Harper, are you familiar with the new regulation from
the Department of Education making it harder to get a
recalculation of your financial aid if you lose your job or
have other reasons to want your aid recalculated?
Mr. Harper. No. I haven't followed that legislation.
Mr. Scott. Okay. They are making it harder. So the problem
there would be, if you lose your job and are not able to make
the anticipated contribution, obviously, if you can't
recalculate the aid that is needed, bad things will happen. But
if you are not familiar with that.
Dr. Pierce, you talked about reopening. There are a lot of
things--some things you didn't mention. How can you reopen
without testing all of the students before day one?
Ms. Pierce. Yes. Well, with us being a nonresidential
campus, we would be following the guidelines provided by the
CDC and the Minnesota State Health Department, which--the State
of Minnesota is providing testing for those who want it and
need it, and we are able to work in concert with them.
So our screening procedures follow the guidelines from the
CDC, the Minnesota State Department of Health, and the Office
on Higher Ed.
Mr. Scott. Does that include testing everyone before day
one?
Ms. Pierce. It does not.
Mr. Scott. What about ventilation?
Ms. Pierce. Yes. Well, part of our reopening is to look at
air quality, because we are very much aware of the fact that--
it is something I recently learned, actually, is that we want
to minimize any cross-ventilation, in terms of air moving from
one geographic area to another. So we are looking at air
quality, and we are also looking at space.
So we are looking at our HVAC system and the quality of air
in our HVAC system. And I have been actually learning quite a
bit about it, in terms of MERV standards, which are a way of
measuring air quality versus air efficiency.
And so, as we are looking at--
Mr. Scott. My time has expired, but one of the things about
air conditioning is that they recirculate the air, which has
been identified as problematic. If they pull the air out, then
send it outside and, rather than recirculate, just cool the air
the best they can, you are better off.
But the ventilation has been identified as a problem. There
are a lot of things about reopening that are problematic. And
you are dealing with it the best you can, so I appreciate that.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Chairman Scott.
Mr. Scott. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Davis. We now turn to Ms. Stefanik of New York
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Stefanik?
We will go to Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I want to start with Mr. Pulsipher.
Since many American families are above the Federal Pell
grant-eligible income level, how can aid better be distributed
to students who really need help to return to school in the
fall?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you for that question, Congressman.
I do think that there is no doubt a short-term hardship
that should be contemplated in considering how to support
students who need to continue on their path.
And so, even at WGU, while our institutional operational
model has not been impacted, our students, given the
disproportionate number that we serve in underserved
categories, have been largely impacted by the economic fallout
of the pandemic. And so there are considerations around, you
know, supporting non-tuition-related expenses, whether that be
housing, food, other necessities of life. We, ourselves, have
established a $10 million aid fund and, in just the last 6
weeks, have distributed aid to over 4,000 students.
There are those things can be contemplated as we consider
both short-term and long-term considerations that would not
just only be related to, you know, Pell-eligible students but
individuals who are trying to advance from lower-middle-income
to upper-middle-income and how do you support that investment.
One of the longer-term examples is something as simple as a
lifetime learning account that can model after things like a
health savings account or even, like, a home equity line of
credit that just allows individuals to tap into needed aid to
support their upskilling and reskilling that will be
increasingly part of their life going forward.
Mr. Banks. Very helpful.
I want to turn my focus to a subject we haven't talked a
great deal about yet today, and that is liability protections.
All of your institutions belong to advocacy groups who have
called for liability protections.
And I want to go first to Dr. Pierce.
Can you talk about how important are liability protections
to reopen your institution for in-the-classroom training in the
fall?
Ms. Pierce. Thank you for that question.
We are a State institution, so we are covered under the
State of Minnesota. However, I am very much aware that
institutions feel a great risk in terms of liability for
opening, in terms of how they are going to be able to cover any
lawsuits that may emerge as a result of students, faculty, and
staff returning to campus who may come into contact with COVID-
19, who may have increased hospital bills and things of that
nature.
Even though the schools are following every guideline
provided by the CDC, their individual State health departments,
and the Office of Higher Education, the liability is there, the
liability is real, and it has a chilling effect on our plans
moving forward.
Mr. Banks. Dr. White, could you weigh in on that subject as
well?
Mr. White. Our twin North Stars about moving to a primarily
virtual fall term and, quite frankly, academic year was driven
by the health and safety issues and our student progress to
success, and health and safety issues not only for our students
but for our faculty, our staff, and the communities. And our
campuses in California are stretched over an 800-mile distance,
from the north coast up in Arcadia down to San Diego State,
and, you know, a lot of our students come from other parts of
the State. So we are very concerned about those two things.
We did not use liability as one of our determining factors
to move to an essentially virtual fall and, quite frankly,
academic year.
You know, one of the issues here that I think is really
important to recognize is, this pandemic is not--a lot of
people are using past tense: ``How did you manage the
pandemic?'' This is not a 2-month problem or a 6-month problem.
This is, you know, a 12-, 18-, 24-month at a minimum problem.
And in California we are approaching it that way.
And so the flexibility around policies can't be
shortsighted. Some of the recent policies that have come out
that have undone some of that flexibility seem to be tone-deaf
to the reality of the biology of the disease. That is something
that we are not yet able to get our hands around.
Mr. Banks. Mr. Pulsipher, your situation is different at
WGU, but can you talk about how important liability protections
would be for an institution like yours?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yeah, Congressman, as you noted, obviously,
with no in-person instruction and no campuses on which students
congregate, this is not a circumstance that we understand all
the variables at play and have considered. And so it is a topic
that I would definitely defer to my colleagues that have
campuses and have broader considerations there. I am not
unaware of them, but it is not something that I personally have
spent the time and attention and understanding the details to
give a cogent answer to.
Mr. Banks. Understood.
Thank you very much. I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Banks.
And I now yield to Ms. Jayapal. Is Ms. Jayapal with us?
If not, Mr. Harder, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Harder of California?
Mr. Levin of Michigan.
Mr. Levin. Thank you very much, Madam Chairwoman. I am
here, yes. Appreciate it. And I appreciate you convening this
hearing on this super-important topic.
You know, I want to get very concrete about the
difficulties of running a university or a community college
during this pandemic. And, as a Michigander, I want to mention
the COVID-19 outbreak in East Lansing that has been linked to a
popular bar near one of our great institutions, Michigan State
University.
As of July 6, yesterday, there had been 170 confirmed
cases, 1-7-0, confirmed cases of COVID-19 linked to this one
bar or restaurant, including 27 secondary cases, meaning people
who did not visit that establishment but caught the virus from
someone else who did.
The entire Lansing region has been moved back into the
high-risk category of our Governor, Gretchen Whitmer's
reopening plan, given the enormous impact of this outbreak.
This is over just an 8-day period following that restaurant's
reopening, and it has since closed again.
I bring this up because it is a cautionary tale of the risk
involved in reopening college campuses this fall. We can't just
think about classrooms and dorms; colleges anchor entire
communities--restaurants, bars, stores, and so on. Cases of
COVID-19 within a student body or faculty aren't going to stay
within a campus's walls.
Many reopening plans developed by institutions center
around the need to test students, test faculty, test staff to
contain cases of COVID-19 on campuses. However, estimates show
that the testing capacity in most States is still far below
what is needed to contain the virus. And, in fact, the lack of
adequate testing is the lead story in today's New York Times.
Dr. White, when you decided to remain online for this fall
and, as you say, perhaps the whole academic year, did testing
capacity and possible scenarios like the situation in East
Lansing play into that decision at all?
Mr. White. Absolutely, it did, Congressman Levin.
I mean, Jiminy Christmas, when you are having a whole--we
are responsible for well over 530,000 people, with our
employees and with our students, let alone, to your point
exactly, what is happening in East Lansing and the communities
where we are embedded. We came up with a number of $50 million
a month to do testing on a routine basis, which is just not in
the cards.
And, quite frankly, to your point, if you test today and
you are negative and it is an accurate test, that doesn't mean
you don't pick it up tomorrow, right?
Mr. Levin. Right.
Mr. White. So we have gone to the notion of really anywhere
from about 3 or 4 percent to maybe 10 percent of our courses
are going to be in-person. They are the laboratories, they are
the healthcare training where they work on mannequins, et
cetera. But everything else will be done in the virtual space
because of the cost and the inefficiency, really, of helping
solve this and keeping the disease under control for our
students.
But we have--like, 25 percent of our employees are in their
60s and above. We are responsible for them.
Mr. Levin. And you consulted with faculty and staff when
you made your decision as well, I assume.
Mr. White. Faculty, staff, students, local public health
officials, epidemiologists, and infectious disease experts in
the State government, yes. Broad consultation across the
system.
Mr. Levin. As you say, it seems like you could easily see
what is happening in East Lansing play out at any college bar
in the country or even at a party, you know, on a campus
anywhere.
So let me ask Dr. Pierce, if we improved testing and stood
up a nationwide contact tracing program, do you think school
administrators like yourself around the whole country would
feel better equipped to reopen, knowing there is an
infrastructure in place to contain outbreaks?
I am talking about, Dr. Pierce, you know, the Federal
Government fully taking responsibility, saying, ``We will have
a national contact tracing and testing program in place.''
Would that affect your decision-making?
Ms. Pierce. I believe it would. I think that, you know, we
follow the guidelines provided for us by the State of
Minnesota, the CDC, and the Office on Higher Ed, but having a
robust screening and testing policy and practice in place would
certainly play into our total decision-making and make us feel
a lot safer about welcoming our students to campus.
You know, our whole guidelines are based on the health and
safety of our employees, and so anything that would enhance
that would be welcome.
Mr. Levin. Thank you so much.
As I hear, Madam Chairwoman--
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Levin.--my time has expired. I will just say that I
feel so badly, as a Member of Congress, which is supposed to
govern our whole country, that we are putting these wonderful
administrators of our great universities and community colleges
into this position of having to deal with this pandemic when we
are not providing the national infrastructure of public health
that we are capable of providing that would help them so much.
And, with that, I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Levin.
Mr. Cline?
Mr. Cline. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Davis. Mr. Cline of Virginia, please go ahead.
Mr. Cline. Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, as we are adjusting to this new normal, as they
call it--I am not partial to that term, but some are calling it
that--it is important that we evaluate how this pandemic has
impacted the traditional way higher education has been
delivered to students and how it will continue to transform
moving forward.
Online learning is one of many approaches that has proven
to be successful in its implementation, and exploring
opportunities for expansion presents a promising alternative to
in-person classes during this time of increased virtual
connections.
You know, not only does it allow students flexibility in
their individual response to COVID, it solves many of the
contributing disparities to educational access that minorities
and those of lower socioeconomic classes face by eliminating
certain barriers. But it does create new ones, as was already
discussed, in relation to the lack of broadband access.
Online learning offers more affordable options that can be
customized to meet individual schedules, allowing for continued
learning to be a viable option for those who are balancing
other commitments like caring for family or holding a job.
Prior to the pandemic, 20 percent of student loan borrowers
were behind on their payments. And this further emphasizes the
importance of affordable and flexible education, particularly
as student debt has climbed over $1.5 trillion.
When I served in the Virginia General Assembly before
coming to Congress, I authored a bill inspired by the Western
Governors University structure that directed the Virginia
Secretary of Education and the State Council of Higher
Education to work with Virginia public colleges and any private
colleges who were willing to develop a program for an online
degree with a lower cost--at that point, $4,000 per academic
year. Virginia is blessed with many great institutions of
higher education, and it is important that they are affordable
and accessible to students. And I am committed to continuing to
work on ways to incentivize these types of innovative paths
forward while I serve in Congress.
So I will ask President Pulsipher, I know you mentioned 77
percent of WGU alumni respondents reported that their education
was worth the cost, compared to the national average of 38
percent. That is a testament to the work you have put forward.
Can you--let's see. I want to ask, you know, as the COVID
pandemic disrupted lives across the country, you know, you note
in your testimony that many people need mid-career reskilling.
But what are some barriers stopping people from seeking
additional skills-based education? And how can Congress help
people whose lives were disrupted by the pandemic-caused
economic downturn?
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Congressman Cline, for that
question.
I think one of the--there is increasing evidence for sure
that learning to earning, if you will, or educational work is
absolutely the loop of what adults are going to go through in
the future. And some of the barriers are simply what is the
program design and whether those programs are eligible for
Federal aid that many of our lower- and middle-skilled workers
actually need to advance their careers and professions.
And so, for example, many such programs, whether they are
apprenticeship in design or short form in duration, whether
they be technical, coding bootcamp models, or short micro-
credentials, as they are often referred to, these often don't
meet the eligibility requirements, whether it is full-time
attendance or whether it is elements related to a degree
seeking a credential model that is a credit-hour-based model.
And so these aren't typically contemplated within the scope
of Federal regulation that governs higher education. Higher
education generally is oriented towards the notion of a first-
time, full-time student who is pursuing an associate's or a
degree of some sort.
And what we are seeing is that employers are now
increasingly entering into this space and providing employer-
led training programs, paid internships, apprenticeships, or
even partnering with technical colleges that are advancing the
availability of these programs.
Those are opportunities for us to address not only the
first-time students but also the reskilling/upskilling
students.
Mr. Cline. Thank you. I appreciate it.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Cline.
And I now turn to Mr. Sablan from the Mariana Islands.
Mr. Sablan, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I thank the witnesses all for their participation
today.
My questions are generally directed for Dr. Pierce and Dr.
White, and then I have other questions that I will submit for
the record.
So the CARES Act provided over, what, $14 billion in
emergency support to institutions and students to address the
immediate impacts of the pandemic? Colleges are required to use
at least half of the funds they receive on emergency financial
aid support for students, while the other half can be spent on
institution expenses associated with the change in delivery of
education resulting from COVID-19.
So when distribution of other CARE funds from the
administration to my districts, the Northern Marianas, were
delayed, direct student relief payments became the first
injection of economic stimulus for individuals in the Marianas
since the beginning of the pandemic.
So I would like to hear from Dr. Pierce and Dr. White about
how they have used the Federal funding that they have received
to date.
Would you both speak briefly to how you approached the
awarding of the emergency grants on your campuses?
Specifically, I would like to hear about how you identified and
prioritized the students with the most need in awarding
emergency aid; how have you used the institutional share of
CARES funding that you received; and what other activities and
services would you fund if you could access additional Federal
support, like in the HEROES Act.
Thank you.
Ms. Pierce. Thank you for the question.
We considered the funding in terms of the intent from
Congress to meet the needs of students and especially students
who had higher need levels, and also students' credit load
because that was part of the funding formula.
So we identified eligible students, and they each received
a base award of $100. Then Pell-eligible students received
additional supplemental funds based on credits enrolled and a
percent of the total share.
Then we also withheld a percentage of the total grant so
that we could award additional funding based on a short
application to meet additional needs, such as housing, food,
basic needs, childcare, technology, transportation, and things
of that nature.
And so that is how we disbursed the funds, because it was
very important for us to use an equity lens in distributing the
funds.
Mr. Sablan. Thank you--
Ms. Pierce. We used additional funds--sorry?
Mr. Sablan. No, no. Go ahead, Dr. Pierce. Please.
Ms. Pierce. We have used additional funds to pay for
increased costs--the funds that were in the second half of the
funding--that arose, such as cleaning supplies, laptop rentals
for our students, access to library services and licenses and
things of that nature, software licenses, internet access,
additional computers, and notes for students who didn't have
access to set up hotspots.
And we anticipate spending a significant amount of the
COVID funds for instructional costs because of the restrictions
that we must operate under because of COVID.
Mr. Sablan. Okay.
And this may be below Dr. White's pay grade, but do you
have any comments, Dr. White? Do you have anything to add to
what Dr. Pierce just said, please?
Mr. White. Well, we distributed $263 million in direct
student funding directly to financial institutions so our
students, even those who lack documentation, could access the
funds. This goes to our deep-seated commitment to inclusive
excellence and equity, to student success--we wanted to make
sure that students who were enrolled to make progress to
degree--and administrative simplicity.
So our awards ranged anywhere from $500 to up to over
$5,000. And we used--within the Pell student body, which is
over 60 percent of our students, we used those with the least
expected family contribution first and worked our way up from
the bottom up until we ran out of money. Equity, ease, and
simplicity and accountability were the ways in which we
distributed those funds.
And on the university side, just like Dr. Pierce, we are
using it for COVID-19-induced additional expenses across our 23
institutions and--
Mr. Sablan. Yeah. And, Dr. White, you have a student
population that is just as great as the district I represent in
number. And I know; I have been to your institution, your
system.
I have additional questions to ask, and I will submit it
for the record. If you could provide a brief response to them,
I would appreciate it.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you.
Mr. Sablan. I hate that bell.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Sablan.
And now, I believe, Dr. Murphy? Dr. Murphy of North
Carolina? I know he was here earlier. I don't see him.
Mr. Smucker, I am going to go on to the rest of the
Democrats that are there. I just want to be sure that--whether
or not you have someone on your side.
Mr. Smucker. Chairwoman Davis, Dr. Murphy does appear to be
still available in the participant list.
Chairwoman Davis. Oh, okay. Great.
Dr. Murphy, are you there?
Well, we will come back to Dr. Murphy.
Mr. Smucker. Madam Chair, Mr. Watkins was on previously as
well. I don't know if he still is.
Chairwoman Davis. Oh, okay.
. Dr. Murphy is visible.
Chairwoman Davis. Oh, terrific. Okay. I am going to go back
to the grid, because I didn't see him.
. Dr. Murphy, you will need to unmute, sir.
Mr. Murphy. I consider myself unmuted.
Chairwoman Davis. Great. Dr. Murphy, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Murphy. All right.
Thank you guys very much for your time.
I want to actually ask different members of the committee
to answer this question. I am really concerned, and help me
walk through this, because I think we have lost a little bit,
in higher education, a little bit about what our purpose is, in
some ways.
And I want to say that, you know, a lot of the industries
and everything--obviously, the Nation has been hit with a
calamity the likes of which we didn't expect this anymore. So,
you know, we want to train and educate our individuals that go
off to colleges and universities to lead lives of constant
learning. And that is what it is. It is not technical school
per se. It is allowing critical minds to think.
And I am wondering, though, that, in and of itself, though,
where industry is exampled, we have times where we have to cut
our belts and, you know, trim our fat. And given the fact that
money now flows very, very freely from the Federal Government
to colleges and universities, really with no strings attached,
I am wondering what suggestions each of you could offer that
colleges and universities could tighten their belt, areas that
they could.
Where, heretofore, it has been basically a blank check from
the Federal Government, and now, given the shortage that is
happening across every industry in the country, where colleges
and universities will fall in that line.
So, if everybody could just do it in sequence, I look
forward to your responses.
Mr. Harper. Sure. I will weigh in on this one first. I want
to acknowledge that so many college and university presidents,
as well as campus reopening task forces, are working incredibly
hard, and they are figuring out how to bring recovery plans to
life, understanding that there are going to be really tight
fiscal constraints.
I wonder if, instead, that energy might be better placed on
figuring out how to effectively educate students in a virtual
environment, at least for this fall semester, and thinking
about how to do that well. It feels to me like that is a much
less expensive project in terms of both the expenditure of
human and fiscal resources.
I, frankly, find it annoying that so many campuses are
scrambling to figure out how to play football this fall and how
to ensure physical distancing in stadiums. It just feels to me
like the money would be better spent trying to figure out how
to close the digital equity access gaps and, again, how to
better prepare faculty to teach online, at least for this fall
semester.
Ms. Pierce. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Harper, for your
comments. I would like to just speak from the point of a
community and technical college in terms of that is exactly
where we are spending our time, our effort, and our resources
in figuring out how to make sure that our students have the
same quality level of an online experience, hybrid experience
that they would have [inaudible] delivering instruction.
However, there are some career and technical programs that
simply cannot be offered in an online environment. For example,
Air Force--I am sorry--aircraft maintenance technicians.
External accrediting bodies and the work that they must do
requires that they be face-to-face with their instructors so
that they can demonstrate a level that is acceptable for the
FAA. So it is incumbent upon us to spend the time and the
resources to make sure that we are able to deliver that type of
instruction to students in a safe environment that protects the
faculty and staff who work in those programs. .
For example, [inaudible] that is another career program
that absolutely requires face-to-face interaction.
So we are balancing the needs of our students, the needs of
other programs, the needs of an external accrediting bodies so
that we can meet our mission. Those are all incredibly
important things for us to do. We are balancing the need to
control spending by delaying and [inaudible] or different types
of instruction programs that need--
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. I want to make sure everybody gets a
chance, and I appreciate the answer. Thank you.
Mr. White. Congressman Murphy, Tim White here. An educated
citizenry is a public good. Equity matters. So Federal funds
for Pell and for MSIs and for [inaudible] institutions matter.
Education really is a matter of social justice at all times and
particularly--
Mr. Murphy. Let me ask you this. I get all the matters
stuff. I get all the matters stuff. How are you going to trim
costs?
Mr. White. We have trimmed costs by decreasing hiring,
decreasing travel, going together with other universities on
procurement at better rates, and eliminating unnecessary
activities that can be postponed in terms of construction and
maintenance. But it is really important to recognize that the
investment by the Feds is an investment in the Nation's future.
Unemployment is one half if you have a college degree versus
not in any given rate of unemployment. So let's not be looking
just at the cost. Let's look at the return on investment.
Mr. Murphy. I understand that. I understand that. I have a
terminal degree, so I appreciate that.
One other individual. Can we get our other--our four.
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Congressman Murphy. I think to
get to the heart of your question, one of the considerations
should be simply to consider what is the percent of an
operating budget that is directly on instruction and advancing
student outcomes and the attainment of their credentials. And
then the question would be, like, for those costs that are not
related to instruction, what are the revenue sources for those?
I would just echo what Dr. Harper had said, which is, you
know, the emphasis and the priority, I think, should really be
focusing on how does an increasing percentage of operating
budgets focus on teaching and the transfer of learning to the
individuals who are seeking and acquiring a credential? There
is no doubt that universities have taken on many different
purposes and missions, if you will. Much of that is emerging
life--emerging adult experience, but that can be a very costly
undertaking with a very different operating and economic model
that now has been disrupted by COVID. And so I think one of the
considerations is what percent of operating budgets are
dedicated to instruction and is increasing probability of
outcomes.
Chairman Davis. Thank you very much.
Mr. Murphy. I yield the balance of my time. Thank you.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Dr. Murphy.
I now move to Mr. Harder. Mr. Harder of California.
Mr. Harder. Wonderful. Well, thank you so much, Madam
Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Davis. You have 5 minutes.
Mr. Harder. Well, thank you. Thank you so much to the panel
for participating.
In my district, schools are right now announcing their
efforts to resume on-campus instruction. What exactly that is
going to look like this fall, clearly, it is going to be very
different from what it might have been last year. And while our
CSU, Stan State, will hold classes primary online, I think it
is really important to make sure that our educators and their
families and the students themselves are getting guidance for
reopening.
I wrote a letter to Secretary DeVos, with bipartisan
support, asking for guidance from the Department of Education,
and I continue to hear from teachers and parents that this is
their top concern, that as we are going through this reopening
process, that we are making sure that we are doing it safely
with the right guidance to folks on the front lines.
Dr. White, my first question is for you. Reopening is
really going to be uncharted territory, whether schools choose
to do so in the fall semester or if they choose to do so later
on. What measures, what guidance and support would you hope to
see from the Department of Education in advance of resuming on-
campus classes?
Mr. White. Well, I think, you know, the CDC has been
helpful with their guidelines for--and they are guidelines. And
the thing that I think really matters here is there is such
variability across the State of California, let alone across
the country, with respect to disease progression. We cannot
change the biology of the disease, but what we can do is change
the human behavior around that biology. And here in California,
and others have commented in other States in the Union, where
things have started to reescalate again.
We imagine another bump later this summer. We have a
forecast that is a very strong forecast of a greater wave of
this disease, coupled with influenza, come October, November,
and another wave coming in sort of March, April. So our
planning horizon has been for the longer term rather than
trying to figure out how we get through the next 2 weeks or 2
months. And I think that is a fundamental mindset that took a
while through collaboration with our faculty, staff, students,
and communities to go from how do we preserve in-person to how
do we move to a virtual and then back away from that as the
disease progression allows us to do, a fundamentally different
approach.
Mr. Harder. That is helpful. And my next question, and it
actually comes from that. It is around connectivity. I think
making sure that we have the right infrastructure in place is
going to be really important. This pandemic has exposed the
digital divide in rural areas such as my district. The
president of Stan State shared with me that she is concerned by
the lack of access to WiFi and internet. In the 21st century,
lack of internet access for our students is simply not
acceptable.
Dr. White, what can the CSU system do to help connect
students in these areas to internet, and what can the Federal
Government do to support you in those efforts?
Mr. White. Well, I think as a university, you know, we have
had a lot of our campuses create WiFi spots in their parking
lots, provide security services in the parking lots so students
that drive stay by themselves in their car and do their work.
There is the edge of roam internet capability that perhaps a
college student from Stan State could be close to an elementary
school somewhere in Sacramento or down in Fresno and still get
access to the internet.
The Governor's Council on Postsecondary Education that
Gavin Newsom appointed myself and other heads of public and
private higher education in the State has made getting rid of
the broadband digital divide one of the top priorities for
California. This is a place where I think Federal investment
could help jump-start that, if you will, to get more dollars
into getting rid of this digital divide [inaudible] achieve for
equity and social responsibility going forward is to remove
that divide.
Mr. Harder. Thank you. That is a big focus for a lot of
students in our area.
Finally, Dr. Harper, I have a question for you. We know the
Great Recession disproportionately impacted education in
underserved communities with reduced enrollment, higher dropout
rates, even students graduating with large debts and no jobs to
pay back those student loans. What can we do to better support
our students in this pandemic?
Mr. Harper. I think it is important for us to get ahead of
the predicted outcomes and recognizing that in prior periods,
everything that you just named had a disproportionate effect on
people of color and certainly lower income people of color. And
response effort, we will [inaudible] in our recovery efforts.
Mr. Harder. Thank you.
With that, I yield back. Thank you so much to our panel,
and thank you, Madam Chairman.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Harder.
And I believe Mr. Watkins of Kansas is with us. Mr.
Watkins, you have 5 minutes.
Mr. Watkins. That is right. Thank you very much. Thanks to
the panel for offering your time and expertise.
Mr. Pulsipher, what are the practical ways colleges can
remain affordable for students? Has the pandemic changed that
or created any new changes to making schools more affordable?
Mr. Pulsipher. I do think the pandemic has accelerated a
trend towards an increasing kind of digitally native approach
to things. Digitally native means how do you really leverage
technology in advancing the student's ability to access,
afford, and experience education. There is no doubt that when
you have a digitally native approach to things, that you are
going to remove a lot of elements of an operating budget that
aren't necessary to that.
I think that has definitely been one of our core models is
that how do you, you know, focus the largest percent of your
operating budget specifically on instruction. How do you make
it more interactive with faculty? How do you provide more--a
higher student-to-faculty ratio? How do you make sure that the
technology is accessible anytime, anywhere so that students can
learn independent of time and place?
A lot of those elements that are addressing things that are
not related to the acquisition, knowledge, skills, and
abilities that they need in their credentials, and so you can
take that out of the cost. Ultimately, we are at this point
where I think we are fundamentally going to start addressing
the arc of the cost curve in higher education and bending it
down rather than just finding out or, you know, devising new
funding and financing mechanisms to afford ever-increasing
costs. So those are opportunities that are now being
accelerated because of this rapid shift to digital.
And to Dr. Harper's point, I would simply add that the
investment required to enable and expand the digital
infrastructure necessary to cover 100 percent of our
individuals in America would be far less than investing in
campuses and buildings, et cetera, to try to make a campus
available within 15 minutes of every person. Like, you can now
bring education to every American. How to invest in making sure
that, you know, the cellular networks, the high-speed internet,
fiberoptic cables, whatever it may be, is fully accessible and
aid programs to cover technology, you know, devices, et cetera,
that are necessary for students to learn. And that hasn't
typically been contemplated, but yet we are willing to afford
accommodations for housing and living and other things like
that can be very expensive.
Mr. Watkins. Understood. Thank you. And you did touch on
this in your answer, but I would like you to maybe think of any
other mistakes institutions of higher learning are making with
respect to their business models, and can those schools do
better to adopt to the changing landscape in the postsecondary
instruction?
Mr. Pulsipher. Well, I think the first and most important
thing is to really as an institution ask yourself the question
of what is your primary purpose and how are you solving for
that purpose, and let everything else become secondary to that.
And if your primary purpose is fundamentally about teaching
individuals and helping them achieve the credential they came
to achieve, then you are going to focus all of your faculty
design, your costs in investment model, your, you know,
pedagogical engagement, peer-to-peer interactions around
learning. And when you do that, I think you can start to slough
off a lot of investments that may remove that.
You know, quite frankly, because we were designed in the
age of the internet, we view place-based classrooms, campuses
constraints to access. We also view them as constraints to even
advancing the quality of instruction and learning because you
can now personalize in a way learning in an online, you know,
digitally native environment that you can't necessarily do in a
classroom of 30, 100, or even 500 students. And so I think it
is just an opportunity for leaders and for the individuals like
yourselves and legislators and regulators to consider how is
technology shaping the future of how [inaudible] education.
Mr. Watkins. All right. Thank you, sir, and that is all I
have got.
I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Watkins.
We now turn to Mrs. Lee of Nevada. Mrs. Lee, you have 5
minutes.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I would
like to thank all the panelists for their insight today.
I represent southern Nevada, and we were hit, obviously,
during the Great Recession, and now are impacted tremendously
during this time. And what the Great Recession taught us, it
was a lot that may be happening now in the higher education
space and in our economy.
Following that recession, many people sought out quick
opportunities to gain skills and training in order to rejoin
the workforce. This trend was also coupled with loosened
accountability standards which resulted in exponential growth
of for-profit colleges. In southern Nevada alone, we saw 30
for-profit schools close within the last 10 years. Data
suggests we are seeing this pattern again now, and we know the
track record of for-profit colleges and their predatory tactics
used to defraud students.
In particular, Corinthian Colleges and ITT Tech are a
couple of institutions that abruptly closed their doors,
leaving tens of thousands of students strapped with worthless
degrees and mounds of debt. Unfortunately, Secretary DeVos'
borrower defense role has made it nearly impossible for them to
seek relief for this burden, setting the precedent that
fraudulent bad actor schools are coddled by the government
while students and taxpayers are stuck footing the bill.
I would like to ask this question of Dr. Harper, and others
are welcome to chime in. What do you think Congress can do
right now to prevent predatory bad actor schools from preying
on students during this recession?
Mr. Harper. I think that the Obama administration began to
make some really serious traction on this, and obviously lots
of those efforts have been rolled back. I think we need to
restore those efforts. You know, I think about this, and I care
very deeply about it, because we know that it is people of
color, and more specifically, low-income women of color, single
mothers, working mothers, who are really the targets of the
predatory practices. We owe it to those women of color to
safeguard them from, you know, being preyed upon when they are
most vulnerable.
As we see joblessness rates increase across the country,
who is most affected? African Americans. So when those people
are out of work and, you know, thinking about, you know, being
out of work, affording them an opportunity to upskill, reskill,
you know, pursue higher education, we must protect them from
being preyed upon by for-profit institutions.
Mrs. Lee. I will move on to Dr. Pierce. How does the
Department's failure to protect students from predatory actors
hurt the ability of community colleges to serve these students?
Ms. Pierce. It has a severe impact on our ability to serve
the students. They arrive, having used up a great deal of their
Pell eligibility or having used up all of their Pell
eligibility. They also frequently arrive already in debt,
because they have also taken on additional debt in addition to
having used up their Pell eligibility. They arrive with credits
or credentials that don't lead to a degree, that don't lead to
a living wage, and it makes it very difficult to serve the
students, and it limits what they are able to do.
So they start 10 feet behind the start line, and it is
just--it makes it that much more difficult for them to move
forward to get to a place where they are able to actually
complete a credential and earn a living wage. So instead of a
program maybe taking 12 months, it takes 24 months, and they
are steadily increasing their debt. They started out with a
deficit to begin with.
Mrs. Lee. Thank you.
Just one final question. The pandemic has brought obviously
great uncertainty, and we have seen many choosing to delay or
forego college altogether, and I am concerned that some
students may never return. I am even more concerned about
figuring out exactly who these students are. We know that FAFSA
renewals among students of low-income families has dropped
about 8 percent compared to the same time last year.
Dr. Pierce and Dr. White, have your institutions seen a
decline in enrollment, and can you expound upon what type of
student you have seen a decline in?
Mr. White. At the California State University, we have not
seen a decline in enrollment, but that is because of a massive
effort by our faculty, staff, and administrators to reach out
and re-create in a virtual space all the sort of things that
students, first-time students as well as returning students,
expect from us as some of the bridge programs, you know,
courses established, et cetera, et cetera. So that is our
approach.. So far, so good. We will know in the fall how it
works out. That is the direction of where we are headed.
Mrs. Lee. Well, that is good news. Thank you.
My time is up, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mrs. Lee.
Mr. Meuser of Pennsylvania, I believe you are there.
Mr. Meuser. Yes. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you very
much. To our witnesses, thank you very much for being with us
and for your important information on this important topic.
Over the last 30 years, public schools costs for tuition,
room and board, total costs tripled after being adjusted for
inflation, and private schools have doubled. Now, I certainly
know the argument. I was on our State board of--the public
schools went up and cost more because in some States, there
were cutbacks in education funding from the States. But even if
it is double after being adjusted for inflation, in the
business world, costs largely due to technology and
efficiencies remained--were cut in many cases or remained
relatively neutral outside of, of course, payroll costs.
So I would just ask Mr. Pulsipher to start off with. Seeing
your background as a business person, you were in the
technology field. You are now head of a school--of a college,
an online college. How do you explain that, the high level of
increased costs over the last 10 years, 20 years, 30 years to
virtually all higher education universities and colleges?
Mr. Pulsipher. Yeah. It is a much longer answer than time
allows, but maybe let me just highlight two things that I think
about. One is there is an investment or an asset and operating
model, the utilization of which doesn't support the total
consumption. And so that when you consider that for most
classroom or campus-based, residence-based models of that, you
really have to dramatically increase the utilization so that
you can get the long-run average cost curve to decline.
Otherwise, the support and operations for the buildings, for
the facilities, for the student life housing, et cetera, like,
that is an ever-increasing cost, and it is very difficult to
not let enrollment grow with it such that if you fix
enrollment, you are not going to grow the revenue to cover that
increasing cost, and there is the dynamic of that economic
model.
The other important thing to note is that over the last
several decades, the percentage of operating budgets that is
spent on instruction has been declining over time, and the
emerging expenses that are spent on student life or even
research and athletics and other things, that has been growing
as a percent of operating revenue.
There is one other dynamic that I don't think is often
talked about, which is this notion that quality is somehow
measured by scarcity or exclusivity, such that in that model
that you have this perverse behavior where if you actually
increase price, the perception of quality goes up such that
demand goes up. And so you have this weird model in higher
education that there is no constraints, if you will, on the
educational institutions to raise their price and having no
impact on demand. I can go on unbridled.
Mr. Meuser. Well, what is more of a concern is a student
comes in, whether the university costs $25,000 a year or
$60,000 a year, and what seems to be--and I don't get good
answers on this in previous testimony. When you review their
major, how much guidance is received? You take their major into
consideration. You take the level of loans that they are taking
out, the student's feedback on whether or not they are on track
to achieve that major in a 4-year period, you know, loans
outstanding. So there is no big surprises at the end that they
can't get a job for more than $38,000 a year, say, in many
cases, and yet they have $60,000 in loans.
Now, it doesn't seem to me, I am going to ask you all, is
that type of feedback strong [inaudible] feel a responsibility
to be providing that feedback to the students?
Mr. White. Congressman Meuser, this is Tim White. Our
tuition and fees is $7,300 a year. More than half of our
students graduate without debt, and those that do have debt, it
is well below the national average; we're about $17,000 in
debt. With the analytics, we provide a lot of advice as
students pursue their dreams, keeping them on track to degree.
We have had a graduation initiative in place now for several
years, and we are having all-time highs in any way you
calculate graduation rates.
Finally, in terms of bending the cost curve, it is just not
the online colleges that can do that. During the last 8 years,
at this CSU, we raised tuition one time for $237 in 9 years.
And we were certainly--before COVID, we had returned and had a
post-recession budget, and yet we were serving 40,000 more
students every year and graduating 35,000 more students every
year than we did before. So there are ways of bending the cost
curve and keeping costs down to the States, [inaudible] but you
have to be intentional about it. We have been [inaudible]
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, and congratulations. Those are good
stats. Appreciate it. Thank you.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Mr. Meuser.
And, Ms. Bonamici, you now have 5 minutes.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you so much. And thanks to the chair
and ranking member and to all the witnesses.
Just to follow up on the comment from my colleague and
Chancellor White's response, the value that people contribute
to our communities and to our society is not necessarily
measured in the amount of their salary, which is exactly why we
have things like the Public Service Loan Forgiveness Program.
But I want to start by saying that technology and online
learning have a place, especially during a global pandemic. I
would be very concerned if we are having a conversation about
the trend of higher education moving to online learning.
Portland State University here in Oregon just did a survey of
their students. 70 percent responded that they had a challenge
with the transition to remote learning. 82 percent had
difficulties focusing on remote instruction and prefer face-to-
face learning. Importantly, 50 percent said they don't have
access to reliable internet service. And a third of the
students with accessibility accommodations said they had very
serious challenges with accommodations. So we know that there
are a lot of inequities in higher education even before the
pandemic, and the pandemic has exacerbated so many of those.
I have spoken with college students pre-coronavirus about
the challenges of housing, of food insecurity, child care for
students who are parents. And now with most classes moving
online or moved online and most campus housing and dining halls
closed, students are really facing these sudden emergency
expenses. And we know historically unrepresented students have
been underrepresented, have been disproportionately affected,
as Dr. Harper talked about. A recent Hope Center survey found a
19 percentage point gap in basic needs insecurity between Black
students and their White peers.
So, Dr. Harper, can you talk more about the nontuition
expenses and how those contribute to gaps? And I really want to
get in time for another question, but I would like your input
on that, please.
Mr. Harper. Sure. I will be concise. It is really important
to think about the important work that colleges like Compton
College do to ensure that students have their transportation
needs met, that they have access to food and so on, and that we
don't have a solution for that, necessarily, if we go too far
online. I do think that Compton College really stepped up and,
you know, in a really impressive way during the pandemic to,
you know, partner with GrubHub and with other institutes to get
meals to students and their families, but I am not sure that
kind of model necessarily is scalable.
What I think is more scalable is what Compton College was
doing before the pandemic, where they were centralizing those
resources. So we need more of that as we return to campuses, at
some point. We need a serious strategy to continue to meet
students' basic needs.
Ms. Bonamici. I appreciate that. And I also very much
appreciate, Dr. Harper, your statement that higher education is
a public good, and I think certainly Chancellor White
established that with his comments about what is happening in
the California system.
I was a State legislator during the Great Recession and
know how hard it can be to balance the budget. But I am also a
graduate of a community college, a public university, and a
public law school, and recognize the value of these
institutions and the detriment to students when education
budgets are cut. So we did provide some funding in the
bipartisan CARES Act, but I know that is not enough, as Mr.
Takano discussed.
What specifically--and this is to Dr. Harper and Dr. Pierce
and Chancellor White, if there is time. What specifically is
needed to make sure that higher education institutions can
continue to provide academic programming? And I want to
emphasize that is to all students, and close those equity gaps
that are so, so critical. And maybe we will start with Dr.
Pierce and see if there is time for Dr. Harper and Chancellor
White.
Ms. Pierce. Yes. We are really committed to making sure
that students continue to have access to those basic services,
and so funding to help us meet those needs is critical.
Students need transportation. They need child care. They need
access to affordable healthcare. They need access to mental
health counseling. They need access to collegiate recovery
programs. They need access to peer mentoring and tutoring, and
they need access to their learning communities.
For some of our students, the act of coming on campus and
being on campus is what inspires them to persevere. Being
disconnected from the campus is very difficult for them.
Everyone doesn't have a quiet, stable environment in which to
learn at home, so we need to be able to maintain access on
campus for specialty labs, computer labs, specialty software,
career and technical programs where students have to perform
skills that must be done on campus [inaudible].
Ms. Bonamici. My time has expired--is expired, but I will
ask that Dr. Harper and Chancellor White on the record to
respond to that question.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you, Ms. Bonamici.
And I believe, Mr. Smucker, can I just ask you, as far as
you know, is there anybody on the line that--I looked through
here. I don't see anybody waiting.
Mr. Smucker. I think you are correct, Madam Chair. I think
we are through all the Republicans.
Voice. Ms. Adams?
Chairwoman Davis. Okay. I will get to Ms. Adams,
absolutely. I just wanted to double-check in with Mr. Smucker.
Okay. Great. Dr. Adams is next, followed by Mr. Norcross, if he
is available and in the room.
But Ms.--or Dr. Adams, you have 5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank you to the ranking
member as well. Thank you for convening the hearing today. And
to the witnesses, thank you for your extraordinary testimony.
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Tribal
Colleges and Universities, minority-serving institutions, and
community colleges are primarily public institutions that serve
many of our country's low-income students and students of
color. However, these institutions are chronically underfunded.
They have fewer resources to support their students.
So, Dr. Harper, how will State budgets cut
disproportionately impact HBCUs, TCUs, MSIs, and community
colleges and their ability to operate effectively and continue
to serve their students?
Mr. Harper. As a proud graduate of Albany State University,
a public historically Black university, I especially appreciate
this question. State budget cuts will affect those institutions
in the ways the State appropriations have affected them. They
have been inequitable for far too long. And therefore, you
know, when there are cuts, those cuts are going to have, you
know, an exceptionally deep impact on those chronically
underfunded institutions.
I really appreciated Chancellor White's earlier response to
the question where he named the price of what it costs to be a
student at the California State University. You know, so many
HBCUs, Tribal colleges, and community colleges effectively
educate students of color with far too few resources. It is
quite remarkable, as a matter of fact, how they make so much
out of so little. Just imagine if we were able to finance them
appropriately. They could, in fact, together, they could help
us close racial equity gaps across all industries if only we
would invest in them equitably.
Ms. Adams. Absolutely. Well, certainly, thank you for your
question [sic]. I am a proud two-time graduate of North
Carolina A&T State University, the largest public HBCU in the
country right now, and I am a 40-year retired professor from
Bennett College in Greensboro, which is a private school. But I
have been reading that some of our Nation's HBCUs could face
enrollment drops of up to 20 percent in the fall due to the
nature of this pandemic and the impact that it is going to have
on low-income students.
So, Dr. Harper, schools like HBCUs are heavily tuition-
driven. These schools rely heavily on tuition for revenue. How
should Congress support them at this time? And how do we
prevent what we saw during the 2008 recession where many of our
schools, in particular HBCUs, faced enrollment drops and,
therefore, fiscal calamity down the road? So is there a way to
change that tuition-based model, in your opinion?
Mr. Harper. Sure. I think that Federal investments that are
specifically earmarked for bolstering enrollments at HBCUs will
be incredibly helpful. Just 6 months ago, I concluded a project
that was funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in
which I was looking at HBCU enrollments. The good news is that
enrollments actually have not declined over time; they have
flatlined. I think with some specific Federal funding, that
those institutions could, in fact, invest in the very expensive
technologies that my university and others like it use to
recruit students and to yield students, but, you know, those
institutions don't have the money.
When you have to make a choice between repairing a sidewalk
to assure that students are safe or investing in technologies
that are going to allow you to, you know, really bolster your
enrollments and attract more students, most presidents are left
with[inaudible] with the choice of having to repair the
sidewalk.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Well, thank you for your question [sic]. I
really want to get some input from the other panelists in terms
of the importance of the meticulous Department of Education
oversight over how CARES Act funds were disbursed and used by
institutions. And you may have to send me this in writing, but
I think we have got like one more minute. So, Dr. White or Dr.
Pierce, if you could respond.
Mr. White. Yeah. You know, we believe in inclusive
excellence for all of our students, whether they have
documentation or not, whether they are international students,
whether they are from Florida or from California. So we
supplemented the CARES Act with our own money, you know, to
make anybody who had a COVID-19-induced added expense was able
to be supported. But it seemed incomprehensible to me that the
Department of Education would exclude those students because
they are part of a fabric of public higher education, bringing
perspectives from around the world and around the country to
all of us.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Well, I am out of time. Thanks to all.
Thanks to all of our panelists for your responses and for your
participation today.
I yield back, Madam Chair.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Adams.
And I want to go back now to Mr. Norcross. Is Mr. Norcross
available? And then Mr. Castro.
Mr. Castro, you have 5 minutes. Mr. Castro from Texas.
Mr. Castro. Yeah. Thank you, Chairwoman. And thank you to
the panelists for your testimony today.
I had a few questions about what you believe the long-term
impacts of COVID-19 will be on higher education, and let me
preface my question with this. When the pandemic broke, I had
conversations with both superintendents in my district, K-12
institutions, and also leaders of the higher education
institutions, our 2-year colleges, community colleges, and our
4-year universities, and they all expressed some similar
experiences and some different ones but, for example, many of
the 4-year universities said that they were seeing students
drop off of plans to enroll in their institutions in favor of
community colleges simply because of fear that they wouldn't be
able to afford to go to those 4-year institutions any longer.
You know, we have seen that the pandemic, especially in certain
States like mine in Texas, has stretched on longer and longer.
And given that in higher education there is often this
inverse relationship between cost and completion, in other
words, the places that are cheapest to go to often have the
lowest completion rates, what is the long-term impact of COVID-
19 on where students go to college, their ability to complete,
and also the support that our colleges and universities are
able to offer for them? And I open that up to any of the
panelists.
Mr. Pulsipher. Thank you, Congressman, for that question. I
will just go ahead and offer perspective on it. There is little
doubt that individuals and their families are consumers of
higher education and what we offer. When you have something
like a pandemic create real disruption in the value proposition
that was previously contemplated, that is going to change how
the consumers of education think about it.
And so simply being the father of two children who are
currently in a traditional model of higher education as well as
a graduate of it, but also being the leader of an online
competency-based education, I think the dynamic is such that if
many of the, you know, really beneficial emerging adult
experiences, social aspects, student engagement, if those
things are not part of the value proposition because of
longstanding or long-tenured effects of something like a
pandemic, then the return on investment for the costs asked to
be paid is going to be a challenge, such that many individuals
I do think will start focusing more specifically on how can I
still acquire the learning and credentials I need to advance
towards the opportunities I require, and what is the more
affordable ROI I could get for that if many of the values that
I previously had available to me are not available.
The other thing I do anticipate is that you will see an
emerging number of, you know, employers and alternative
pathways that will start emerging as you also consider the 40-
plus million adults and 10 million workers that are going to be
displaced because of either technology pandemic that need to be
reskilled and upskilled, and a 4-year degree pathway is not
going to be fast enough. And so you will see emerging
credentials and alternative pathways serving not just the
first-time, full-time student but the working learners and
adults who need to find pathways to their next job.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I don't know if any of the other
panelists have--
Ms. Pierce. If I may, Congressman. I will be very quick and
say that exactly what you have described is exactly the mission
of community and technical colleges meeting the needs of
students as they emerge. We will anticipate over time you will
see an increase in enrollment in community colleges as people
come back to seek short-term credentials, long-term
credentials, transfer programs, as well as opportunities to
fill up and transfer into different areas of growth. Community
and technical colleges are affordable, they are a value
proposition, and they offer excellent opportunities to retool
our economy.
Mr. Castro. Thank you.
Mr. White. Congressman Castro, one thing that [inaudible]
conversation for a different day, but I think this learning
deficit that is appearing in our K-12 system where the
interruptions and disruptions are happening in public schools
and in private schools that will lead to a disproportionate
across the spectrum of race and ethnicity and income level,
that those students, when they do finally get to a community
college or a 4-year university or an online college, will have
a different set of preparation. And there will be some learning
deficits there that the colleges and the universities are going
to have to deal with. We may not be causing the problem, but it
is going to be ours to resolve at the end. That is going to
fundamentally change, I think, the relationship of public
higher education in particular in the years and decades ahead.
Mr. Castro. Thank you. I appreciate it.
And I yield back, Chairwoman.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
And I believe that we have come to the end of members who
are ready for questions. I am going to just check our grid
again to be sure.
Anybody that we didn't see? Okay.
Then I wanted to just remind my colleagues that pursuant to
committee practice, materials for submission for the hearing
record must be submitted to the Committee Clerk within 14 days
following the last day of the hearing, so that would be by the
close of business on July 21 of 2020. The materials submitted
must address the subject matter of the hearing, and only a
member of the subcommittee or an invited witness may submit
materials for inclusion in the hearing record. Documents are
limited to 50 pages each. Documents longer than 50 pages will
be incorporated into the record by an internet link that you
must provide to the Committee Clerk within the required
timeframe, but please recognize that years from now, that link
may no longer work.
Pursuant to House Resolution 965 and the accompanying
regulations, items for the record should be submitted
electronically by emailing submissions to

[emailprotected]
. Member offices are
encouraged to submit materials to the inbox before the hearing
or during the hearing at the time the member makes the request.
The record will remain open for 14 days per committee practice
for additional submissions after the hearing. And, without
objection, I would like to enter those following reports into
the record.
I want to thank our witnesses certainly for their
participation today. It has been outstanding, and we know that
there are many more questions out there. We are all anxious and
worried, quite honestly, about what is going to happen, and so
we know how important it is that the your remarks have been
today. Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for you, and we ask the witnesses to please respond
to those questions in writing, and that hearing record will be
open for 14 days in order to receive those responses.
I want to remind my colleagues that pursuant to committee
practice, witness questions for the hearing record must be
submitted to the Majority Committee Staff or Committee Clerk
within 7 days, and the questions submitted must address the
subject matter of the hearing.
I now want to recognize the distinguished Ranking Member
for his closing statement, Mr. Smucker. Thank you for being
with us today, and we would welcome your comments.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I agree this was a great discussion. I appreciate you
scheduling this hearing. I want to thank the witnesses as well
for all of your testimonies, for your insight, your
perspectives, and for the great work that each of you are doing
in your institutions.
We have heard from all of you about the challenges that
schools have faced in the spring as the coronavirus forced
institutions to quickly shift to virtual learning environments.
We also learned that there will be further obstacles that
schools have to grapple with in the fall.
The pandemic accelerated the underlying trends that are
shaping postsecondary education. Increasingly, students are
demanding a better return on investment. They are demanding on-
demand education and the ability to fluidly transition between
the classroom and the workforce. Simple fact is that the
pandemic exposed what members on our side have been asking for
some time, that Congress must really pass real HEA, or higher
ed authorization reform. We need to get beyond just doubling
down on the failing status quo which, unfortunately, is what
the HEROES Act does. And Congress instead should come together
in a bipartisan manner to pass--we did come together, I should
say, in a bipartisan manner to pass the CARES Act. We provided
billions of dollars in relief to institutions and to students
that have been impacted by the coronavirus. And, unfortunately,
my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are insisting on
spending billions more in taxpayer money without first
understanding the full effect and impact of the CARES Act.
As Congress discusses additional relief, we should broaden
the conversation beyond simply just more money for the sector.
We should be judging our success by how well we enhance
opportunities for students to seek education and to improve
their station in life.
Over several decades, the Federal Government has played an
increasingly larger role in our higher education system and
with some pretty dismal results. Just over half our Nation's
college students are graduating within 6 years, and those who
do graduate are finding themselves woefully unprepared for the
workforce. So Congress must work together in a bipartisan
manner to pass legislation that encourages universities to
innovate and adapt and meet the needs of today's students.
Our focus should be on reopening responsibly. We cannot
lose sight of doing what is best for students. Congress can
help all students, regardless of their background, succeed by
encouraging proven methods of learning such as competency-based
education, including workforce participation in the college
classroom, and allowing for innovative and stackable
credentials. The time for substantive HEA reform is now.
Again, I want to thank the witnesses for your testimonies
today. I look forward to working with my colleagues to reform
the HEA in the best interests of the students, institutions,
and taxpayers.
Madam Chairwoman, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairwoman Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Smucker.
I now recognize myself for the purpose of making a closing
statement.
And I certainly want to thank, once again, our expert
witnesses for joining the subcommittee's first virtual hearing
and for your compelling testimony today. Our discussion
certainly offered an important reminder that Congress still has
much work to do from providing institutions with additional
relief to protecting vulnerable students from fraud and
ensuring that all students can access and complete a college
degree.
You know, I think if--we would love to have had students in
the room as well to share for us how devastating for a number
of students this has been to try and make some adjustments, to
anticipate, and to even inquire and ask themselves and their
families, is it good to try and continue with my higher
education at this time? What should I do? For freshmen who are
just entering, for those who have been--maybe they had a year
of school behind them, and now, they are really troubled about
what the next step is. And I am sure that you all could have
offered some advice about that, but our role here is to try and
understand what can we do? What can the Congress do? What
should we be doing? And so again, we have a lot of work to do
in that regard.
We are well aware that there are a number of alternative
pathways. In fact, the Committee on Higher Ed has been working
hard on workforce investment, looking at how we scale up
apprenticeships more. How do we help young people who maybe are
looking for alternatives to be able to access those, and
especially at a time like this when things are so uncertain?
But at the same time, we have to be sure that those
institutions and those programs are highly accountable, not
just to the people that they serve, of course, but also to the
taxpayers. And so that is a keen interest of ours, and we are
working very hard on that.
We also know that there are a lot of reasons why young
people are not able to profit from their education as well as
they should. And I think as we look at how we can reimagine,
how we can think differently about higher education, that we
need to be certain that we understand what are those reasons
for them not being able to achieve in the way they wanted in
the past, and how do we work or how do we adjust our higher
education system to respond to that and, again, look at our
workforce investments.
So again, I thank you very much for being here, and we know
that we must advance the HEROES Act. I think a little
differently than my colleague, Mr. Smucker. I think that we
need to have that support there in order to do what needs to be
done to create this reimagining within our communities. If we
don't have that, then those students who benefit from that
support, that mentoring, all that we have been able to do in
the past, will not have that in school, and they will probably
leave the system and maybe never return, even though they have
the great potential to be able to have made those contributions
as individuals in the future. We can't let that happen. So we
ought to be certain that we are thinking ahead about the
support that is needed.
And there is no question that COVID has impacted the
ability of each and every school to prepare their students and
to be able to deliver in the way that they need to deliver. So
I hope that we can come together on behalf of the HEROES Act
and overcome this pandemic and excel into the future.
Thank you again. We really benefited from your expertise
today.
And with that, if there is no further business, without
objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned. Thank you all.

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 2:53 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
