- EXAMINING THE EDUCATION DEPARTMENT'S IMPLEMENTATION OF BORROWER DEFENSE

[House Hearing, 116 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE EDUCATION
DEPARTMENT'S IMPLEMENTATION
OF BORROWER DEFENSE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION
AND LABOR
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

HEARING HELD IN WASHINGTON, DC, DECEMBER 12, 2019

__________

Serial No. 116-48

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Education and Labor

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: www.govinfo.gov
or
Committee address: https://edlabor.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
39-729                      WASHINGTON : 2021

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND LABOR

ROBERT C. ``BOBBY'' SCOTT, Virginia, Chairman

Susan A. Davis, California           Virginia Foxx, North Carolina,
Raul M. Grijalva, Arizona            Ranking Member
Joe Courtney, Connecticut            David P. Roe, Tennessee
Marcia L. Fudge, Ohio                Glenn Thompson, Pennsylvania
Gregorio Kilili Camacho Sablan,      Tim Walberg, Michigan
Northern Mariana Islands           Brett Guthrie, Kentucky
Frederica S. Wilson, Florida         Bradley Byrne, Alabama
Suzanne Bonamici, Oregon             Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Mark Takano, California              Elise M. Stefanik, New York
Alma S. Adams, North Carolina        Rick W. Allen, Georgia
Mark DeSaulnier, California          Lloyd Smucker, Pennsylvania
Donald Norcross, New Jersey          Jim Banks, Indiana
Pramila Jayapal, Washington          Mark Walker, North Carolina
Joseph D. Morelle, New York          James Comer, Kentucky
Susan Wild, Pennsylvania             Ben Cline, Virginia
Josh Harder, California              Russ Fulcher, Idaho
Lucy McBath, Georgia                 Van Taylor, Texas
Kim Schrier, Washington              Steve Watkins, Kansas
Lauren Underwood, Illinois           Ron Wright, Texas
Jahana Hayes, Connecticut            Daniel Meuser, Pennsylvania
Donna E. Shalala, Florida            Dusty Johnson, South Dakota
Andy Levin, Michigan*                Fred Keller, Pennsylvania
Ilhan Omar, Minnesota                Gregory F. Murphy, North Carolina
David J. Trone, Maryland
Haley M. Stevens, Michigan
Susie Lee, Nevada
Lori Trahan, Massachusetts
Joaquin Castro, Texas
* Vice-Chair

Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director
Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director
------

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Hearing held on December 12, 2019................................     1

Statement of Members:
Scott, Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'', Chairman, Committee on
Education and Labor........................................     2
Prepared statement of....................................     4
Foxx, Hon. Virginia, Ranking Member, Committee on Education
and Labor..................................................     5
Prepared statement of....................................     6

Statement of Witness:
DeVos, Hon. Betsy, Secretary, U.S. Department of Education...     8
Prepared statement of....................................    11

Additional Submissions:
Courtney, Hon. Joe, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Connecticut:
Memorandum dated December 14,2017 from the United States
Department of Education................................    92
Davis, Hon. Susan A., a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Prepared statement from United States of America Federal
Trade Commission.......................................   103
Grijalva, Hon. Raul M., a Representative in Congress from the
State of Arizona:
Letter dated August 30, 2018 from CLASP..................   109
Hayes, Hon. Jahana, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Connecticut:
Letter dated January 9, 2017 from the Borrower Defense
Unit...................................................   114
Letter dated January 10, 2017 from the Borrower Defense
Unit...................................................   128
Omar, Hon. Ilhan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Minnesota:
Class Action Complaint...................................   142
Affadavit................................................   164
Chairman Scott:
Letter dated October 24, 2016 from the Borrowers Defense
Unit...................................................   167
Department of Education and Attorney General Kamala
Harris Announce Findings From Investigation of Wyotech
and Everest Programs...................................   185
Borrower Defense Partial Relief Methodology Corinthian
Colleges, Inc. (CCI) Programs December 2019............   197
Borrower Defense Partial Relief Methodology Corinthian
Colleges, Inc. (CCI) Programs December 2019............   203
Borrower Defense Partial Relief Methodology ITT
Educational Services, Inc. Programs December 2019......   209
Borrower Defense Partial Relief Methodology ITT
Educational Services, Inc. Programs December 2019......   210
Policy Statement dated December 10, 2019.................   211
Federal Student Aid Enforcement Office Report on Borrower
Defense October 28, 2016...............................   224
Prepared statement of Chairman Scott.....................   229
Form 8-K Current Report..................................   232
Letter dated August 25, 2016 from the Department of
Education..............................................   236
Litigation Release: SEC Charges Former Executive Officers
for Their Role In Corinthian Colleges' Disclosure
Failures...............................................   243
Letter dated December 10, 2019 from LSC..................   245
United States Department of Education First Report of the
Special Master for Borrower to the Under Secretary
September 3, 2015......................................   247
United States Department of Education Second Report of
the Special Master for Borrower to the Under Secretary
December 3, 2015.......................................   258
United States Department of Education Third Report of the
Special Master for Borrower to the Under Secretary
March 25, 2016.........................................   265
United States Department of Education Fourth Report of
the Special Master for Borrower to the Under Secretary
June 29, 2016..........................................   274
U.S. Department of Education Accepts Operating Plan from
Corinthian Colleges Inc................................   282
Takano, Hon. Mark, a Representative in Congress from the
State of California:
Defendents' Brief In Response To October 8, 2019 Order...   285
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania:
Article: Bid To Buy For-Profit College By Former Obama
Insiders Raises Questions..............................   298
Wild, Hon. Susan, a Representative in Congress from the State
of Pennsylvania:
Article: Education Department Appoints Special Master To
Inform Debt Relief Process.............................   308

EXAMINING THE EDUCATION
DEPARTMENT'S IMPLEMENTATION
OF BORROWER DEFENSE

----------

Thursday, December 12, 2019

House of Representatives

Committee on Education and the Workforce,

Washington, D.C.

----------

The subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 9:01, a.m., in
Room 2175, Rayburn House Office Building. Hon. Robby C.
``Bobby'' Scott (Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Scott, Davis, Grijalva, Courtney,
Fudge, Sablan, Wilson, Bonamici, Takano, Adams, DeSaulnier,
Norcross, Morelle, Wild, Harder, Schrier, Underwood, Hayes,
Shalala, Levin, Omar, Trone, Stevens, Lee, Trahan, Castro,
Foxx, Roe, Thompson, Walberg, Guthrie, Byrne, Grothman,
Stefanik, Allen, Smucker, Banks, Walker, Comer, Taylor,
Watkins, Wright, Meuser, Johnson, Keller, Murphy.
Also Present: General Brown.
Staff Present: Tylease Alli, Chief Clerk; Katie Berger,
Professional Staff; Rachel Beers, GAO Detailee, Ilana Brunner,
General Counsel - Health and Labor; Sharit Cardenas, Labor
Policy Fellow; Emma Eatman, Press Assistant; Christian Haines,
General Counsel - Education; Kia Hamadanchy, Oversight Counsel;
Ariel Jona, Staff Assistant; Stephanie Lalle, Deputy
Communications Director; Andre Lindsay, Staff Assistant; Jaria
Martin, Clerk/Assistant to the Staff Director; Max Moore, Staff
Assistant; Jacque Mosley, Director of Education Policy;
Veronique Pluviose, Staff Director; Benjamin Sinoff, Director
of Education Oversight; Banyon Vassar, Deputy Director of
Information Technology; Claire Viall, Professional Staff;
Joshua Weisz, Communications Director; Cyrus Artz, Minority
Parliamentarian; Kelsey Avino, Minority Fellow; Courtney
Butcher, Minority Director of Coalitions and Member Services;
Dean Johnson, Minority Staff Assistant; Amy Raaf Jones,
Minority Director of Education and Human Resources Policy;
Hannah Matesic, Minority Director of Operations; Audra
McGeorge, Minority Communications Director; Jake Middlebrooks,
Minority Professional Staff Member; Carlton Norwood, Minority
Press Secretary; Brandon Renz, Minority Staff Director; Alex
Ricci, Minority Professional Staff Member; Chance Russell,
Minority Legislative Assistant; and Mandy Schaumburg, Minority
Chief Counsel and Deputy Director of Education Policy.
Chairman Scott. The Committee on Education and Labor will
come to order. We want to welcome everyone, and note that a
quorum is present. The committee is meeting today in an
oversight hearing to hear testimony from the Department of
Education's implementation of the Borrower Defense Rule.
Pursuant to Committee Rule 7(c), opening statements are limited
to the Chair and Ranking Member. This allows us to hear from
our witnesses sooner, and provides all members with adequate
time to ask questions.
I would like to thank Secretary DeVos for being with us
today, and thank her for agreeing to hold enough time in her
schedule to allow all of the members present to ask 5 minutes
of questions pursuant to House rules. And I am especially
thankful because as chair, I am exercising my prerogative to go
last in the question order. And so, if she were to leave early,
I would not get to ask questions. So, thank you for agreeing to
stay with us for the full time.
I recognize myself now for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
We are here to examine the Department of Education's
implementation of the Borrower Defense Rule, and I want to
thank--thank you, Madam Secretary, for appearing before the
committee to discuss this important issue.
The Borrower Defense Rule is grounded in basic fairness.
Student borrowers, who are defrauded by their college, face
severe financial and emotional consequences. And it is,
therefore, cruel and counterproductive for the Federal
Government to compound their misfortune by collecting on their
student loans.
Accordingly, the Higher Education Act requires the
Secretary of Education to provide debt relief to defrauded
borrowers. Until recently, that authority was rarely needed
because institutional fraud was uncommon, but, in 2015,
Corinthian Colleges, a large for-profit chain, abruptly closed
its doors in the face of widespread allegations of fraud. Those
allegations were later substantiated with countless reports of
schools luring students with false promises of guaranteed jobs
upon graduation and inaccurate information about the
transferability of credits. A year later, another for-profit
chain, ITT Tech, closed under similar circumstances.
In response to a surge of claims, the Obama Administration
issued a new Borrowers Defense Rule to streamline the process
for providing relief to defrauded students. By the time the
Trump Administration took office, 28,000 Corinthian students
had already received relief, and the Department was on pace to
process the remaining 54,000 pending claims by the spring of
2017.
However, under the present leadership, the Department has
refused to implement the Borrower Defense Rule. Instead of
providing defrauded borrowers with full and timely relief as
the law allows, the Department halted processing claims, so
that it could invent a new formula that ensured most defrauded
borrowers would get only a fraction of relief that they were
eligible to receive.
The Department's initial partial relief formula would have
deprived about 93 percent of defrauded students' full relief.
In 2018, the Federal Court blocked the initial partial relief
formula because it misused students' personal data. But even
after the court's ruling, which specifically asserted the
Department could provide timely and full relief to eligible
borrowers under the Obama era framework, the Department refused
to do so. In fact, in 18 months, between the court's June 18th
ruling, June 2018 ruling, and today's announcement of a new
revised partial relief formula, the Department did not
present--process a single Borrower Defense claim.
Meanwhile, the victims of predatory schools are being left
in limbo. The number of borrowers awaiting relief has grown
from 54,000 to roughly 240,000. So, Madam Secretary, your
refusal to process claims is inflicting serious harm on
students that you have the duty to serve.
While the Department has been searching for a legal method
to shortchange these defrauded borrowers, these defrauded
borrowers have been left with mountains of debt, worthless
degrees, and none of the job opportunities they were promised.
In many cases, they were unable to go back to school, start a
family, or move on with their lives. And not only has the
Department refused to provide relief to defrauded students, it
also illegally collected on 45,000 borrowers, who are awaiting
you to take action on their claims. In some cases, these
individuals had wage, wages and tax returns, garnished by the
very government who was supposed to be providing them relief.
The court found you in court--in contempt of court for
collecting on roughly 16,000 of these borrowers, but now the
Department has conceded that it was illegally collecting on
about 45,000 borrowers.
In sum, the defrauded borrowers have been cheated twice:
first, by their college, then by the Department of Education
that refused to make them whole. In court filings, the
Department admitted to gross negligence in handling the
Borrowers Defense Rule.
Throughout the last year, this committee has been--has sent
multiple requests for information and documents in an attempt
to understand the rationale for changing the Department's
policy. The Department has continually refused to comply with
those requests. This lack of transparency was in full display
yesterday when a media outlet published documents revealing the
Department's own staff conducted an extensive review of claims
from former Corinthian and ITT Tech students and found that
student borrowers who attended these schools deserved full debt
relief. Those memos should have been provided to the committee
in response to our repeated requests. Their existence raises,
unfortunately, two important questions. One, why was there a
refusal to provide relief and immediate debt relief to
defrauded borrowers, despite the clear finding of the
Department staff? And, two, are there other relevant documents
in the Department that the Department is withholding from the
committee and the public that would shed light on policy
decisions?
Today's hearing is intended to get answers to these and
other questions on the--about the Department's policy on behalf
of roughly 240,000 borrowers awaiting relief. So, thank you,
again, for joining us today. And I yield now to the ranking
member, Dr. Foxx, for the purpose of making an opening
statement.
[The statement by Chairman Scott follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Robert C. ``Bobby'' Scott, Chairman,
Committee on Education and Labor

We are here to examine the Department of Education's implementation
of the Borrower Defense rule. I want to thank you, Madame Secretary,
for appearing before the Committee to discuss this important issue.
Borrower Defense is a rule grounded in basic fairness. Student
borrowers who are defrauded by their college face severe financial and
emotional consequences. It is therefore cruel and counterproductive for
the federal government to compound their misfortune by collecting on
their student loans.
Accordingly, the Higher Education Act requires the Secretary of
Education to provide debt relief to defrauded borrowers. Until
recently, that authority was rarely needed because institutional fraud
was uncommon. But in 2015, Corinthian Colleges - a large for-profit
chain - abruptly closed its doors in the face of widespread allegations
of fraud.
Those allegations were later substantiated with countless reports
of schools luring students with false promises of guaranteed jobs upon
graduation and inaccurate information about the transferability of
credits. A year later, a second for-profit chain, I-T-T Tech, closed
under similar circumstances.
In response to a surge in claims, the Obama administration issued a
new Borrower Defense rule to streamline the process for providing
relief to defrauded students.
By the time the Trump administration took office, 28,000 Corinthian
Colleges students had already received relief, and the Department was
on pace to process the remaining 54,000 claims pending by the Spring of
2017.
However, under the present leadership, the Department refused to
implement the Borrower Defense rule. Instead of providing defrauded
borrowers full and timely relief - as the law allows - the Department
halted processing of claims so it could invent a new formula that
ensured most defrauded borrowers would get only a fraction of the
relief they were eligble to receive.
The Department's initial partial relief formula would have deprived
93 percent of defrauded students of full relief.
In 2018, a federal Court blocked the intial partial relief formula
because it misused students' personal data. But even after the Court's
ruling, which specifically asserted the Department could provide timely
and full relief to eligble borrowers under the Obama-era framework, the
Department refused to do so.
In fact, in the 18 months between the Court's June 2018 ruling and
Tuesday's announcement of a new revised partial relief formula, the
Department did not process a single Borrower Defense claim.
Meanwhile, victims of predatory schools are being left in limbo.
The number of borrowers awaiting relief has grown from 54,000 to
roughly 240,000.
Madame Secretary, your refusal to process claims is inflicting
serious harm on the students you have a duty serve. While the
Department has been searching for a legal method of shortchanging
defrauded borrowers, those defrauded borrowers have been left with
mountains of debt, worthless degrees, and none of the job opportunities
they were promised. In many cases, they have been unable to go back to
school, start a family, and move on with their lives.
Not only has the Department refused to provide relief to defrauded
students, it also illegally collected on 45,000 borrowers who are
waiting for you to take action on their claims. In some cases, these
individuals had their wages and tax returns garnished by the very
government that was supposed to be providing them relief. The Court
found you in contempt of court for collecting on roughly 16,000 of
these borrowers, but now the Department is conceding that the illegal
collection involved 45,000 borrowers.
In sum, defrauded borrowers have been cheated twice: First by their
college, and then by a Department of Education that refuses to make
them whole. In Court filings, the Department admitted to ``gross
negligence'' in its handling of the Borrower Defense rule. This is
perhaps one of the few areas on which we can agree.
Throughout the last year, this Committee has sent multiple requests
for information and documents in an attempt to understand the rationale
for changing the Department's policy. The Department has continually
refused to comply with those requests.
This lack of transparency was on full display yesterday, when a
media outlet published documents revealing that the Department's own
staff conducted an extensive review of claims from former Corinthian
and ITT Tech students, and found that student borrowers who attended
these schools deserve full debt relief.
Those memos should have been provided to the Committee in response
to our repeated requests. Their existence raises, unfortunately, two
important questions:
1. Why was there a refusal to provide full and immediately debt
relief to defrauded borrowers, despite the clear findings of your own
staff?
2. What other relevant documents is the Department withholding from
this Committee and the public that would shed light on its policy
decisions?
Today's hearing is intended to get answers to these and other
questions about the Department's policy on behalf of roughly 240,000
borrowers awaiting relief.
Thank you, again, for joining us today. I now yield to the Ranking
Member, Dr. Foxx, for the purpose of making an opening statement.
______

Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
DeVos, for being here today. It is my hope that today's hearing
will provide members of the committee with the chance to
understand how the Department of Education is working to
address borrowers' defense claims that have been filed with the
Department.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to make one thing abundantly
clear. Above all else, committee Republicans support smart,
focused, and constructive oversight. Members of Congress have
an important responsibility to protect every single tax dollar.
Everyone in this room knows how seriously we take that
responsibility. Strong and effective oversight can strengthen
the integrity of our institutions, including the Department of
Education. Ensuring the Federal Government is efficient and
accountable should be a top priority for all members in
Congress.
Sadly, this committee is missing an opportunity to address
serious oversight issues. We could investigate the widespread
and brazen lawmaking by the United Autoworker Union Leaders,
who betrayed hardworking Americans in favor of self-enrichment.
We know the UAW's senior union leaders engaged in money
laundering, tax fraud, bribery, and embezzlement, but this
committee has taken no action.
We could investigate the potential fraud within Head Start.
A recent report from the nonpartisan Government Accountability
Office, GAO, indicated there was income fabrication and
doctored applications to impact an individual's eligibility.
We could investigate how potentially tens of thousands of
people may be committing student loan fraud, as a GAO report
found borrowers may have understated their income or overstated
their family size to reduce their student loan payments.
There are real opportunities to work together to address
these serious issues that require honest oversight. Instead,
committee Democrats will choose to use their time today
attacking Secretary DeVos for delays in responses to oversight
requests she is responding to. Let me remind everyone here
today that the process to produce the oversight documents
requested by any member of Congress, including the committee
chairman, requires reviews across multiple offices within the
agency. All of this takes time and is necessary to produce
documents and answers that are, actually, responsive to
members.
Despite the limitations of the bureaucracy, the Education
Department is trying to work with the committee Democrats to
respond to all their requests. So, contrary to claims, I expect
to hear today from my colleagues across the aisle, Secretary
DeVos and the Education Department are committed to providing
relief to students who have been harmed by fraudulent practices
and are reforming the Borrower Defense to Repayment Rule, both
to clarify standards and make the process more accessible.
Since taking office, Secretary DeVos has spent more than 2
years on deliberations, public hearings, negotiations with
higher ed stakeholders, and considering, incorporating, and
responding to public comments on this issue. They did so with a
regulatory reset in mind to hold colleges and universities
accountable, and provide relief to students who have been
harmed by deceptive practices.
Claims that Secretary DeVos is unnecessarily or
purposefully delaying relief for these borrowers is false--are
false. Secretary DeVos is putting reforms in place that will
help defrauded students navigate the process of getting the
loan relief they deserve, and committee Republicans are
supportive of these efforts.
Defrauded students who have been financially harmed should
get relief. I thank Secretary DeVos, again, for being here
today, and look forward to our discussion about how the
Education Department is working to protect student borrowers
and American taxpayers by not only holding fraudulent
institutions accountable, but also working to prevent fraud
from happening in the first place. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement by Mrs. Foxx follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Virginia Foxx, Ranking Member, Committee on
Education and Labor

Thank you, Secretary DeVos, for being here today. It is my hope
that today's hearing will provide Members of the Committee with a
chance to understand how the Department of Education is working to
address borrowers' defense claims that have been filed with the
Department.
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to make one thing clear, above all else,
Committee Republicans support smart, focused, and constructive
oversight. Members of Congress have an important responsibility to
protect every single tax dollar. Everyone in this room knows how
serious we take that responsibility.
Strong and effective oversight can strengthen the integrity of our
institutions, including the Department of Education. Ensuring the
federal government is efficient and accountable should be a top
priority for all Members of Congress.
Sadly, this Committee is missing an opportunity to address serious
oversight issues. We could investigate the widespread and brazen
lawbreaking by the United Auto Worker (UAW) union leaders who betrayed
hardworking Americans in favor of self-enrichment. We know the UAW's
senior union leaders engaged in money laundering, tax fraud, bribery,
and embezzlement, but this Committee has taken no action. We could
investigate the potential fraud within Head Start. A recent report from
the nonpartisan Government Accountability Office (GAO) indicated there
was income fabrication and doctored applications to impact an
individual's eligibility. We could investigate how potentially tens of
thousands of people may be committing student loan fraud, as a GAO
report found borrowers may have understated their income or overstated
their family size to reduce their student loan payments.
There are real opportunities to work together to address these
serious issues that require honest oversight.
Instead, Committee Democrats will choose to use their time today
attacking Secretary DeVos for delays in responses to oversight requests
she is responding to.
Let me remind everyone here today that the process to produce the
oversight documents requested by any Member of Congress, including the
Committee Chairman, requires reviews across multiple offices within the
agency. All of this takes time and is necessary to produce documents
and answers that are actually responsive to Members.
Despite the limitations of the bureaucracy, the Education
Department is trying to work with the Committee Democrats to respond to
all their requests.
So, contrary to the claims I expect to hear today from my
colleagues across the aisle, Secretary DeVos and the Education
Department are committed to providing relief to students who have been
harmed by fraudulent practices and are reforming the borrower defense
to repayment rule to both clarify standards and make the process more
accessible.
Since taking office, Secretary DeVos has spent more than two years
on deliberations, public hearings, negotiations with higher education
stakeholders, and considering, incorporating, and responding to public
comments on this issue. They did so with a regulatory reset in mind to
hold colleges and universities accountable and provide relief to
students who have been harmed by deceptive practices.
Claims that Secretary DeVos is unnecessarily or purposely delaying
relief for these borrowers is false.
Secretary DeVos is putting reforms in place that will help
defrauded students navigate the process of getting the loan relief they
deserve. And Committee Republicans are supportive of these efforts.
Defrauded students who have been financially harmed should get relief.
I thank Secretary DeVos again for being here today, and I look
forward to our discussion about how the Education Department is working
to protect student borrowers and American taxpayers by not only holding
fraudulent institutions accountable but also working to prevent fraud
from happening in the first place.
______

Chairman Scott. Thank you. And, Dr. Foxx, without
objection, all other Members who wish to insert written
statements into the record may do so by submitting it to the
Committee Clerk electronically in Microsoft Word format, by
5:00, by 14 days--within 14 days of today.
I would like to welcome Secretary DeVos, and thank her,
again, for appearing before the committee. I will now yield to
the gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg, who has requested the
honor of introducing the Secretary.
Mr. Walberg. I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your deference
to allow me this opportunity. We Michiganians are proud people.
And I know there will be disagreements here in this hearing
today about what the Secretary is doing, but having had the
privilege and honor of knowing her and her family, going back
into the early 1980s, and knowing the impact that her family,
as well as the family she married into, has had in not only
Michigan, but all across this country, not because they were
pushed into it, but because they had a passion for seeing young
people educated from K through college, and to make sure it was
done in appropriate ways and that people have had choices that
would not have had choices before. They have done it in a way
that has made a difference, and it continues on into their
children, as well in cultural areas, educational areas,
manufacturing, bringing up people that would not have had the
opportunity that they had.
So, I understand that this will be a challenging hearing
today. I do know, from personal experience, that our Secretary
wants to do things right, wants to do it according to law,
wants to make sure that things are carried out on both sides of
the ledger, and especially that students and taxpayers are
treated fairly. And I know that because of knowing how she and
her family have carried on the life in Michigan, and touching
lives who would not have been carried on in a way before that
led to success.
So, I just want my colleagues to know that background
information, as well, even though she is a Secretary of
Education and is entirely capable of answering all the
questions we have. I welcome you, and thank you for being here.
Chairman Scott. Thank you very much. Before you begin your
testimony, Madam Secretary, I would like to acknowledge the
presence of retired Air Force Major General Mark Brown, chief
operating officer of the Office of Federal Student Aid, for
agreement with the committee. General Brown is here to assist
the Secretary in her answers. He is not a witness at this
hearing. In the course of answering a question directed to her,
the Secretary, according to the agreement, may consult with
General Brown or direct him to assist her in the response. But
insofar as he is not a witness, members are reminded that
questions, including follow-up questions, may not be directed
to him personally, but must be directed to the Secretary.
Let me remind you, Madam Secretary, that we have received
your written statement and it will appear in full in the
hearing record pursuant to Committee Rule 7(d) and committee
practice. You are asked to limit your oral presentation to a 5-
minute summary of your written statement pursuant to Title 18
U.S. Code Section 101. Are you aware of that code section,
prohibiting false statements to committee?
So, we will forego the spectacle of the swearing in.
Therefore, before you begin your testimony, please remember to
press the button on the microphone in front of you so that it
will turn on and the members can hear you. As you begin to
speak, the light in front of you will turn green. After 4
minutes, the light will turn yellow to signal that you have 1
minute remaining. When the light turns red, your 5 minutes have
expired and we would ask you to wrap up. During member
questions, in answering a question, please remember to, once
again, turn on your microphone.
I now recognize the Secretary of Education, Secretary
DeVos.

TESTIMONY OF THE HONORABLE BETSY DeVOS, SECRETARY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

Secretary DeVos. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you, Congressman Walberg, for that very kind introduction.
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Foxx, and members of the
committee, let me, first, thank the committee for its
willingness to make this a productive hearing. We have provided
the committee 18,000 pages of documents during the past month
on Borrower Defense alone. We have briefed you several times,
and I am hopeful we can use today's hearing to continue in that
spirit of constructive dialogue.
Let me also thank you for the opportunity to set the record
straight on this administration's approach to Borrower Defense
to repayment. I want to be very clear. Students are my number
one priority. They are why I come to work every day. So, if
students have been deceived by institutions and suffered
financial harm as a result, they should be made whole. But if
claims are false or students did not suffer financial harm,
then hardworking taxpayers, including those who scraped and
saved to faithfully pay their own student loans, should not
have to pay somebody else's student loans, too. It is a matter
of fairness.
Adjudication of these claims must treat all students and
taxpayers fairly. Simply discharging all of these loans, as
some on this committee suggest be done, is not fair to
taxpayers, nor to those who have paid or are paying their
loans.
This administration's commitment to fairness and the rule
of law continues to guide our thinking with regard to Borrower
Defense. When Borrower Defense arrived in 1995, it was a
regulation in the Higher Education Act that was little known
and little used. In fact, in the 20 years from 1995 to 2015,
fewer than 60 claims were filed. Then the previous
administration weaponized the regulation against schools it
simply did not like. They applied the law in a discriminatory
fashion. So, since 2015, there has been a 5,000 percent
increase in Borrower Defense claims.
This administration is committed to pulling back the
previous administration's overreach, and will enforce a
Borrower Defense Rule that is consistent with Congress' intent,
that protects all borrowers and that treats taxpayers and
schools fairly. Before I discuss the important distinctions of
our Borrower Defense Rule, let me begin by saying what it does
not do.
First, it does not apply retroactively. When our rule goes
into effect on July 1st next year, it will apply only to loans
first disbursed after that date. This means that the Department
will continue to enforce, in good faith, the previous
administration's 2016 rule for all loans disbursed between July
1, 2017, and July 1, 2020.
Second, our rule does not shield any school from
accountability, nor does it relax oversight of bad ones. All
institutions, no matter their tax status, are held accountable
under our rule.
Finally, our rule does not demand that students prove that
their school intentionally deceived them. Instead, the rule
provides due process for all parties. Our process focuses on
individual students and requires evidence from both the
borrower and the school before deciding a claim. And unlike the
prior administration's rule, the student always has the
opportunity to respond to the school's case.
Now, let me discuss the basics of what our rule does do.
First, our rule puts into place a process that is clear,
understandable, and easily accessible for borrowers. It also
ensures that claims are processed efficiently, carefully,
transparently, and fairly.
Second, students may file either affirmative or defensive
claims, all of which will be judged using a preponderance of
the evidence standard.
Third, our rule provides a legally grounded, reasoned, and
appropriate definition of misrepresentation. It enables both
borrowers and institutions to present evidence, obtain relevant
evidence we are considering in the case, and respond to any
evidence in the record.
These reforms constitute much needed course corrections to
the 2016 rule currently in place. The Obama Administration's
rule punishes for-profit schools, but gives nonprofits a pass
for the very same conduct.
Now let me turn to the ongoing adjudication of existing
claims before the Department. Yes, there is a backlog of
Borrower Defense claims at Federal Student Aid. To say that I
am frustrated by that is an understatement. But rather than
focus on why there is a backlog, too many have, instead,
focused on creating more chaos in a circus-like atmosphere.
Here are the inconvenient facts about Borrower Defense.
First, we inherited from the Obama Administration more than
64,000 Borrower Defense claims. So, I asked the IG to
investigate why they had made such little progress processing
these claims. The IG found material weaknesses in the previous
administration's procedures for approving and denying claims.
In fact, the prior administration was encouraging claims to be
filed, knowing full well it lacked the ability to even
accurately track them. It had no process in place for reviewing
any claims, and it knew that the Department could not quickly
and legally give blanket forgiveness of all loans. So, when
they left office, they left tens of thousands of claims behind.
Greeted by this crushing number of applications, and
without effective guidance from Congress, we took action to
establish a process for reviewing the backlog using the prior
administration's categories as our baseline. We quickly
adjudicated 32,400 claims. Our relief methodology was based on
the same data, Social Security Administration data to be exact,
that the Obama Administration used to measure schools under
their Gainful Employment Rule.
Unfortunately, in May of 2018, a Federal District Court in
California determined that using that data violates the Privacy
Act. We strongly disagree, and have been waiting for a decision
on appeal from the Ninth Circuit for well more than a year.
The Department stands ready to process these claims. I want
to process these claims. We simply need a decision from the
court. In the meantime, we are doing everything we can to
process claims in another manner. I recently approved a new
scientifically robust methodology that relies on publicly
available 2017 Gainful Employment earnings data, Social
Security Administration earnings, College Scorecard data, and
IRS information to determine harm and calculate the amount of
relief.
Ultimately, what the Department wants, what I want, and
what taxpayers deserve, is to provide fair relief to all those
borrowers who actually have been harmed. That is what the law
requires. That is what you intended by the Borrower Defense to
Repayment Law, and that is what we are doing. Thank you. I will
be happy to answer your questions.
[The statement of Secretary DeVos follows:]

Chairman Scott. Thank you, Madam Secretary. Under Committee
Rule 8(a), we will now question the witness on the 5-minute
rule. As I mentioned earlier, as Chair, I have decided to go to
the end. So, I will yield to the next senior Member, the
Majority side, who will be followed by the Ranking Member or
her designee. We will then alternate between the parties.
And I remind Members, again, that all questions are to be
directed to the Secretary, who can consult with General Brown,
or--and I would also remind members that the subject of the
hearing is Borrower Defense. Per agreement with--and per our
agreement, members should limit their questions to that issue.
I now yield 5 minutes to the gentlelady from California, Ms.
Davis.
Ms. Davis. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And, Madam
Secretary, welcome. We are glad that you are here. In the
course of our discussion with you today, I hope we can
determine your interest and your thinking on this issue. One of
your roles, of course, is to protect the taxpayer, but we hope
you will also want to protect students from the harm caused by
predatory for-profit programs.
Today, you are here to get credit, I think, for the new
partial relief formula, but it does deny full relief to the
vast majority of defrauded students. Can you tell us how many
partial relief funding formulas you discussed with your
Department before settling on this one?
Secretary DeVos. Well, thank you, Congresswoman, for that
question and for your continued concern about and focus on
students. We share that concern and want to do what is right
for all students.
We considered a number of different methodologies once the
court shut us down in May of 2018. And we wanted to make sure
that we had a scientifically robust and defensible approach to
being able to determine whether a student was, indeed,
financially harmed, and we believe that this new methodology
addresses those concerns, and will indeed treat and consider
each student and their individual circumstances very fairly and
straightforwardly.
Ms. Davis. But I think you must be aware that the new
formula does rely on incomplete earnings data which represents
only about 20 percent of all programs. Would you agree that is
incomplete?
Secretary DeVos. Well, it relies on a number of different
data sets, and it is all publicly available. It is all--it is
actually more expansive than just the gainful employment data,
and it is taking into consideration--
Ms. Davis. But we hope--
Secretary DeVos.--programs at schools at which the student
has filed a claim versus programs, like programs, across the
country.
Ms. Davis. Well, I certainly hope that you will look at
that again because the 80 percent of all borrowers only
includes borrowers who completed degrees, and most students
seeking relief under Borrower Defense do not complete their
degrees. So, I want to read to you a quote from a story, which
came from the recent NPR story. Are you familiar with that
story at the NPR?
Secretary DeVos. I have heard about it. I have not listened
or looked at it in depth.
Ms. Davis. Okay, and I believe that was one that really had
to do with the work in your Department, and I quote, ``I was
also told by the recruiters from the school,'' and this is a
student speaking about what happened, ``I was also told by the
recruiters from the school about wages I could make that I have
yet to be able to earn due to the fact that the school is and
was not very credible. The ITT Tech recruiters assured me AA
students graduate making around 50,000 to 60,000 a year, and a
B.S. graduate would be around 80,000.''
So, they misrepresented their product, their name brand,
and their education. Would you say that student has been
harmed?
Secretary DeVos. I am not going to comment to
hypotheticals. I am sympathetic to that student's plight, and
if that student has filed a claim, it will, of course, be
adjudicated and processed appropriately through what--our
efforts with--at the Department and FSA.
Ms. Davis. Well, you know, does the university not have a
responsibility to provide what it claims it will? There is
literally no other consumer protection that does not restore
full repayment of a fraudulent product. We are all aware of
that. We have probably been through it.
NPR reported yesterday that internal memos in your own
Department show that career staff advocated for defrauded
students to receive full relief from Borrowers Defense. Did you
review the memos that came from your own Department?
Secretary DeVos. I am not sure which memos to which you are
referring. There are lots of memos generated within the
Department of Education. There are hundreds and hundreds of
lawyers, and many of them have lots of opinions. So, if you
would like to share the specific documents, I would be happy to
review them.
Ms. Davis. I believe there were thousands of them, and I am
just wondering, I mean, according to the report, the majority
of career staff disagree with you. And so, that was clear in
the report and you will, I am sure, have a chance to have a
look at that..
And I think there is also, you know, a concern that if you
weren't listening to the career staff that were telling you
what they were seeing with students that were definitely
harmed, but did you rely on that same staff for the partial
defense plan that you came up with?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, what I know when I came
into my job is, there were tens of thousands of claims and
there was no process and no structure for actually considering
them. We worked on and developed a process and a structure,
implemented it, and we are well down the way of considering all
of the claims that we had pending and then the court shut us
down. We had to develop another process. We are still waiting
for the court to opine on the ruling that they made in May of
2018.
Davis. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, my time is up. I was also
going to go into the Federal Trade Commission coming up with
the University of Phoenix ruling. And the interesting thing
about that is that if students had a Federal loan, they will
probably not be made whole, but if they got their yield, their
loans through the school, they will, which is an interesting
dilemma that we are going to have to face. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady's time has expired. Dr.
Foxx?
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, again, Mr. Chairman. Secretary DeVos,
it is important to conduct good oversight and to do that we
need to have a good working relationship with the Department. I
know you are trying to cooperate with congressional oversight,
so thank you for those efforts.
Madam Secretary, I know there are several letters that you
have received from the chairman that his staff has also sent a
significant number of emails with additional requests. Is that
accurate?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, it is.
Mrs. Foxx. My understanding is that you are diligently
working to address those requests. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, it is and we have been for sure.
Mrs. Foxx. More generally speaking, how many letters have
you received from Congress since taking office and what is your
overall response rate?
Secretary DeVos. Since I took office, on average, we
receive 1.8 letters every day from members of Congress to
address specific issues. We have responded to 95 percent of
those letters and I have placed a high priority on making sure
we are responsive and timely in our responses.
Mrs. Foxx. So, 1.8 letters per day,--
Secretary DeVos. Per day.
Mrs. Foxx.--from members of Congress.
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mrs. Foxx. Then moving on to Borrower Defense, these
questions might require more technical information. So, I am
fine with General Brown sharing information with you to answer
the question. There is a report the Department issued before
you were there that claimed FSA was on target to clear all
eligible Borrower Defense claims by spring of 2017. Are you
familiar with this report?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, I am.
Mrs. Foxx. Do you know how many claims the administration
had processed at that point and how many remained then?
Secretary DeVos. I believe there were 16,000. Is it 16,000
that had been processed before I came in and then--
Mrs. Foxx. Sixteen thousand?
Secretary DeVos. Sixteen thousand and there were 64,000
awaiting me when I came.
Mrs. Foxx. Okay. So, could you tell us why you were not
able to clear pending claims by spring of 2017?
Secretary DeVos. Well, as I mentioned in my opening
comments, there was no process in place to actually consider
the claims. The ones that had been processed early on were
clearly ones that there was a hundred percent relief involved.
But as more of those claims were considered, we consider--they
continued to deteriorate, to use the Federal Student Aid
terminology, in terms of their validity of claim. And so
without a process in place, we had no way of actually
determining what the relief could or would be.
Mrs. Foxx. It sounds as though from the information that we
have been given and things you have either said or alluded to,
it was as though the Obama Administration just okayed every
single claim, if there was no process. Is that an accurate
thing to say? So, it would not have mattered what the students
said, but they just said, I want my loan forgiven and it was
forgiven?
Secretary DeVos. Yes. That is based on the data that we
have seen and the information that we have been able to find
from that time period.
Mrs. Foxx. So, no proof was required of the students that--
a student that he or she actually had been defrauded? Secretary
DEVOS. No. Once again, there was no real process in place. So,
it was a matter of looking at claims and then forgiving them.
And that had been done for a number of thousands of students
before I arrived.
Mrs. Foxx. All right. And much has been made about the
``career staff'' who made some recommendations to you early on
about how to handle these claims. My assumption is those would
have been the same career staff, that that had just been simply
sending out forgiveness for loans to these people.
What is your understanding of your role when you get a
recommendation from a staff person?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I get many recommendations from
staff, both career and politically appointed staff and take
them all into consideration. I clearly understand and
acknowledge the expertise--of those who have been in the
Department for some time. But in this case, I--for one thing, I
am not sure to what documents are even being referred to. So, I
do not want to comment on specific documents when I am not sure
what they exactly say.
And secondly, like I said, there are hundreds of lawyers in
the Department of Education, many of whom generate lots of
ideas and lots of recommendations and I take those, I do not
review all of them. I get--some come to me, but I take the
recommendations, I take the input. And ultimately, I need to
make sure I am following the law and that I am establishing
policies and practices that are consistent with the law.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I apologize for going over.
Chairman Scott. That is okay. The gentleman from Arizona,
Mr. Grijalva.
Mr. Grijalva. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is no question
that Corinthian borrowers were defrauded and that fraud was so
severe that they were entitled to full relief. In fact, the
Department of Education found the Corinthian education provided
little or no value. Madam Secretary, do you agree Corinthian
defrauded students?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I know that there were a
number of students that attended Corinthian programs that have
claims with--for financial harm based on their experiences and
their individual circumstances. And we are continuing to work
to make sure that those claims are ultimately processed and
those students are responded to. Again, unfortunately, the
courts have stopped our processing of those.
Mr. Grijalva. But there has been countless memos developed
by your own attorneys and the Department of Education about the
wholesale defrauding of students by Corinthian. And, in fact,
the court filings by over 20 state attorney generals would
disagree that this is a widespread issue. But do you agree that
Corinthian misled students on the college's graduation rates?
They falsely asserted a degree would result in a guaranteed
employment and that academic credits from Corinthian would be
accepted and transferable to other colleges? Do you agree that
those students were misled?
Secretary DeVos. I think in some cases that was probably
the case, but I also know that the prior administration
basically forced schools like Corinthian out of business. They
put financial restrictions on Corinthian that allow--that did
not allow the school to even continue operating anymore. What
we need to do--
Mr. Grijalva. But the fundamental question with Corinthian,
you can agree or disagree, and I will ask that Corinthian
provided no educational value to its students as a result of
fraud and that was pervasive before any discussion by any
administration regarding that program?
Secretary DeVos. I do not agree with that narrative. I
think there are many students that received valuable education
from Corinthian just like they do from many other institutions.
The question is what students among them were financially
harmed - that is part of the process--
Mr. Grijalva. Referencing the statement that my colleague,
Ms. Davis, referenced from yesterday, that internal
communication in the Department of Education from January 10,
2017, concludes, ``Given this extensive, well-documented,
pervasive, and highly publicized misconduct, the Department has
determined that the value of an IT&T education, like
Corinthian, is likely either negligible or nonexistent.
Accordingly, it is appropriate for the Department to award
eligible borrowers full relief.''
So, though, do you agree that those loans before July 1,
2017, are subject to the Borrower Defense Fund standard?
Secretary DeVos. They certainly are subject to the Borrower
Defense Rule, but they are not subject or they are not
automatically subject to full and complete forgiveness of every
single loan.
Mr. Grijalva. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. That is, I mean, even the prior
administration, individuals acknowledged that there were up to
40 percent of the Corinthian claims filed that were not even
eligible for consideration. And so--
Mr. Grijalva. But the 1994 standard--
Secretary DeVos.--again, I go back, I am sorry, I go back
to the fact that there was--
Mr. Grijalva. Madam Secretary--
Secretary DeVos.--no process.
Mr. Grijalva. I have limited time.
Secretary DeVos. There was no way to really consider these
claims. I inherited no process. We had to create a process.
Mr. Grijalva. But the 1994 standard--
Secretary DeVos. I understand that some of you here want to
just have blanket forgiveness for everyone, anyone who raises
their hand and files a claim, but that simply is not right.
Mr. Grijalva. No, I think most of us here want justice for
these taxpayers that happen to be borrowers, for them to
receive the relief that they need to receive. And the 1994
standards established that these claims are subject to state
law standard, meaning those 20 states that found that the
college engaged in fraud, those students are entitled to
Borrowers Defense. And how many of these loans, pending loans,
fall within that criteria of the loans that you are talking
about, that we are talking about with Corinthian, and that are
seeking relief from the Department? It is a question.
Secretary DeVos. Is it a question?
Mr. Grijalva. Yes.
Secretary DeVos. I do not have the specific number of
Corinthian claims that are still pending. Perhaps General Brown
can help.
Mr. Grijalva. Well, I think Judge Kim in her decision said,
``This is a problem that the government created. Madam
Secretary, you have an obligation to provide relief to those
borrowers regardless of costs.'' Do you agree with that?
Secretary DeVos. We have an obligation to follow the rules
and to follow the law and we have implemented a process that
will actually allow us to do that. We had implemented one.
Mr. Grijalva. Well, in the defense of--
Secretary DeVos. The court did not agree with the data we
were using--
Mr. Grijalva. In the protection of taxpayers, we have to
agree that seeking--that those seeking relief are taxpayers and
the Department should be doing something about protecting them
as well. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. And I am going to have to be a
little stricter with the time because we may run over. So, with
that, Dr. Roe, you are recognized.
Dr. Roe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here and your work on simplifying the
FASFAFAFSA form. And, General Brown, thank you for your
service, sir.
Today, Madam Secretary, I would like to discuss your
authority when it comes to awarding relief or a defense to
repayment claim. I know this was discussed in your testimony,
but I would like the record to be clear. If you believe General
Brown can provide a more technical answer, please feel free to
call on him. Many of the questions are a simple yes or no.
Number one, you have the authority under the law to provide
borrowers filing a Borrower Defense claim full, partial, or no
relief. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct, Congressman, and I would
love to refer everyone to Exhibit 5 that demonstrates or that
shows the portion of the law that clearly states this. I think
this has been a question for a lot of people and I want to make
sure it is very clear that it is the Secretary's prerogative to
have--to establish full or partial relief.
Dr. Roe. Thank you. The statute is silent on full or
partial relief, but the regulation specifically discussed
partial relief. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct.
Dr. Roe. The Department defended partial relief in both the
2016 rule under President Obama and your 2019 regulations. Is
that correct?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct.
Dr. Roe. The lawsuit and ManriquezManriquez case is about
the data used to determine partial relief. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct. Not the methodology.
Dr. Roe. Okay. I know that many of my colleagues believe
you should just reward full relief if you find there was harm,
but you have decided, as you are authorized to do, to grant
partial relief in some circumstances. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct.
Dr. Roe. Simply following the statute on the rules. Can you
please explain why you believe partial relief is important and
what are some examples of where partial relief is appropriate?
Secretary DeVos. Certainly. Well, the previous approach was
either all or nothing and the new methodology that we have
developed is a very scientifically defensible approach that
looks at standard deviations from median earnings in a program
and compares it to median earnings. So, if a claimant makes a
claim against a school with regard to a specific program, we
will take the median earnings data from that program, from that
school, and compare it to like programs from other schools
across the country. And if it is more than two standard
deviations below that median, the individual would get a
hundred percent relief. If it is between the median and two
standard deviations, it will be a tiered relief. If they are
earning more than the median for the rest of the schools, then
they would not be entitled to relief. They cannot demonstrate
that they have been financially harmed.
Dr. Roe. So, that seems very fair to me to be able to do it
that way. If you have a situation where your earnings are what
they said they would be, then I agree you should not have
relief.
I would like to yield, Mr. Chairman, the rest of my time to
the ranking member, Dr. Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you very much, Dr. Roe. Madam Secretary,
the ManriquezManriquez case is related to Corinthian borrowers,
is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, specifically to Corinthian borrowers.
Mrs. Foxx. Okay. And the plaintiffs in that suit are
seeking relief from their loans because they claim that schools
misrepresented their job placement rates, is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mrs. Foxx. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. Primarily, they are primarily job
placement claims.
Mrs. Foxx. Sure. And the plaintiff specifically challenged
your methodology for determining partial relief, is that
correct?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I believe they were taking issue
with the entire methodology and the court held that the data we
were using was the issue.
Mrs. Foxx. Okay. And then the judge issued an injunction
preventing you from using the methodology because it violated
privacy protections, is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. That was that judge's opinion, yes.
Mrs. Foxx. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. We disagree with that and have appealed
it.
Mrs. Foxx. That injunction prevents the Department from
collecting on the loans of the covered borrowers while the case
is pending, is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mrs. Foxx. Okay. However, there was a problem and those
loans were collected, continuing to be collected on, is that
correct?
Secretary DeVos. Well, no. Let me put that in context. So,
a couple of things I think are important to know.
First of all, before that court case was ever--or that
injunction was ever handed down, I had directed that all of the
pending student loan or student Borrower Defense applications
be put in forbearance and also not continue to accrue interest.
So, while this was going on for months and months and months,
those students were not going to be sinking deeper and deeper
into their whatever problem. So, that was done before the court
injunction when the court--when the judge issued that
injunction. That was already the directive and that directive
was the policy or the practice that I expected would be carried
forward.
After a year, there were some processing errors within
Federal Student Aid and with our servicers, so, human beings
made mistakes. As soon as we became aware of it, we said we
acknowledge it and we will correct the issues, which we did
immediately.
And I would like to ask General Brown to just talk briefly
about the numbers and how quickly we have--
Mrs. Foxx. Madam Secretary, we will come back to that when
we have a chance. I do not want to go over.
Secretary DeVos. Okay.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. The gentlemen from Connecticut, Mr.
Courtney.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here today. Again, I just want to go back
to your response to Mr.--Dr. Roe about--and again, you were
very, I think, specific about the fact that your discretion, it
is vested in you by the 1993 Student Loan Reform Act, allows
you to provide both partial and full relief, that you just said
that, is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, yes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you. Okay. And I appreciate that
answer. Mr. Chairman, I just want to now enter into the record
a memo dated December 14, 2017, published in the New York Times
from Steven Menashi, who was a political appointee acting
general counsel at the Department of Education to James
Manning, who at the time had been delegated the authority to
perform the duties of Under Secretary.
Chairman Scott. No objection.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In that memo, Madam
Secretary, Mr. Menashi, who is now Judge Menashi, wrote that,
``It is now OGC's position that the Borrower Defense Unit's
analysis that Department regulations in the Borrower Defense
Statute allow the Secretary to assess relief at her
discretion.''
Do you believe that this memo again provides you the legal
basis to provide, in some instances, full relief to defrauded
students based on your discretion?
Secretary DeVos. I am not referring to the memo. I am
referring to that section of the rule that existed in both the
95 rule and the 2016 rule.
Mr. Courtney. Great. Well, thank you, which again,
basically says that you have that--
Secretary DeVos. There is, yes, that the Secretary has
discretion--
Mr. Courtney. Right.
Secretary DeVos. And again, because there was no process in
place--
Mr. Courtney. We agree. We agree. I am not--
Secretary DeVos. There was no process in place and--
Mr. Courtney. Thank you for your answer. I just want to
keep going here because on page 6 of the memo it goes on to say
that, ``In fact, the only limit to the Secretary's ability to
grant relief is that no student may recover in excess of the
amount that the borrower has repaid on the loan,'' which is
certainly a commonsense statement. And I think we can all agree
on that, that you cannot overpay with restitution. Is that
correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mr. Courtney. Thank you.
Secretary DeVos. I mean, I think that would--
Mr. Courtney. So, again, since you took office, I know you
did process some of the pending claims from the prior
administration, but after that cohort, have you provided any
defrauded loan borrowers full relief since that first tranche?
Secretary DeVos. Well, we could not, frankly, because the
process was shut down and we could not--
Mr. Courtney. Let me talk about that because actually, if
you look at the court order, which, again, shut down your
partial relief program because of what the judge felt was
improper use of Social Security data, the judge actually
stated, and I quote, ``Nothing in this order prohibits the
Secretary from fully discharging the loans of any borrower who
successfully completed or who successfully completes an
attestation form.''
So, I mean, she actually still left the door open for the
Department to continue to process these Borrower Defense
requests.
Secretary DeVos. Yes. But without a methodology that we
could access the appropriate data, we could not. I could not go
ahead and say, we can just go ahead and forgive a whole bunch
of loans 100 percent because, number one, each student, each
student's application needs to be considered individually. The
circumstances are different and the facts are different. And so
without a methodology to utilize, we could not continue to
process. Now, we continued--
Mr. Courtney. So, the--
Secretary DeVos.--let me just clarify.
Mr. Courtney. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. We continued to adjudicate and we have
many claims that are awaiting now being processed to be able to
respond specifically to whether there was financial harm or
not. And so now that we have another methodology up and
running, we are going to be able to, I think, move through
those fairly quickly. And--
Mr. Courtney. So, again, if I could just follow up with a
question, again, because my time is about to run out. So, what
I hear you saying is that these claims, after the judge's
order, stopped being processed because you, through your
discretion, determined that they had to come up with another
way of processing the claims. But again, that is not because
the judge handcuffed you in terms of providing full relief. Her
order specifically says that she left that door open for you.
It really was your decision based on whatever priorities and
policies that you had to not continue to process those pending
applications.
I would just say Congresswoman Hayes and I have about 1,100
Borrower Defense applications from the State of Connecticut
that have been sort of stuck in this queue during that time
period. And that is based on June data; I am sure that the
numbers have grown. ITT Tech is pretty much the driving
institution, which is now defunct.
So, again, we at least made some progress here in terms of
at least verifying what the scope of your authority is and my
time has run out. So, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Pennsylvania,
Mr. Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Chairman, thank. Thank
youSecretary DeVos, for being here. Much appreciated. I will
say, my friend, we worked a lot together and a lot of different
issues were brought to my attention. I am appalled that this
judge did what they did and what they put forward to basically
providing a license to not to--just to allow the continued
abuse. I appreciate the fact that you came into this particular
position and, unfortunately, what you inherited from the last
administration, which was really no structure, quite frankly,
just providing loan forgiveness which we were warranted were
harmed. I think that is important, but there is a duty and a
responsibility to do this diligently in the right way. And so I
appreciate that last, my colleague bringing that up, brought
that to my attention how abusive that this judge was with the
ruling.
Madam Secretary, there are a few myths out there about the
2019 Borrower Defense regulation that I would like to discuss
with you today. And General Brown might have some of the
technical answers to these questions. So, please certainly feel
free to ask him to answer if you believe that is better. Pretty
straightforward.
The first myth is that the 2019 role eliminates $11 billion
in relief. Is that true? If not, can you explain it for me?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, that is indeed a myth. The
presumed savings assume and count on the fact that with much
more clarity around a school's responsibility and what a
student's claim would and could mean that we will have
ultimately fewer Borrower Defense claims going forward. Let us
just recall the fact that from 1995 to 2015, there were a total
of 59 claims filed and then a 5,000 percent increase from 2015
to where we have almost 300,000 claims today.
And so going forward we have just released a ton of data on
the College Scorecard that individuals--if an institution is
making claims about a program, it is going to be easy to check.
You can go to that school and that field of study and see what
the earning is for the first year. And we are going to continue
to add the data for years after that. So a lot more
transparency for students and for schools, frankly. And so
going forward, the savings are going to be around the fact that
I--we are not going to have as many claims.
Mr. Thompson. Yeah, a great tool for financial literacy.
Secretary DeVos. It is a good argument for financial
literacy, yes.
Mr. Thompson. Yeah. Another myth is that the role
eliminates accountability for for-profit schools. Is that true?
Secretary DeVos. Not at all. Indeed, it really treats all
schools equally and I think that is one of the major
deficiencies of the 2016 role. It was strictly focused on for-
profit institutions.
In fact, I saw some internal stuff at the Department saying
we are not going to pay attention to any claims or any schools
that had a liberal arts program because it is presumed that
they are of the, you know, full value. Well, that is just
wrong. I mean, if a student has a claim against a school for
being fraudulent and deceptive, that should apply across the
board to every school.
And we know that UC Berkley fudged their numbers to get
bumped up rankings in U.S. News and World Report's college
rankings. Should those be subject to Borrower Defense claims
like the others were?
Mr. Thompson. And yet another myth is that the rule is
cumbersome or overly burdensome to comply with from a
borrower's perspective. Is that true?
Secretary DeVos. No, in fact, we have made it very easy for
students to find the information they need. It is prominently
located on Federal Student Aid's website and we want to make
sure that if and where there are these claims that are, you
know, legitimate, that students have a very clear path to
understanding how they proceed.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Chairman, I yield what little bit
of time I have to our--the Republican leader, Dr. Foxx.
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you. And rather than ask a question, I am
going to make a statement. Just tell me if I am saying this
correctly. It was asserted before that the judge gave you
discretion to go ahead and discharge these loans. But my
understanding from you is, yes, you have processed all the
applications and once you understand you have a way to do this
that is not going to be challenged in court, then you will,
what you say, adjudicate, meaning give an answer to the
students, is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Close. I would actually love to have
Exhibit 1 put up for the--
Mrs. Foxx. Next--well, okay.
Secretary DeVos.--for the process because it shows where
things are and I would like General Brown to actually speak to
you--
Mrs. Foxx. Well, I am going to have to cut you off one more
time, but I promise you the next time we will come to General
Brown. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary DeVos. Okay.
Chairman Scott. Thank you.
Secretary DeVos. We are going to get there yet.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from Ohio, Ms.
Fudge.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you, Madame Secretary, for being here today. Once again, I find
myself agreeing with the ranking member.
We could be investigating other things today, but there are
so many in this administration I don't know where I would
begin. Maybe I would start with the three USDA rules that are
getting ready to cut 4 million poor people off of SNAP, 1
million of them children. Or maybe I could talk about the daily
travesty on our borders, but that is not what we are here to do
today.
But it is unfortunate that my colleagues are suffering from
amnesia on the other side of the aisle because I remember well
how they treated the last administration. So they can't take
this holier than thou kind of attitude. Let us all be nice and
get along. I remember. I was here.
And the other thing I just want to bring to our attention
is you talked about the two letters or less that you are
getting every day. We get that every day, too, and we have a
lot less staff than you do. So I don't feel it is something
that is onerous and something that you cannot respond to.
Secretary DeVos, is it fair or lawful to defraud students?
Secretary DeVos. No, it is not.
Ms. Fudge. Very good. Should those people that are
defrauded be made whole?
Secretary DeVos. If they have been financially harmed
indeed they should, there should be relief for them.
Ms. Fudge. Thank you very much. I yield the balance of my
time to my colleague from Connecticut, Ms. Hayes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thanks, Secretary DeVos. Just really quickly,
Mr. Chair, I would like to enter into the record the January
10, 2017, memo from the Borrowers Defense Unit to then Under
Secretary Ted Mitchell.
Chairman Scott. Without objection.
Mrs. Hayes. Which this memo was drafted by your office
after the previous administration left and I just want to say
something. As I am sitting here and I am listening, I remember
our last interaction where you at that point had also not read
the memos that came from your office.
And I just find it just a total lack of regard that after
the NPR story broke on Friday and you knew you were coming here
for a memo about--I mean, for a hearing about Borrowers
Defense, that you wouldn't even take the time to acquaint
yourself with the memo that was talking about that your staff
recommended that borrowers be given full and complete relief. I
mean, there is nothing, as my colleague Congresswoman Fudge
said, so incredibly onerous about 1.8 letters a day from
Congress.
You have over 3,000 staff and a budget of $60 billion
around plus dollars. I get more than two letters a day and I
make it my business to respond to them. So I am going to follow
up about this same memo and I hope that--I mean, as you said
before you don't know what anyone is talking about, you haven't
read it, you heard of the story, but don't know the memo.
But in this memo, your staff recommended that full relief
for borrowers who are enrolled in ITT colleges and campus be--
in California, be granted. Can you explain why you ignored that
memo and then why you did not include it in the documents that
were sent to this committee?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congresswoman, once again, without
having the document in front of me I am not going to continue
to comment.
Mrs. Hayes. Did you not know you were coming here today?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, there are hundreds of
documents written--
Mrs. Hayes. You are absolutely right and I would accept
that--
Secretary DeVos. And I would just--I would just--
Mrs. Hayes.--but the fact that on Friday this story broke
and this document specifically was referenced, I don't think it
is unreasonable. I know I am a freshman Congresswoman. If I
were coming to a committee and I had taken the time to prepare
and a document was revealed in an NPR story that went
nationwide 5 or 6 days before the hearing, I would say to my
staff ,can you get this document for me so that I can read it
for myself because I am sure that this committee will have
questions in relation to this memo. That didn't cross your mind
at all?
Secretary DeVos. January 10, 2017--
Mrs. Hayes. No, Friday. Last Friday.
Secretary DeVos. January 10, 2017, was the last
administration.
Mrs. Hayes. Did it not cross your mind--
Secretary DeVos. I was not in my office until February 7,
2017.
Mrs. Hayes. Did it not cross your mind when the story
broke--
Secretary DeVos. There are hundreds of documents that are
pumped out from--
Mrs. Hayes. You are absolutely right, but on Friday, when
this specific document--
Secretary DeVos. And it is--
Mrs. Hayes.--was revealed, did it not cross your mind that
maybe I should read it? On Friday?
Secretary DeVos. No. I don't need to read the document--
Mrs. Hayes. So in December 2019--
Secretary DeVos. I know what I have--
Mrs. Hayes.--when NPR ran a story, it didn't cross your
mind that maybe I should read this document?
Secretary DeVos. I don't need to read every document
originating--
Mrs. Hayes. No, this one specifically. Not the thousands of
others, just this one.
Secretary DeVos. Because a news outlet chose to print it?
Mrs. Hayes. Yes. Is that a no?
Secretary DeVos. I should read everything that a news
outlet chooses to print?
Mrs. Hayes. Yes or no. Did it not cross your mind that--
Secretary DeVos. I should read--
Mrs. Hayes.--you should read this document?
Secretary DeVos. I am--ma'am, I am focused getting a--
Mrs. Hayes. So no?
Secretary DeVos.--process right--
Mrs. Hayes. So no?
Secretary DeVos.--for students and for taxpayers.
Mrs. Hayes. So no.
Secretary DeVos. On getting a process right for students
and taxpayers.
Mrs. Hayes. So no.
Secretary DeVos. And that is what I am doing.
Mrs. Hayes. Part of getting that process right, requires
reading. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Scott. Gentlewoman's time has expired. The
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Walberg.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you,
Secretary, for being here, General Brown as well. Again,
January 10 was before the inauguration and February 17 was when
you were confirmed. And I hope it doesn't concern my
constituents too much that I don't read every article that is
written about me either. There are certain articles that would
be a waste of time and take me away from doing the jobs that I
have been asked to do, especially when you know what you are
supposed to do and follow the law.
Talk to us, if you will, about your Exhibit Number 1. Give
you the opportunity this time.
Secretary DeVos. So exhibit number--thank you, Congressman.
Exhibit Number 1 shows the process through which we go with
every Borrower Defense application. And I would like to ask
General Brown to talk just briefly about it so we can
understand where we have come, where we have brought the
Borrower Defense claims to prior to having the new methodology
to process.
General Brown. Thank you, Madame Secretary, and thank you,
Congressman, for that question. I would just remind the
committee that overall, we are fastly approaching what will be
almost 300,000 Borrower Defense applications by the end of this
calendar year.
And each case is adjudicated on its own merit and what that
means is there is no blanket way to do them all because they
vary greatly in how, what data is there, and also the validity
of each case without regard to which school the person went to,
the student went to.
And we do not look at them per se by school. We adjudicate
the individual cases. So the type of school is less of an issue
than the validity of the case.
For every one of those cases, we bring them in that top bar
that you see and we have our administrative people as well as
our attorneys take them apart, look for supporting
documentation and check the validity of that documentation. And
this is the first part for the case. If it happens to be under
the 2016 rule and the case is determined to, in fact, be a
valid case, then the school would be notified under the 2016
rule and those going forward. Not all are under the 2016 rule.
At that point, the case would start the adjudication
process. All cases get to that point. At that point, that is
the Borrowers Defense regulations that you all have supported
across administrations and we looked at this across
administrations because only because those were the questions
that we have gotten.
The percent of those that were valid and invalid really has
held true. It has been about 62 percent to about 38 percent
throughout both of those times and for the first 65,000 of
those cases that have been completed, adjudicated, and
processed back down to the students.
However, at that point, if the case is, in fact, either
ineligible or eligible, if it is eligible, that is a point at
which, as the Secretary said earlier, she has the discretion to
determine some or a methodology that will determine some, none
or all.
When you talk about a backlog, when you use that term,
those cases got to that final point, had to be stopped, as you
all have already referenced, by the Ninth Circuit and so that
is the backlog. And it is the decision upon which the Ninth
Circuit either answers the appeal or a new methodology has to
be determined. And so when you use the term ``backlog,'' that
is what we are taking each case based on its individual merits
through.
Mr. Walberg. Thank you for that explanation. Previously,
there was no official source a student could access to see
college outcomes at the programmatic level. You recently
unveiled new information on the College Scorecard that would
allow families for the first time to compare programs within an
institution or similar programs at different institutions.
Could you please explain what consumer information is
included in this tool and how providing this information up
front will help students make informed decisions before
starting their school?
Secretary DeVos. Sure, Congressman, I would love to talk
about it a little bit more. Previously, you could go to look at
a school, a cost of attending a school, average cost of
attending a school, and then what the average earnings could
be, would be expected for a graduate of that school. That is
nice information, but it is not particularly useful for
students based on programs that they choose.
Now, with this new data release and this new approach, you
will be able to go look at a school and then go into the field
of study within the school and see what your cost is for
attending that program and then what your earnings potential
is, what the earnings have been for students who have graduated
from that field of study their first year. And we are going to
be able to add subsequent years as more data becomes available.
But this is going to give students a whole new tool to use
in making--in decision-making around what kind of education to
pursue post high school and it is going to be--it is useful for
2-year programs, for certificate programs. We are also linked
to apprenticeship opportunities through the Department of
Labor.
So a very robust set of data and important tools to be used
for students as they begin to think about their futures and I
think, importantly for institutions, to maybe ask some hard
questions about some of the programs they have been offering
that may not be, you know, the value for cost that they should
be.
Mr. Walberg. Glad to hear. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Before I recognize the next
member, I would like to ask unanimous consent that documents,
the document from January 10th from the Borrower Defense Unit,
has been entered in the record. There is also a January 9th and
an October 24--January 9, 19, 2017, and October 24, 2016.
These memos describe an extensive review of claims for
Corinthian, ITT Tech, and Everest Whyotech where students--
where the staff recommended full debt relief for borrowers from
these schools. These memos, 14 pages, 14 pages, and 18 pages,
reflect a clear process and evidentiary review conducted by the
Obama administration. So that, we just want those in the
record. The gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Wilson.
Ms. Wilson. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. I am so happy that Secretary DeVos' schedule has
finally allowed her to address this pressing issue here today.
Madame Secretary, there are 200,000 students that are still
waiting to have their Borrower Defense claims processed by your
Department. The Education Department has not approved a single
new claim for lone relief in the past 18 months. If a student
takes out a Federal loan to study at an institution that
behaved fraudulently or deceptively, that student's loan should
be forgiven.
Mr. Chairman, tens of thousands of borrowers acted in good
faith as they applied to school and took out loans looking to
better their lives. Because of bad actors they were left with
unfulfilled promises, outright lies, and mountains of debt. I
believe that it is incumbent upon us to provide relief for
those harmed by schools that acted in a fraudulent matter.
Secretary DeVos, you wrote with extreme displeasure on the
document that discharged loans that had already been through
the BD process prior to your appointment. Why would you write
that? Why would providing relief to defrauded borrowers whose
claims have been reviewed by experienced professionals
displease you?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, very good question. Very
simply, there was no process. The claims were simply forgiven
without consideration for the individual circumstances.
Ms. Wilson. Secretary, I heard you say that.
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman--
Ms. Wilson. I want to tell you a story about a borrower
from Florida named Jessica Matterson that gives me extreme
displeasure.
In January 2017, Ms. Matterson was told her Borrowers
Defense application had been approved and that her $19,000 in
student debt would be forgiven in 60 to 120 days. It was not.
And instead, the government began garnishing her paycheck to
recoup the money. As a result, she did not have electricity for
weeks because her garnished checks couldn't cover the bills.
How is it possible that the Department of Education could
have continued to collect Ms. Matterson's loans after she had
already been approved for borrowing defense loan?
After the Washington Post wrote about her story in July
2017, the garnishment stopped. They did not refund her money.
Just $2,000 were refunded, was refunded of the 12,000 that had
been garnished from her wages. Do you believe it is appropriate
to not fully refund wages that were garnished for student loans
that were deemed fraudulent?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, when a student's Borrower
Defense claim is deemed to be--they have been financially
harmed and we have a process to consider that, the level of
that, the students are made whole and the students--we address
each student's issue and situation individually. That is why it
is important to have a process because every student's
situation is unique.
Ms. Wilson. Do they get all of their money back--
Secretary DeVos.--is unique and different.
Ms. Wilson.--that was taken from them?
Secretary DeVos. It depends on the various claims. I
can't--
Ms. Wilson. Because of these wage garnishments, Ms.
Matterson could not afford to see a doctor to address the
intense pain she was experiencing. When she finally did go to
the hospital, she was diagnosed with cancer. In October of this
year, she passed away.
Secretary, can you commit to me today that you will
personally ensure that Jessica's wife will receive the
remaining $10,000 owed to her by the government?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, I can assure you that we
can and will look into that specific situation if provided the
details. And once again, I go back to the fact that all of
these claims--
Ms. Wilson. Secretary DeVos--
Secretary DeVos.--all of these student claims need to be
considered individually.
Ms. Wilson.--I have worked in education my entire life. I
have dedicated my life to this work and I have worked with
Democrats and Republicans to advance the goal of quality
education for young people.
I have had some honest disagreements with my friends in the
Republican Party about how to move education forward, but I
have never, not one time believed that they were out to destroy
public education until I met you.
Why has every decision you have made harmed students
instead of empowering them? Are you the Secretary of Education?
You are supposed to be their champion. When you approach a
public school, you are protested. If you enter, you are booed.
When you spoke at an HBCU in Florida, 2 months later, the
president was made to resign.
You are the most unpopular person in our government.
Millions will register to vote in 2020. Many will vote to
remove you more than to remove the president. I yield back.
Mrs. Foxx. Mr. Chairman, I just have to say one of those
last comments was over the line. Absolutely over the line. To
say that Secretary DeVos is trying to destroy public education
is going too far. And I believe every one of my colleagues
agrees. We all sat up very quickly when that comment was said.
Now, I like Representative Wilson. She and I have talked a
lot and we are very concerned about education, but that kind of
comment cannot stand in this committee. The Secretary has come
here to help us with our--oversight
Mr. Takano. A point of order, Mr. Chairman. The gentlelady
is taking time that was not recorded.
Chairman Scott. The ranking member is making a point of
order.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, point - Mr. Chairman
Mrs. Foxx. Mr. Chairman, I believe it took--if that had
been said on the floor of the House it would have been--those
comments would have been taken down.
Chairman Scott. The--
Mrs. Foxx. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady's comments are well taken.
Next person to be recognized is the gentlemen from Kentucky,
Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, I have a point of parliamentary
inquiry.
Chairman Scott. I am sorry. The gentleman from South
Dakota.
Mr. Johnson. I am just a freshman, sir, so I don't know the
rules backwards and forwards. Is there a mechanism by which a
vote of this committee could strike those comments from the
record?
Chairman Scott. Just a minute. The comments from the
gentlelady from North Carolina have been part of the record so
I think we have both sides and I think we have agreed with the
ranking member.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, my point of parliamentary
inquiry is--
Chairman Scott. And we should--
Mr. Johnson.--whether or not we should--
Chairman Scott. We should refrain from questioning the
motives of the members.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. And the witnesses. Thank you. The gentleman
from Kentucky, Mr. Guthrie.
Mr. Guthrie. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, appreciate
the opportunity to be recognized and sorry that the tone in
Washington has reached the way it has reached the last year. I
apologize for that.
As somebody that has been here for a while, we hate to see
it has deteriorated the way that it has. We need to be working
together to get big things done for this country and,
unfortunately, we are where we are. But I want to get to my
questions.
I am sure you are--you agree that Congress has a
responsibility to do oversight of the administration and I
believe you said that 95 percent of all congressional requests
have been met. You said that earlier?
Secretary DeVos. With regard to the letters--and let me,
yeah, let me just add, you know, the 1.8 letters are not just
like constituent nice, can you respond with a half-page or a
page response.
These are voluminous responses required that require a lot
of research to respond to and often hundreds, if not thousands,
of pages to be responded in each of them.
Mr. Guthrie. I was going to ask if it included phone calls,
emails, and written response, and I think you answered that.
Secretary DeVos. Well, but no, these are voluminous
responses of writing.
Mr. Guthrie. And long ones as well. And I am sure you agree
that it is important for all parties involved to communicate
directly, that is what you said. So I am going to get to this
hearing.
I agree that borrowers are harmed--borrowers that are
harmed should be granted relief as quickly as possible. After
diving into some of the nuances about this issue, I understand
why you have decided to grant partial relief in some cases.
Now, it is my understanding that there was a report that
estimated the Borrower Defense claims would be cleared by the
spring of 2017. But your decision to review those cases and
grant partial relief meant that the estimate proposed in the
report would not be met. Is this correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes. Again, Congressman, there was no
process and short of simply deciding to forgive all of the, and
accept all the claims with 100 percent validity or not, we
needed to get a process in place to consider each claim.
Mr. Guthrie. So the--thank you. So the memo I just
mentioned, was that an official memo that included promises or
any guarantees to borrowers?
Secretary DeVos. I am not sure what memo you are referring
to.
Mr. Guthrie. It is the one that said about spring of 2017
you would--so, but anyway, so it wasn't official. So I will get
to this.
So there wasn't anything illegal about your decision, about
your determination. It was the best interest of taxpayers to
review these claims and make sure the relief granted was
correct.
So I guess my question is there was nothing legally
requiring you by the spring of 2017 to make those decisions and
you made the decision to put in a process that made sure that
fraudulent claims were paid, but need to make sure their claims
were fraudulent and so you made those. So nothing illegal about
where you are today about not getting that done by 2017?
Secretary DeVos. No. It was a matter of building on a lack
of policy and process from the previous administration. The
policy of the previous administration was to simply forgive
claims.
However, there was also some opinion expressed that up to
40 percent of some of the claims that had been submitted did
not qualify. So again, without a process and a framework, we
couldn't proceed and progress any of those claims forward,
which is exactly what we did when coming into office in 2017.
Mr. Guthrie. Thanks, I appreciate that. And I want to yield
to the ranking member or the Republican leader.
Mrs. Foxx. I want to thank the gentleman from Kentucky. I
want to point out, I want to make several clarifications.
Number one, some of our colleagues don't know evidently the
calendar in 2017. Because the memorandum under consideration
hereunder that has been brought up was a memorandum to Under
Secretary Ted Mitchell who worked in the Obama Administration.
The Obama Administration was in office until January 20
when the President, President Trump, took office. You again
pointed out you did not come into office until February. So if
they have an argument with anybody, it ought to be an argument
with these folks who got the memo on January 10. This sounds
like a lot of other memos that came out around that time.
I would also like to point out that contrary to what has
been said, that for-profit schools have no value, 1995 was when
Borrower Defense rules went into effect. Corinthian Colleges
were formed in 1959. ITT was around since 1969.
Between the time Borrower Defense went into effect, as you
said, Madame Secretary, until 2015, 59 claims were filed. So
obviously, something happened. Yes, those schools closed. But
there has been a culture change I believe in our country in
terms of what people believe they are owed.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired. The gentlelady from Oregon, Ms. Bonamici.
Ms. Bonamici. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
DeVos, for being here. And thank you, Mr. Chairman, for
introducing into the record the January 9 and January 10, 2017,
memos.
Secretary DeVos, when you made opening remarks you said
that some on this committee suggest full relief for defrauded
borrowers. The point is that it is not just some on this
committee. It was the Borrower Defense Unit in the Education
Department as well, people who had been working on these cases.
That is the point.
And, Secretary DeVos, the mission of the Department of
Education is to promote student achievement in preparation for
global competiveness by fostering educational excellence and
ensuring equal access.
And when I look at how the Department and you have been
handling the borrower defense cases, I just don't see that is
consistent with the message and the mission of the Department.
With so many hundreds of thousands of students, including
thousands in my home state of Oregon, stuck with loan balances
and a worthless degree if they even got a degree.
I am a former consumer protection lawyer for the Federal
Trade Commission and I know fraud when I see it. And these
students were misled and cheated, and the fact that some of
them may be making money doesn't mean that they weren't
defrauded.
If somebody went into one of these programs hoping to
become a nurse, for example, and now they are selling clothes
at a department store, it doesn't mean that they weren't
defrauded. And I hope you can put yourself in the shoes of some
of these borrowers.
I know it is challenging, but they went to try to find a
better path for themselves and instead of getting a good
education, they got collection notices and wage garnishments.
And in September, the Department admitted to violating a court
order by illegally demanding loan payment from more than 16,000
Corinthian borrowers seeking Borrower Defense. And that number
has now increased to 45,000.
And the issue came to the public's attention only after you
were held in contempt for violating a court order. So this is
not a new problem. In fact, more than a year ago, a court
ordered the Department to stop seizing tax returns of Borrower
Defense applicants. That was the Williams case.
So, you and the Department have known about this issue for
years. So why did the Department continue to bill more than
16,000 Corinthian borrowers in violation of the law?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congresswoman, I am sorry you
weren't here when I talked about that earlier on, but what we
said, what I said, was it was very clear that the borrowers
that made claims for Corinthian College programs were in
forbearance, were not accruing interest per my direction prior
to the court order in--court injunction in May of 2018.
Since then, a year later, there were errors made within
Federal Student Aid and with some of our servicers. Human
errors that once we were, became aware of them we immediately
acknowledged and immediately went to work to correct and
rectify the problems for those impacted students--
Ms. Bonamici. And I am going to reclaim my time and ask
another question.
Secretary DeVos. And it is not--it is 99.8 percent--
Ms. Bonamici. Secretary DeVos, I am going to reclaim my
time and ask another question. And I was here, I just didn't
find the answer satisfactory.
How many times has a court already found that the
Department has illegally collected payments from borrowers or
sieged their--seized their wages or tax returns?
Secretary DeVos. How many times? It was--
Ms. Bonamici. Have other courts found that?
Secretary DeVos.--in relationship to the court injunction
from May 2018 and General Brown can comment to the specific
numbers of impacted borrowers. And frankly, what we--
Ms. Bonamici. Just for the record there were other--
Secretary DeVos.--have done--what we have done to--
Ms. Bonamici.--cases as well.
Secretary DeVos.--to make sure all of those cases were
addressed and taken care of, which they have been.
Ms. Bonamici. And you say, Secretary DeVos, that you care
about the responsible use of taxpayers' dollars. So the judge
in the ManriquezManriquez case imposed sanctions in the amount
of $100,000 for violating an injunction. So who paid that? You
personally or the taxpayers?
Secretary DeVos. I am not aware that it has been paid. It
is an injunction in a judgment against the Department of
Education. So--
Ms. Bonamici. So you are not aware if it has even been
paid?
Secretary DeVos. I don't believe--I don't know. I can--
Ms. Bonamici. And who do you expect to pay that? Will you
pay that personally or will the taxpayers pay that?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I think there is an appeal to
suggest that it is not appropriate to fine a Federal--another
Federal department.
Ms. Bonamici. So in my remaining time, it was the borrowers
who discovered that the Department was billing them improperly.
This is not a result of the Department's oversight.
So we know there are many Borrower Defense claimants who
are watching today. How are you going to assure them that you
are doing everything in your power to help them get relief and
that they won't have their wages garnished or their tax returns
taken in the future?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I am very hopeful that we will be
able to continue to move ahead with our new methodology and
assuming no challenge from through the courts of that
methodology, we will be able to process these claims that have
been pending for many years--
Ms. Bonamici. And that is the methodology that if--
Secretary DeVos.--and that is--
Ms. Bonamici.--someone is making money, they weren't
defrauded.
Secretary DeVos.--a focus. That is a--
Ms. Bonamici. And that is not justice, Madam Secretary, and
I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Before I recognize the next
witness I would like to enter into the record a OIG report in
response to this report. The present Department of Education
FSA stated by the previous administration's process for
adjudicating claims they said, and I quote, ``Despite these
challenges, we are pleased to note that the OIG did not
identify any errors in adjudicated claims, that the review for
each of the sample claims was properly documented. In addition,
OIG found that FSA created policies and procedures for Borrower
Defense that have evolved over time as FSA has continued to
redefine its processes.'
The OIG report is dated December 8, 2017, so that is during
the present administration. Without objection, so ordered. And
the gentleman from Alabama.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary DeVos,
General, thank you for your service to our country. It is not
often said enough, but people like you have given a lot to this
country and continue to do so. We appreciate you being here
today and we appreciate your service.
I am going to ask some questions about oversight and I am
going to direct them to the Secretary, but, General, if it is
something that you need not be the one to answer to just feel
free to jump in.
Let us just begin with the basics. Do you believe in the
need for congressional oversight?
Secretary DeVos. I do, Congressman.
Mr. Byrne. Well, I think your presence here today proves
that, but I wanted you to be on the record to say that you
believe in it. Have you informed your staff of the need to be
responsive to Congress to help us do our job?
Secretary DeVos. Indeed I have. I am very keen on making
sure we are responsive and have repeatedly directed all of my
team that we must be and we must do so in timely fashions.
Mr. Byrne. And how do you follow up with them to make sure
that they are doing that?
Secretary DeVos. Have regular reporting relationships
depending on the area and the department. And with respect to
the issue that we just talked about, I get daily reports on how
those claims have been restored back to their standing that
they should be in forbearance and we are continuing to have
regular dialogue and updates on those. And, General Brown, did
you want to?
General Brown. Yes, sir. I can provide you one example of
those daily reports. On Exhibit 7, we are asked for all of
those students that had some element of error that were
involved in the ManriquezManriquezs case when they were
erroneously put out, taken out of forbearance and perhaps
billed. Since that time, we have done daily reports on each one
of those cases.
This is not a report that we created for this committee. In
fact, it is 2 days old. It talks about .5 or so percent of
those cases having not been remediated, and today that is
actually less than 30 of those cases that have not been
remediated.
We are responsible for giving that report to the Secretary
each day. And even if it is at 99.5 percent, we won't be
through doing that daily report until it is 100 percent,
meaning every particular person, specific person that had any
element of harm done to them has been corrected.
So if they had a Treasury offset, like I heard earlier in
the statement, that the Treasury would have had to refund that
money for us to put them in a remediated status. And that is
one way that we provide oversight of this process and in
responsiveness to the Secretary's request.
Mr. Byrne. Well, thank you. That was very helpful. Thank
you for providing that to us. Now, I know you get multiple
requests from the same member or several members of Congress.
How do you prioritize requests when you get multiple ones
from the same member and what kind of communication do you have
in place to ensure that your staff is still able to meet the
standard for response that you have set?
Secretary DeVos. Well, our prioritization is really based
on responsiveness in general. And we try to be--we try to be
able to respond within 30 days of receipt of one of those
requests.
Sometimes it has to go longer than that depending on the
volume of material requested and required, but we are very
focused on ensuring that we continue to work through these
issues as promptly as we possibly can.
Mr. Byrne. And I think you have already said this, but you
can remind me. What is your response rate to Congress since you
have taken office?
Secretary DeVos. Ninety-five percent.
Mr. Byrne. Pretty good. Some of us would like to have that
rate in our--with our constituents if I might say. Is there a
different standard for oversight in the Federal Student Aid
office and in other offices at the Department?
Secretary DeVos. No, we have high expectations for
ourselves across the board.
Mr. Byrne. And, General, this may be for you. How does the
FSA balance a request for data and information with the need to
get your job running the loan program done?
General Brown. I thank the Congressman. We--our desire is
to answer all correspondence within 30 days. However, I will
tell you that those that are very data-centric that require
special pulls from what is 11 loan servicers across the
country, often will require more time because that data simply
doesn't exist in the systems that we are working to reform. But
all--for most data requests we try to do those within 30 days.
Mr. Byrne. Thank you for that. Thank you for your hard work
and trying to be responsive to Congress and trying--and thank
you for your professionalism and for understanding that the
taxpayers' money is precious and that we have a responsibility,
all of us, including those of us in Congress, to safeguard that
money.
And with that Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you and I will remind the members to
please direct the questions to the Secretary. The gentleman
from California, Mr. Takano.
Mr. Takano. Madame Secretary, you have twice testified
today that all pending claims in the Manriquez case you had
ordered the forbearance and not to collect interest prior to
that court decision of 2018. And you referred to processing
errors were made a year later.
Are you aware, in fact, that your Department submitted in a
compliance report to the court on October 8, 2019, that the
compliance errors that we are talking about at issue were not
the result of willful or intentional conduct on the part of the
Department, but as the court has recognized gross negligence,
including negligent oversight over the Department services. You
are aware of that. That is your own Department's words. Are you
aware of that?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, what I know is that once we
became aware--
Mr. Takano. It is a simple yes or no question. I have many
questions.
Secretary DeVos. Yeah, I know, but it is not a simple yes
or no answer.
Mr. Takano. No, but it--I am just asking if you are aware
that is what is in your own Department's submission to the
court, that your Department conceded that it was gross
negligence for the loan processor error.
Secretary DeVos. There were human errors made on both
Federal Student Aid's end of things as well as certain--
Mr. Takano. Madam Secretary, on November 21, 2019. your
Department--by the way, I wanted to enter this into the record,
Mr. Chairman. The statement of the Department, their response
to the court.
Chairman Scott. Without objection.
Mr. Takano. Madam Secretary, on November 21, your
Department held its first-ever quality assurance and
performance meeting with executors from all the loan services
to review the Manriquez case. Why did it take your Department--
why did you and your Department take 18 months for this first
meeting to occur with your loan service providers? Why did it
take 18 months to do that?
Secretary DeVos. The loan servicers are--we are continually
in dialogue with the loan servicers. I think--
Mr. Takano. It took you 18 months to have your first
meeting with these executives.
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, it--you--
Mr. Takano. Why did it take so long to do that?
Secretary DeVos. Are you interested in learning or are you
just interested in making a point?
Mr. Takano. It is a simple question, why did it take so
long for you to meet with these loan servicers?
Secretary DeVos. I am very pleased with the leadership of
General Brown, who came to Federal Student Aid 9 months ago,
assuming the chief operating officer role. He is responsible
for the operations of Federal Student Aid--
Mr. Takano. Madam Secretary, he came on board much later in
the process.
Secretary DeVos.--as well as the relationships with the
loan servicers.
Mr. Takano. Moving on, Madam Secretary, on May 25, 2018, a
Federal Court ordered you to stop collecting on former
Corinthian borrowers in the Manriquez case. Seventeen months
later in October 2019, Federal Judge Sallie Kim was highly
critical of you and your Department's attempts to comply with
the preliminary injunction and she stated it consisted of
inadequate communication with each of your nine loan service
providers.
Is it correct that your Department's only communication
with loan service providers during this time was through email?
Secretary DeVos. No, that is incorrect.
Mr. Takano. Mr. Chairman, I would like to enter into the
record the emails cited in Judge Kim's order. One email only
was three sentences long. The other emails to loan service
providers didn't even cite the fact that the Department was
under a court order.
Chairman Scott. Without objection.
Mr. Takano. The judge was astounded, Madam Secretary, that
your Department only sent emails and did not have in-person
meetings or phone calls with the loan service providers
explaining the court order.
Judge Kim asserted that would have been normal for any
entity under such a mandated court order to have in-person
meetings with the contractors immediately following the
preliminary injunction and not several months later on November
21, 2019, which is 18 months later.
Mr. Chairman, I have already asked you consent to enter the
emails. Mr. Chairman, I want to point out that on May 29, the
May 29 email was only three lines providing instructions to
loan servicers, and on July 5 the email that they sent to an
additional five servicers contained no mention of the
preliminary injunction.
Madam Secretary, who at the Department did you assign
responsibility for ensuring that the loan servicers complied
with the preliminary injunction?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I am very pleased with
General Brown's leadership at Federal Student Aid. He is
responsible--
Mr. Takano. When did Mr. Brown come on board?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, can I please finish my
sentence?
Mr. Takano. When did Mr.--my question was when did you
assign--who did you assign responsibility for compliance?
Secretary DeVos. Federal Student Aid has a chief operating
officer responsible for the operations of Federal Student Aid.
General Brown is responsible as the chief operating officer--
Mr. Takano. When did he come on board?
Secretary DeVos.--for those operations. He assumed the COO
role 9 months ago. He was with the Department for 4 months
before that. And prior to that--
Mr. Takano. So he was responsible--
Secretary DeVos.--there were acting individuals.
Mr. Takano. You immediately assigned him responsibility to
ensure that your department complied with the court order? Who
did you put in charge?
Secretary DeVos. We have continued to be intentional about
complying with the court order. We have acknowledged that
mistakes--
Mr. Takano. Madam Secretary, you are going to answer my
question?
Secretary DeVos. Can I finish?
Mr. Takano. Who did you assign responsibility to comply
with the court order for your department?
Secretary DeVos. Chief operating officer of Federal Student
Aid is responsible for the operations of Federal Student Aid.
Mr. Takano. You are referring to Mr. Brown, but he didn't
come into this role until 9 months ago.
Secretary DeVos. There was an acting chief operating
officer who--
Mr. Takano. Who was that?
Secretary DeVos. That preexisted him. It was James Manning
as an acting. And prior to that there--when I came into the
Department I inherited a chief operating officer who left his
role rather than come and testify here before you.
Mr. Takano. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman's time is expired.
The gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Banks.
Mr. Banks. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary DeVos, thank you for your service and your
leadership. A lot of discussion today has been about what
happened in the past on this issue, but I want to take a moment
and focus on steps moving forward.
General Brown might have more of the detailed answers to my
questions, so feel free to have him answer if you prefer.
First of all, for the borrowers that are waiting for
relief, when can they expect to hear from the Department on
whether they are eligible for relief? And if a borrower is
indeed eligible for relief, approximately how long will it take
for an individual to hear how much relief they are going to
receive? Will it take years or are you working to make sure the
borrowers are aware as soon as possible?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, thanks for that question.
Now that we have a new operable methodology, we are going
to be able to process the pending claims much more quickly,
assuming we don't get stopped in some way by a court order.
General Brown can comment to the specifics of how quickly
those claims can be processed, but I know that he has continued
to increase the staff in this area to be able to really address
them in a very timely manner and has hired many additional
attorneys to be able to look at each claim individually, as it
must and should be done.
General, would you like to comment to the timing?
General Brown. Yes, Madam Secretary. I would say that
within the last--even within the last 24 hours we are notifying
students of their eligibility or ineligibility if they have
given--if they have provided a claim. We continue to do that.
Those claimants, they would know now and if they got relief
they would know so within the next--or actually have it done
within the next 60 to 90 days.
I would also say though that the staff at its height was 14
in previous years. We have more than tripled that with a
special emphasis on hiring attorneys. And, frankly, the more of
those that you have the quicker you are able to get to these
cases. So minus any litigation, we expect to get to those cases
fairly quickly.
But another part of this is the system, which we have been
rebuilding over the last 12 months and that system's platform
is ready.
So to answer your question, Congressman, we expect to clear
the majority of this backlog, minus any further litigation,
over the next 12 months.
Mr. Banks. Do you have the staff that you need to do that
currently?
General Brown. So I am happy to say that both the systems
and the authority and resources to hire the personnel has been
given to us by the Secretary and we have either hired them or
are in the process of on-boarding them.
So, again, minus any litigation, we have what we need or
will have very shortly.
Mr. Banks. Are these permanent or temporary staff people?
General Brown. The majority of them--some of them are what
we would call term employees. We did that out of consideration
and out of stewardship, frankly, for the fact that we would not
expect to forever receive what we are receiving now, which is
somewhere in the neighborhood of 1,200 cases per week. So these
are temporary 3-year term hires and we will see at that point
if we need to extend them further.
Mr. Banks. Secretary, who is involved in how a final
decision on relief is made? Do all of the Borrower Defense
claims come to General Brown or you for final approval? Or are
lower-ranking employees empowered to make that final decision?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congressman, I have approved the
policy, the process for which--by which these claims will be
determined. And it is General Brown and Federal Student Aid's
role to implement that policy and see through the processing of
the claims.
It is really a mathematical scientific formula and
approach, so the policy lays out that framework clearly.
Mr. Banks. Okay. Let me change my line of questioning just
a little bit. Borrower Defense seems like an inefficient way to
protect taxpayers from fraud, given that the government is
losing money in the end. What reforms are you making to help
prevent the need for borrowers to use this provision in the
first place?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, thanks for asking about the
College Scorecard. We have made considerable changes to and
enhancements to the data available to students and, frankly,
broadly to taxpayers and institutions. So now, prospectively,
students can look at the cost of a college program, a field of
study, what the cost is going to be, and what their earning
potential is the first year after. We will be adding data and
information to that as subsequent years become available. But
this is going to help clearly reveal whether the value for a
program is there. And, frankly, I think it is going to help a
lot of schools make some decisions about whether to continue
programs that they have been offering as well.
Mr. Banks. Thanks to both of you for being here and thanks
for always being willing to answer my questions and provide
anything that our office needs along the way as well.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from New Jersey,
Mr. Norcross
Mr. Norcross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Madam
Secretary, thank you for being here today.
I want to start out by saying I agree with my colleague on
the other side that we wish that we would work together much
more often. So let us see if we can start with you and I, that
we get direct responses to direct questions and be respectful
of each other, which is something that I am sure you want to
do.
Let me start out by asking you about the partial relief
formula that uses the College Scorecard data. Talk to me about
that, how after 18 months I guess since the court order you
rolled this out, why you thought this was the best Scorecard,
particularly when you only have 20 percent of the programs
involved in that now. How did that become the best one?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congressman, just to be clear, we
are using several different data sets to--
Mr. Norcross. But aren't you using the Scorecard?
Secretary DeVos. As one of the data sets, yes.
Mr. Norcross. And do you agree that it only has 20 percent
of the programs?
Secretary DeVos. Yes. Well--
Mr. Norcross. Okay. So please continue.
Secretary DeVos. So we are using several different datasets
and in looking at each Borrower Defense application the field
or the program of study that the applicant is claiming was
fraudulent in some way, the median income for that program is
compared against the median income for programs, like
programs--
Mr. Norcross. Yeah, I understand, but--
Secretary DeVos.--from other institutions.
Mr. Norcross. But what are--you were going to tell us what
else you were using.
Secretary DeVos. The other pieces that we are using are
Social Security Administration data and the 2017 Gainful
Employment Earnings data and IRS information.
Mr. Norcross. But they don't reflect back to the individual
programs that people are looking for. So if my son goes to look
at it and says, gee, let me go to the Scorecard, that is the
only piece of information that program would reflect what the
reality is, even though it is 20 percent.
Secretary DeVos. The College Scorecard actually--the
programs that are included include about 80 percent I believe--
80 to 85 percent of the students pursuing fields of study. The
smaller programs that are not included in College Scorecard are
simply because the cohorts are too small to be able to
consider.
Mr. Norcross. Well, actually, it makes up 80 percent of the
entire programs, so it is the exact opposite. And it only has 2
years.
So if it took you 18 months to come up with this new one,
it just seems to me to use something that is such a small part
of the solution of what is actually going on, because you agree
with me you are trying to get students, potential students that
information, right? So that they can make an informed decision.
Secretary DeVos. We are trying to consider each student's
claim individually and the circumstances.
Mr. Norcross. No. No, this is being used, the Scorecard, to
give potential students an idea of the cost involved and the
outcomes. We understand that. But using only 20 percent--and,
General, thank you for your service, but I guarantee you
wouldn't want to send somebody into a warzone with only 20
percent of the information.
The point I am trying to make here is--
Secretary DeVos. It is 20 percent of the programs, but it
represents 80 percent of the students attending higher ed
institutions.
Mr. Norcross. But 80 percent are the smaller programs--
Secretary DeVos. So it is a pretty significant number.
Mr. Norcross. Can we agree that the program information is
less than you would desire and I would desire?
Secretary DeVos. We would love to include additional
programs--
Mr. Norcross. Okay, so that is the point I am trying to
make.
Secretary DeVos.--but we need to have larger cohorts.
Mr. Norcross. Because when we looked at this--and again,
let us be respectful of each other's time here--10 percent
relief for the Corinthian borrowers, you made the decision to
give them 10 percent whether your new formula was involved or
not. I have a disabled vet in my district; ITT Tech, which is
one of the horror stories, he went there for a digital design
degree. The school told him he could use his GI Bill. Long
story short, he used those stipends to pay for this and then he
found out ITT lied to him and he is into a $50,000 student
loan. Now he has got no job, no degree. I know that tugs at
your heart, as it does mine. You know, why is it the
Corinthians will get a 10 percent flat over there, but this
young man who defended our country gets nothing until you get
to his application? How did you decide they are worthy, but
this veteran wouldn't be because he was in a different program?
Secretary DeVos. Sir, the Corinthian students have had
their institution attacked mercilessly in the media for years,
and so in consideration of that and the consideration of the
length of time that has lapsed since we were first able to
process a number of those claims before the court shut us down,
the determination was made that all of them would receive at
least some--some level of relief depending on--
Mr. Norcross. So because of media reports you are going to
give them 10 percent, but this veteran--listen, my time is
expired.
On behalf of all those students, which I know we all care
about, this is impacting their life. I can't suggest to you how
important this is to expedite this in a fair and balanced way.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman's time has expired.
The gentleman from South Dakota, Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary.
I found myself most interested on the conversations we have
been having about the new methodology, so I just wanted to
learn a little bit more about that. You have talked a number of
times about using the median rather than the--I think the
median salary for individuals in these groups. Why does the
median make more sense than the mean?
Secretary DeVos. I am not a mathematician, but the median
methodology and the standard deviation methodology is a
scientifically proven approach to be able to consider these
individually and yet fairly. And so the goal was to have an
approach that would not only allow for full relief if the
student is significantly financially impacted, but also partial
relief if there is some financial impact, but not as
significant perhaps as others.
Mr. Johnson. So when we--I mean the heart of this
methodology really comes down to comparison to peer groups and
peer academic programs. How do you decide what that cohort of
comparison programs looks like?
Secretary DeVos. Well, there are similar programs with
codes that are considered for each of those programs and they
line up across the board. The previous questioner's line around
the percentage of programs included in the College Scorecard,
captures-- the data captures the bulk of the students and the
programs that students have and are attending. And so there are
always like comparisons to be able to use when using the new
methodology.
Mr. Johnson. So we have had some discussion today about to
what extent the new methodology is fair or unfair to people who
have gone on to better themselves, maybe through, you know,
extraordinary efforts on their own. Talk to us a little bit
about the methodology and whether or not you think it fairly
has an impact on students given their different economic salary
outcomes in the years after their education.
Secretary DeVos. Well, it actually looks at program to
program versus their specific salary. So if an individual has
done very well themselves financially, but they have a claim
against a school and that particular program, that is what the
comparison--that is the comparison that is made between the
programs.
Mr. Johnson. So that is an important distinction. I mean,
if somebody--I mean, they get credit or dispensation for the
average impact, negative impact of their program. In that way
their extraordinary efforts, that would accrue benefit to them.
They wouldn't be punished for that. Am I saying that right?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. And then I want to talk a little bit
about the timeline for applying for relief. I think if memory
serves, your new rules allow for a 3-year filing timeline.
Number one, is my memory right? Number two, why is that the
right timeframe?
Secretary DeVos. We decided on a 3-year timeframe because
following a completion of study in a program, 3 years after
seems to be a reasonable amount of time, particularly
considering the fact that generally speaking, if there was a
claim to be made, that presumably would have occurred at the
beginning of the decision to take that program. So the length
of time that a student has is really I think pretty
substantial. Because it could be up to 7 years, frankly.
Mr. Johnson. Do we have a sense--I mean, you talked about
how--and I don't want to put words in your mouth--so pushback
if I am categorizing your statements wrong, but I think you all
had a methodology you were pretty happy with. The courts have
told you can't use that particular data set. When you spoke
about that earlier it didn't seem as though you had any idea of
a timing on a final decision. Is that right?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct. We have appealed that
decision. We believe the dataset was a viable use and the court
has not yet opined for over a year.
Mr. Johnson. So have all legal filings been made before the
Appellate Court? I mean, are all the parties, all their stuff
is in, we are just waiting on a decision?
Secretary DeVos. We are waiting on the court's decision,
yes.
Mr. Johnson. Okay. Very good. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from New York, Mr.
Morelle.
Mr. Morelle. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman, for hosting
this hearing. And thank you, Madam Secretary, for being here
this morning to answer our questions.
I do find interesting the conversation about taxpayers'
rights and interests versus students who have made claims. And
I suppose one way to save taxpayer dollars will be to deny all
the claims, and I am not suggesting you say that, but I just
find it interesting. What we need to do is find balance because
if we simply just denied all the claims that would neither be
legally or, in my view, morally defensible. But it would
certainly save taxpayer dollars. So we obviously want to strike
the right balance here.
I want to just touch on a few things that I find
interesting about the Department rules. One of them relates to
what they call frivolous factors. And I want to read, under the
new rule the Department states institutions that include the
nicest dorm on campus as part of the college tour cannot
guarantee that every student will have the opportunity to live
in that dorm. How many students have submitted a Borrowers
Defense claim that they didn't like their dorm room? Do you
either know the number or percentage?
Secretary DeVos. I don't have the number for that, but I do
have a case file of one that submitted a claim who is trying to
claim Borrower Defense for the fact that he or she did not like
their professor.
Mr. Morelle. Okay. But as it relates to--in the rule it
actually cites the nicest dorm rule and I am just curious
whether or not you could follow up to determine--since it is in
the rule, I assume that there were concerns that claims had
been made by students that they didn't get the nice dorm room
that they saw on the tour.
Secretary DeVos. There have been a number of different
quite unbelievable claims made.
Mr. Morelle. Can you give me a sense of how many frivolous
claims in your view the 2016 regulations allowed to be--forced
the Department to discharge?
Secretary DeVos. I don't have a specific number to cite
because not all of those claims have been not only adjudicated
but processed. But I do know that there have been a number of
claims made that, you know, your jaw would drop if you actually
read the reason for their claiming fraudulent activity.
Mr. Morelle. I am not sure my jaw would drop, but perhaps
other people's would.
But, one of the things that I was struck by in reading
through this, and I am relatively new to this, my background is
in the New York State legislature and we obviously are heavily
involved in higher education, but not Federal programs, but the
new rule states that it made the changes to the application
process so ``borrowers shop wisely, take personal
responsibility for seeking the best information available, and
make informed choices and accept the benefits of student loans
with the full understanding that they generally are legally
obligated to repay these loans in full.''
I was struck by some of the conversation because the
institutions that qualify for this and the guaranteed loan
program, the requirement is that they be accredited, either by
a national or regional accreditation organization. And given
the nature of some of the students, particularly that attended
Corinthian and other schools that have had claims of
significant fraud, it seems hard to me as just an average
citizen that you would put the burden on an individual who is
looking to go to school. And these are in often cases,
nontraditional students. So they are at work, they may have
families, they are challenged, but they want to pursue new
careers. It would seem to me that the fact that they are
accredited should mean something. And the sort of suggestion
that I get is that the expectation is that they would not only
take the accreditation, but be obligated to do additional
research on the claims made by the college when they go.
So if the college says or a representative says 100 percent
of our students find jobs after taking this course in the field
in which they study, it is accredited by the Federal
Government, you know, has the Federal Guaranteed Loan Program,
and they are accredited by a national or regional organization,
why should that student be obligated to do further research?
Why shouldn't they essentially take that as a proxy, the
accreditation that is required by the Federal Government?
Secretary DeVos. Why shouldn't they take the--
Mr. Morelle. Yeah.
Secretary DeVos. I am not sure I am clear on your question.
Mr. Morelle. So the suggestion is, as I understand it, the
suggestion is that there is a responsibility on the prospective
student to do more research on the credibility of claims being
made by people representing various colleges. I would just
assume if they had been accredited either regionally or
nationally and there is a Guaranteed Loan Program, that is an
indication that the Federal Government has essentially put the
Good Housekeeping seal of approval. Why would the Department,
as it seems to suggest in the regulations, require a student to
do additional research on the validity of the claims being made
by an accredited college?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I think it is imperative that we
provide as much information for all parties. And clearly
accreditors have a role, institutions themselves have a role,
and the Federal Government, as a lender, has a role to play.
That is why we have continued to improve the information
available and to insist on an approach with the regulation that
is balanced and that treats all institutions equally.
Mr. Morelle. Well--and I apologize, I am out of my time, so
I am going to yield back. But I would just say that
accreditation should seem to me to shift the balance and the
requirement for the student so that they should be able to rely
on that. And I don't think that is what the rule says.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Dr. Murphy from North Carolina.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Secretary
DeVos for coming today.
I just want to say, I appreciate the effort that your
Department is doing to try to be good stewards of the taxpayer
money. And I think this entire issue highlights some of the
problems that the Federal Government actually has in education.
That is a different diatribe I will go on a little bit later.
But I appreciate you trying to be a good steward because we are
striking a balance between individuals that want to better
themselves, to pursue higher education, and also to be one that
just doesn't dole out money just because someone claims that
they deserve money. I can understand some of the comments or I
would probably shake my head at some of the comments and the
reasons that some people claim that they should be reimbursed
or whatever.
Let me ask you a couple of questions, because accreditation
to me, jut in the medical sphere, seems to be in my opinion, a
way to get a lot of money for institutions that accredit other
institutions. And so by definition, in my opinion,
accreditation really means about as much as it is worth. You
can be accredited by different bodies. And so I don't give a
stamp necessarily to some institution that has been accredited.
And there is a phrase, caveat emptor, you know, let the buyer
beware. So we do take risks whenever we venture into something.
But on the other hand, what strategies, what practices does
the Department use to conduct oversight for these higher
education institutions to make sure they are not fraudulent
institutions?
Secretary DeVos. Well, the Department has a lot of
responsibility to ensure that all institutions are treated
equally and fairly. And this rule--and I want to get us back to
the reason that we are here today, to talk about Borrower
Defense and our approach to handling these claims and ensuring
that students are treated fairly and taxpayers are treated
fairly in the process. We are committed to following all of the
rules and the regulations that Congress has--the laws that
Congress has provided for us and continue to do so regularly.
Mr. Murphy. Thank you. What form of penalization, if you
were, is used by the Department for institutions that are
having practices that are causing students to have to lose
money to--in other words, what type of deceptive practices are
penalized and how are they penalized by the Department by some
of these institutions?
Secretary DeVos. Well, the Department has primarily
fiduciary tools and responsibility. It is a balance between
accreditors and states and the Department to ensure that
institutions are holding up their end of the bargain. And the
fiduciary role is primarily through the Department of
Education.
Mr. Murphy. Okay. Just one final question. Of the students
who have submitted claims, what percentage would you say are
folks that are doing this as a second--while they are also
working at a second job or working a job and doing versus
people who are primarily just using this as their main focus as
far as higher education versus doing it as a second--trying to
get a second career?
Secretary DeVos. Yeah, that is a good question. I am afraid
I don't have the granular data on that. I don't know, General
Brown, if you have a breakdown on?
General Brown. No, ma'am. So, sir, we don't collect the
data at that level to see if they are doing additional jobs or
those kinds of things. We simply adjudicate each case based on
its own merit, what is presented.
Mr. Murphy. And just to follow up with that, I just--you
know, I feel for individuals who are working and then trying to
better themselves, by all means. You know, education is the key
to a lifelong career and prosperity.
I do think the Federal Government has led to some of the
problems that we are having in higher education now because the
money is so free. It comes without many strings, and if you
want to get money and go on, you do. And instead, I think it
has led to a lot of bloat within higher education and we have a
lot of kids going to higher institutions that really should be
going to community colleges first.
And so to be honest with you, we are part to blame for all
this nonsense.
So, anyway, I thank you for your work and I thank you for
trying to keep us informed and doing the right thing.
Secretary DeVos. Thanks, Congressman.
Mr. Murphy. I yield back my time.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady from
Pennsylvania, Ms. Wild.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to first address the new partial relief
formula released by the Department. An expert in the field, Dr.
Douglas Webber, who is an associate professor of economics at
Temple University and was a bipartisan witness before this
committee, recently said that the new Borrower Defense scheme
is nonsensical and harmful to students. In particular, he
pointed out that the standard deviation, the main tool used by
the Education Department, is defined based on the mean and has
no direct relationship to the median.
In short, his analysis finds that the Education Department
has proposed a formula which misunderstands and misapplies
fairly basic statistical techniques in a way that makes it
materially harder for defrauded students to find relief.
I would like to enter his analysis into the record.
Chairman Scott. Without objection.
Ms. Wild. Thank you.
Moving on, Secretary DeVos, over the past year the number
of pending Borrower Defense claims has ballooned to 227,000.
Many of these are part of group claims submitted by 20 separate
state attorneys general, including the one in my state,
Pennsylvania. And some borrowers have been waiting for more
than 4 years for relief. These group claims represent thousands
of students who were defrauded by predatory colleges. There is
no question that these colleges engaged in fraud. Twenty-four
members of this committee, on both sides of the aisle represent
students in those states.
Now, initially, when those claims were brought, your
Department attempted to have them summarily dismissed by
arguing that state attorney general could not assert a Borrower
Defense on behalf of a group of borrowers. Is that still your
assertion?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, thanks for that question.
Let me just correct you. We have now--
Ms. Wild. Well, let me just have an answer first. Is that
still--
Secretary DeVos. Let me just correct you, we now have
almost 300,000 claims filed.
Ms. Wild. Okay. All right. Thank you.
Secretary DeVos. And--
Ms. Wild. Is it still your assertion that a state attorney
general cannot assert a Borrower Defense on behalf of a group
of borrowers?
Secretary DeVos. It is the assertion that it is the Federal
Department of Education that has through Federal Student Aid
the oversight responsibility and the claims continue to be
filed by individuals and are considered as individuals.
Ms. Wild. So I take it then that your answer to my question
is yes, that you still maintain that a state attorney general
cannot assert a Borrower Defense on behalf of a group of
borrowers.
Secretary DeVos. I know that there are many--
Ms. Wild. Yes or no.
Secretary DeVos. I know there are many attorneys general
who are marketing the opportunity to file claims. We have seen
Facebook ads and many other sources of--
Ms. Wild. Madam Secretary, I am sorry, but you seem to be
incapable of answering yes or no, so let me just remind you
that in October of 2018 a Federal Court ruled in Williams v.
DeVos that the Department's actions were unlawful and ruled
that the Education Department must review applications
submitted by states attorney general and cease involuntary
collection activities against those borrowers.
So why are those claims still sitting at the Department?
Secretary DeVos. The claims cannot be processed without a
methodology to do so. We now have one and they are being
processed again.
Ms. Wild. And how many of those claims have been processed
that were brought by the--the collective claims that were
brought by the state attorney general since that court ruling?
Secretary DeVos. General Brown will have to answer about
the specific claims that have currently been--
Ms. Wild. Why don't you--I am going to ask you to get that
information--
Secretary DeVos. That have currently been processed because
we just started processing within the last week. So, General
Brown, if you would like to--
Ms. Wild. Well, no, I don't--the question is directed to
you. If you would like to turn to General Brown and ask him--
Secretary DeVos. I have just done that.
Ms. Wild.--for that information, that is fine, but I want
the answer to come from you please.
General Brown. So, Madam Congressman--
Ms. Wild. General Brown, would you inform the Secretary
please of your answer? How many of those claims?
Secretary DeVos. We don't process by attorneys' general
claims. We are processing--
Ms. Wild. Notwithstanding the fact that the Federal Court
directed you to do so?
Secretary DeVos. We are processing the pending claims that
we have had and we will take them as the Federal Student Aid
department decides they need to be--the ones that they are able
to process and are processing first.
Ms. Wild. All right. I am going to reclaim my time.
In June of 2019, 22 senators wrote to you asking for an
update on the status of each of the group discharge
applications submitted by the state attorneys general and your
Department responded stating that the request for group relief
are in various stages of review by the Department, correct?
Secretary DeVos. They are indeed. All--
Ms. Wild. And what stage of review is that?
Secretary DeVos. All of the claims are going to be
considered individually.
Ms. Wild. On your timetable? Did you not state at the very
beginning of your testimony that students are your number one
priority? Because listening today, I have a hard time believing
that a defrauded borrower would think that you are in their
corner.
With that, I yield back.
Secretary DeVos. I was very clear from the start that while
this process--
Ms. Wild. I yield back.
Secretary DeVos.--was being set into place, that no student
would assume more interest on their student loan debt and that
they would be held in forbearance. I don't like the fact that
they have been sitting there as long as they have anymore than
you do. I said that at the beginning, I will say it again now.
Our goal is to get these claims processed and to take each
student's claim individually, acknowledging that each student
has unique and separate circumstances. I am committed to doing
it--
Ms. Wild. I am sorry, but, Secretary DeVos, you have--
Secretary DeVos. I am committed to doing that.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Wild. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Kansas, Mr.
Watkins.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Madam
Secretary. It is good to see you again. And I noticed also that
you tweeted that students are my number one priority. That is
why I come to work every day. I know that to be the case as
with other educators, one being my mother who is here, was an
educator in Kansas for many years and reminded me of what she
would say when she came home, and students are her number one
priority. And that is why she went to work every day. That is
why you go to work every day, and I thank you for that.
Obviously, you are trying to work and do the best you can
at an intersection between politics and education where
everybody is very emotional about the way ahead. And so thank
for your best efforts. You're a patriot and certainly doing the
best under the situation.
Now, during your tenure--well, before your tenure, a lot of
things happened. So I am going to just ask a bit about the
timeline, about let us see--and you can feel free to have
General Brown answer if you would like. November 2016, the
Department published new Borrowers Defense regulations. Now,
that was the first in some 11 years, I believe, in accordance
with the Higher Education Act. The final regulations were
published in November 2016, were scheduled to go into effect
July 1, 2017. But you put a hold on them. Why was that?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, thanks for the question.
We were hopeful to be able to delay the implementation of
the 2016 rule in order to further refine the rule, which we
have now done with the rule that will go into effect next July.
As it stands now, we have three different sort of buckets
of claims and rules under which we will ultimately have to
operate. The '95 rule, the 2016 rule, and then prospectively
the 2020 rule.
Mr. Watkins. Can you tell us when that process began and
how long it took to issue the final rule? And during that time
did you consider and incorporate feedback from higher education
stakeholders including the public?
Secretary DeVos. Oh, yes. We went through the rulemaking
process and received input and feedback during the public
comment period, and responded to that appropriately. Yes.
Mr. Watkins. Thank you. And again, I just want to say thank
you for your hard work, and thank you for all that you do. And
I would like it to be a reminder that the challenge here is to
ensure that we provide and empower the--in the case of primary
education, the decision-making power to teachers and to
parents, and assure that we understand what our role--what our
limited role as oversight ought to be, because I believe it is
best done by the parents and the teachers.
And so thank you again for being here, Madam Secretary. And
I yield the remainder of my time to the ranking member.
Secretary DeVos. Thanks, Congressman.
Mr. Walberg. I thank the gentleman. Madam Secretary, if you
could enlighten us a little further on how FSA communicates in
a constant way with loan services and how they communicate the
changes in borrower status, when the court intervenes or the
borrower files a claim.
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congressman, the communication with
the servicers is an ongoing and regular effort, and continues
to be a challenge, frankly. And I would love to have one of the
exhibits that we have along here put up, Exhibit 2, to better
understand the complexity. You know, when Federal Student Aid
was created I don't think Congress ever envisioned the kind of
complex organization that it would be today, and I think you
will see with this chart, how many different elements there
are.
The loan servicers all operate on different platforms, so
there is not an efficient and effective way to communicate, it
makes communication challenging, but one for which we have
continued to take responsibility. That is why we have continued
to move to the modernization of Federal Student Aid's platform
and framework, what we call NextGen, and we are going to be
able to have a much and better and smoother process and
communications flow when we are ultimately able to migrate
completely to that NextGen framework.
And if you are interested in hearing more about it, I know
General Brown has a lot more detail about that process.
Mr. Walberg. Well, with 8 seconds, 7, I don't think we have
that detail, but we will look forward to it. But delighted to
hear that while it is cumbersome right now, we are moving
NextGen to do it better and complete those 300-and-some
thousand.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
gentlelady from Washington, Dr. Schrier.
Dr. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Madam
Secretary, for joining us today. I come from Washington State,
and nearly 6,500 students there are stuck. They took out
student loans and enrolled in bad actor, for-profit colleges
that intentionally deceived them. The colleges closed, credits
were worthless, they got stuck with thousands of dollars of
debt, and nothing to show for it. No degree, no credits that
could transfer.
One of my constituents from Pitfall, Washington is a single
mother, and she found herself broke because she wasn't able to
get a degree, her so-called education prepared her for nothing.
She earned very little, was stuck still paying back these
loans, even though they gave her no education, and she could
not afford to even leave her parents' home.
She said, and quote, ``My son has asthma and sometimes
needs hospital visits. When he gets really sick, I can't even
take him anywhere. It makes my life a living hell.'' She has
had to take out loans because she has continued to have to pay
on this debt.
Now there was a consensus in your own Department that all
of these Corinthian and ITT loans should be forgiven, that
uniformly students got no benefit. And under the Obama
Administration a policy was enacted to forgive that debt
because they were victims of fraud.
But you have continued to collect on those loans, and so
students sued, and a judge held you in contempt for continuing
to take their payments and to this day, the Department of
Education is still making students pay off Federal loans for
this fraudulent education, sometimes even garnishing wages.
And so my question for you, who considers students their
number one priority, is, do you really believe you have done
everything you possibly can to help these students and make
them whole?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congresswoman, let me first disagree
with the narrative that you just advanced. I have continued to
respect the fact that many students' Borrower Defense
applications have been pending, and I have directed that all
students whose applications are pending are in forbearance, and
are not having interest accrue.
So, the narrative that you have advanced is not accurate,
and I am committed to continuing to implement this methodology
to now process the pending applications, and I am very hopeful
that we are going to be able to continue to do it, without
litigation, and that ultimately these borrowers will have their
questions answered, and I can--
Dr. Schrier. Here is my concern, is that you say they are
in forbearance, but people are still paying on these loans.
They are still racking up--
Secretary DeVos. In the case that they were, they have been
remediated, and where we have become aware that they have been
inaccurately taken out, we have remediated them, and we will
continue to be vigilant about that.
Dr. Schrier. I would like to know about what kind of
timeframe we are looking at. Because you have mentored
children, precisely the kinds of kids who grow up, and go to
institutions like this. And I wonder if you could just put
yourself in their shoes and feel what it would feel like to go
to one of these institutions, be defrauded, be deceived, told
they were going to have a degree, that credits would transfer,
that they would have an income afterwards, and then not.
And then have to wait this long for forgiveness. Being in
forbearance is one thing, but you are continuing to collect on
these students, and my understanding is that only about 1,500
cases have been truly processed through to date.
So, your new process looking at one case at a time,
anticipating another year of waiting that seems like too long
to me. Can you tell me when you anticipate that they will have
relief?
Secretary DeVos. I can indeed feel for the students that
are going to any institution and having hopes that far exceed
what they realize and what they ultimately experience. And we
are committed to ensuring that every student that submits a
Borrower Defense claim is considered on its individual merits,
and that we have a fair and robust way of considering each of
those claims.
We are moving as expeditiously as possible--
Dr. Schrier. This is my issue that--
Secretary DeVos.--to address those claims now that we have
a new methodology underway.
Dr. Schrier. So, the new methodology has multiple flaws,
but there is also nothing that prevented you from simply
stopping collecting payments while it was going through this
process. But the students are still paying and some of them
going into debt, some of their credit rating is damaged, and I
would just like to know what you are going to do to fix this.
To give the money back to them to repair their credit ratings,
because there is a long chain of suffering that happens when
you are forced to continue to pay on fraudulent debt.
Secretary DeVos. Again, any student that ultimately has a
claim that has merit, and that for which they have experienced
financial harm, we are committed to ensuring that they are made
whole in that process.
Dr. Schrier. Corinthian students and ITT students 100
percent have valid claims because they got zero benefit.
Secretary DeVos. That is simply not true, there are many
Corinthian students and ITT students who have done very well--
Dr. Schrier. Your own staff determined it was true. Thank
you.
Chairman Scott. Your time has expired. The gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Walker?
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have been watching
some of the hearing over my office, and having some other
meetings. You know, I thought all the painful stuff was
happening in another committee, but obviously we are making
some space on this one, even though we are not the feature
primetime spot, it doesn't mean you can't still say some crazy
things on this committee as well.
I have got a couple questions, but I am just kind of
pausing to commend you on your strength. Listen, the reality
is, is all of us when we transition into the political
environment, my background as a pastor, some educators, you are
not going to get everything right at first, but we are taught
to look at the heart.
And I think with your career, before coming to this
wonderful position of Secretary of Education, that you have,
and other things that you have done, I think the heart is
pretty clear here on what you have tried to do.
It is a little embarrassing to see when it goes personal,
like it has, but I don't know how you have continued just to
kind of--to take it for 3 years and just keep moving forward.
But you have, and I think that shows great resolve. I think
sometimes when people have disagreements, it is a shame that we
make it personal, because I would tell you, I think only God
sees the heart, and I just commend you for trying to do the
right thing.
And I guess I will ask a few questions, if that is okay at
this point. So, after my commentary is completed. You have
released a new methodology for determining relief for
borrowers. Can you please walk me through the methodology, and
explain why you think this is fair and appropriate measure? If
General Brown needs to provide some specific information, to
have you do that as well? So, I will toss it to you.
Secretary DeVos. Well, thanks Congressman, and thanks for
the encouragement. The top line is the new methodology really
treats students individually, and fairly, and also respects the
taxpayer. It has established a process of scientifically proven
demonstrable process to consider students that made claims
against whatever institution, by the program they attended.
And it compares the earnings, the median earnings from that
program at that institution with median earnings from like
programs from other institutions, and so--
Mr. Walker. I am sorry, go ahead, finish.
Secretary DeVos. If it falls outside of two standard
deviations from that mean, or median, the borrower would
receive 100 percent relief.
Mr. Walker. Right.
Secretary DeVos. And between the median and two standard
deviations, it would be a tiered approach, and so we believe
this is a very fair and good way of demonstrating that.
Mr. Walker. So which of these loans does this methodology
apply to?
Secretary DeVos. Well, all of the pending claims with the
exception of the Corinthian college students that have been
carved out by the previous lawsuit, and we are hopeful that the
judge will review this process and permit it for the claims
that were pending there as well.
Mr. Walker. My understanding is that the system used to
process these claims and match borrower information, is
significantly out of date and lacks the capacity to efficiently
process the exponential growth in claims since 2015. At least
that is our understanding.
Could you or General Brown, if this requires a more
technical answer, please elaborate as to why this backend
system is deficient in handling these claims, and how this can
be contributed to the backlog of claims processed.
Secretary DeVos. Well, first of all, Federal Student Aid as
an organization in general is a very complex organization.
Mr. Walker. Yes, it is.
Secretary DeVos. Congress never envisioned, I don't think,
when it was founded, what it would become today. And we are in
the process of updating that foundation and framework so that
it does more smoothly and easily talk within itself, and with
its servicers.
But I think the ponderousness around this whole thing all
speaks to the complexity of Federal Student Aid, and the
federalization of student lending. And it has continued to
manifest itself, 1995 to 2015, only 59 Borrower Defense claims
in that 20-year period, since then, nearly 300,000.
Mr. Walker. Wow.
Secretary DeVos. And it was frankly an all-out attack in
the last administration on specific institutions, and I think
that is very unfortunate. Our rule, going forward, will treat
all institutions equally. You know, the last administration
said they weren't going to look at materials or realities from
you know, liberal arts programs because the value was assumed
there. Well, that is just not a reasonable approach going
forward.
Mr. Walker. Sure. And I wanted to hear more from General
Brown, but my time has expired, so I yield back to the
chairman.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Underwood?
Ms. Underwood. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Secretary DeVos. Do
you know how many Corinthian students had negative information
wrongly added to their credit reports?
Secretary DeVos. How many students with the mistake that
was made most recently?
Ms. Underwood. How many students had negative information
wrongly added to their credit report?
Secretary DeVos. Hmm?
Ms. Underwood. I am not asking about your staff, ma'am, I
am asking about you. Do you know the exact number? Ma'am?
Secretary DeVos, do you know the exact number?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, I am consulting with the
chief operating officer of Federal Student Aid, who is charged
with the running and implementation of this program.
Ms. Underwood. Right. I appreciate that, but if you didn't
know, the answer could be just be no, and that is okay.
Secretary DeVos. I am trying to find out if I can give you
an accurate answer.
Ms. Underwood. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. The reality is, we don't distinguish
within the loans that have been pending in process. So, the
answer is we don't - that information is not collected.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. Well, so far your Department has
publicly released the number, and it is 5,900 Corinthian
students whose credit reports were wrongly affected. Now, you
are aware that negative information on your credit report, like
information that says you are not paying your student loans,
can lower your credit score. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. All of the students who were impacted by
the mistake that was made have been remediated.
Ms. Underwood. We are going to get to the remediation. I
was just asking--
Secretary DeVos. Well, I am going to get to the remediation
now because it has been done.
Ms. Underwood. Ma'am, it is my time. Reclaiming my time--
Secretary DeVos. So let us go on to the next question
please--
Ms. Underwood. Mr. Chairman, reclaiming my time.
Chairman Scott. Go ahead.
Ms. Underwood. Secretary DeVos, have you ever been denied a
home or a car loan because your credit score was too low?
Secretary DeVos. I do not.
Ms. Underwood. Okay. But you do know how an unfairly low
credit score or a bad credit report can affect students. What
are some specific examples of those harms?
Secretary DeVos. In fact, all of the students that had
credit reports affected have been remediated and--
Ms. Underwood. Thank you so much, ma'am.
Secretary DeVos.--we will continue to pay attention to not
having it happen again.
Ms. Underwood. So, do you know what, ma'am? Thank you. So,
we know that students whose credit reports get harmed it
impacts their ability to buy a home and auto loans, it can lead
to job loss, the consequences are real and they are personal,
and they have really devastating impacts on students.
So, I want to share a few of their stories. Loquisha
Johnson from my home state of Illinois earned a degree as a
medical administrative assistant from a Corinthian school, but
we now know that degree is almost worthless. But Ms. Johnson is
left with those student loans. She just had a job offer
rescinded because her credit score shows delinquent loans.
Julie Decker from Indiana lost her home and her car while
waiting for the debt relief that she is legally entitled to.
Now, her credit has suffered so much that she can't find a new
apartment to rent.
So, let us go back to that 5,900 number. You previously
said that only 900 students' credit scores were affected, but
last week you disclosed an additional 5,000 students. Are there
more disclosures to come? Or can you commit right now that you
have discovered and corrected every unfair report on the
Corinthian students' credit?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, I, too, feel for the
individuals that you have cited in your examples and, again,
once again, I am committed to ensuring that we do what is right
for all students who have submitted Borrower Defense claims. We
have continued to be diligent, correcting the errors that were
made, we have acknowledged them, we have said we are sorry for
them, and we are going to continue to be vigilant to make sure
that we do not incur more of them.
We have put notices in the servicers' files, which has
significant implications for future federal contracts.
Ms. Underwood. Sure.
Secretary DeVos. We have continued to make sure that
consequences for the mistakes that were made are levied and
that students are continuing--that we continue to put students
first in this case. The ones that did have credit ratings
impacted, again, we have addressed those. We will continue. If
there are instances in the future, we will do so with them as
well.
Ms. Underwood. Right. My concern, ma'am, is that this group
of students may just be the tip of the iceberg. Your Department
just disclosed this larger number, the additional 5,000
students last week, as a result of one lawsuit, as a result of
a court order. It doesn't include the Corinthian students who
are not involved in this particular class action, or who joined
a different lawsuit, with their State Attorney General, or
otherwise.
It doesn't include the hundreds of thousands of students
who went to fraudulent schools that aren't Corinthian schools,
who may also be eligible for Borrower Defense. And even whereas
your own former deputy, Wayne Johnson, gave an interview a few
weeks ago about student loans where he said, quote, ``Right
now, I know that millions of people have unfair information in
their credit files that is causing them to pay more on car
loans, and on apartments.''
So, Secretary DeVos, you both have the responsibility and
the existing authorities to do something about it, and what we
are trying to determine is, what is the right number? Is it
900? Is it 5,000? Or are we into the millions, ma'am? I yield
back.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady's time has expired. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen--excuse me, excuse me. The
gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Keller. I am sorry.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary DeVos,
General Brown, thank you for being here today, thank you for
your service to America's students and education. I appreciate
it very much. I have a couple of things that I would like to
get into after I just make a couple observations.
Secretary DeVos, I know that we all agree, all students who
were defrauded by their schools should receive relief. I also
want to focus on fairness.
Since joining the committee we have marked up a one-sided
Peter robs Paul Higher Education Reauthorization Act. The
Democrat bill struck me as being incredibly unfair to the
students we are trying to help, and insulting to the
intelligence of the students who made the educational decision
in their best interest.
As Democrats continue to push policies that double down on
failed policies and cuts out specific educational providers
that are only harming our students, we do a disservice to the
students when they focus in our school's tax returns, rather
than the educational experience delivered.
We can discuss how there are bad actors across the board,
but what we should focus on is how we allow students to find
the school or educational program that best fits their needs
and helps them achieve their goals. And I heard a lot earlier
today about not having a process and many things in place for
you to be able to do that from the previous administration. So,
I just have a couple questions.
Can you tell us about what the Department is doing to help
students and prospective students better understand the options
available? Like does the College Scorecard cover more than just
baccalaureate degrees?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, thanks for that question.
Yes. As I mentioned a little earlier, the College Scorecard
that we have recently enhanced the data for, now contains
information at a field of study level for not only 4-year
colleges, but also 2-year institutions, for some certificate
programs, some graduate programs, and also has links to the
apprenticeship programs through the Department of Labor. So, we
believe this is going to be a really good and important tool
for students to be able to access and use as they consider
future fields of study in future programs.
Mr. Keller. So prior to, the previous administration, did
they cover that broad range of programs available or were they
just focused on the baccalaureate degrees?
Secretary DeVos. They were focused on 4-year institutions
and by institution level. Now we are down to the program level.
Mr. Keller. Okay. So what that would do then would be
improving any student at any field of study, depending on how
long that takes?
Secretary DeVos. To acknowledge, there are many pathways to
a successful adult life, and we encourage students to look at
all of their options and, in fact, look at them starting in
middle school, frankly.
Mr. Keller. So your scorecard will actually protect more
students than the previous administration's did because you are
including at the degree level, and not the institution level,
and you are considering all programs, not just baccalaureate?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Keller. So you have done more to help students since
you have been Secretary than previously?
Secretary DeVos. I would argue with that to be, yes.
Mr. Keller. Yes? Because previously if I had been going for
a 2-year agree or an apprenticeship, I wouldn't have had that
information available to me. Correct?
Secretary DeVos. That is correct.
Mr. Keller. Thank you for that. I appreciate it very much.
Also, Secretary, has the information shared on the College
Scorecard been expanded? Of course, that is--expanded of
course, that it has been expanded under your watch. Can you
highlight what changes have been made, what the additional
educational pathways are available?
And I know you talked a little bit about that, but, you
know, when you look at that, how do you think that its helped
some of the other people that aren't going for a baccalaureate,
but they may be going for 2-year associates degree or a
training program?
Secretary DeVos. Well, this is relatively new, so it was
just within the last several weeks that this data was made
available, and so I think prospectively students are going to
be able to make better comparisons, and to be able to compare
between institutions, compare between programs, compare
different kinds of fields of study, and again, just give
students and prospective students many more tools to be able to
make good decisions for their future.
Mr. Keller. I appreciate that. And I just want to follow
up. I know there has been some previous remarks made about
certain, you know, students, they haven't, but the courts have
really held you up on getting relief to all students. Is that
correct?
Secretary DeVos. Correct. We had a process well underway in
2018, and the court stopped us from continuing it in May of
2018, and we have been waiting for the court on appeal; since
then, have developed a second methodology, and have just been
able to unveil that and begin implementing it last week.
Mr. Keller. So, really, the courts have caused some
people's credit scores to be harmed more so than the
Department?
Secretary DeVos. Indeed. Indeed.
Mr. Keller. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Connecticut, Ms. Hayes?
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to return
just for a moment to that January 10, 2017, memo from the
Borrower Defense Unit to Under Secretary Ted Mitchell, who is
the top lieutenant of former Secretary of Education John King.
I just want to point out, while this memo was written before
you took office, it serves as a fundamental transition memo
between administrations.
And I have the benefit of sitting next to a former
Secretary who assured me that there are meetings and a briefing
book and letters, so I just think that it would be vital for
you and your Department to read what you inherited, especially
since you were saying there was no plan, and, in fact ,there
was a plan as this memo indicated. You know, we operate in a
country where there are--
Secretary DeVos. It was not a process, and I will continue
to--
Mrs. Hayes. That wasn't a question. We operate in a country
where we have peaceful transitions of power, and it is
understood that we have changed from administration to
administration. And then just the last thing I would say before
I move on to my questions, is that it has been suggested by my
colleagues on more than one occasion that I don't understand,
this I understand, everything about these hearings I
understand.
So, Secretary DeVos, in March, you told Senator Murray
that, and I quote, ``The Department had decided to move forward
with processing--the Department had decided to move forward
with processing denials while awaiting the court's decision
regarding the Borrowers Defense partial relief methodology. It
turns out, in fact, that your Department has been sitting on
approximately 18,000 denial claims.''
My question is, why would the Department purposely not
inform borrowers that their claims had been denied?
Secretary DeVos. First of all, the claims are ineligible,
and we decided not to release a whole bunch of them early
before we were able to implement this new methodology, because
we didn't want to concern students that had pending
applications that perhaps this was going to be the case for
everyone.
So while we could reach the conclusion and reach the
decision for a number of them, we intentionally, did not want
to, I think, concern students with pending applications because
there are, because there are many pending applications that
they have relief.
Mrs. Hayes. I got it. I got it. But don't you think that a
borrower who has no chance of getting forgiveness, should be
told their status? Is it unfair for borrowers to be waiting up
to 4 years for a resolution when some of them may have, in
fact, already been denied? The institutions have closed, they
are losing access to critical documents, the interest is
building up. Is there any, I don't know, political reason for
doing that so as the number of denials would not be increased?
If you have the information.
Secretary DeVos. Yeah, we were concerned about the message
that it would send to pending students with valid applications,
and so that was the reason.
Mrs. Hayes. But wouldn't a student want to know if they are
waiting for a decision. It has been 4 years, and a decision has
already been made that their application was denied so that--
Secretary DeVos. I am sure all students want to know, that
is why we are really focused on trying to get this new
methodology fully implemented, and, frankly, have been very
disappointed that the court has not opined on our appeal to the
previous methodology.
Mrs. Hayes. But the court has not prevented you from
informing students of denials. Is it not true that in a sworn
declaration filed last month in court that Principal Deputy
Under Secretary Diane Auer Jones stated that the Department did
not want to notify borrowers about the denials because of
concerns about the public perception of the process?
Secretary DeVos. Again, just what I said, we did not want
students with pending applications to somehow think that their
application was not going to have any chance of approval or of
relief.
And so, now that we have the new methodology, it is kind of
a moot point actually. We are well underway with processing
again, and we will be able to inform borrowers, hopefully, many
of them very quickly with regard to the status of their
application.
Mrs. Hayes. To me this looks like a political decision
because you aren't approving any claims. It would look bad if
you were ratcheting up the denial rates, if the approvals were
flat, and the denials were up. So, instead you are just sitting
on everything to keep better optics at the cost of students,
who just want a resolution.
I will ask again, if you know a borrower does not have a
valid claim, or that he has been denied for other reasons, what
is the benefit of sitting on that information and not sharing
it with the student?
Secretary DeVos. I would like to refer us to Exhibit 6,
which demonstrates the percentage of claims that had relief
on--
Mrs. Hayes. I am talking about the claims that you know are
denied.
Secretary DeVos. I am just--I am talking about the history
of the claims that we were able to process before the courts
stopped us. And compare that to the percentage of claims that
the previous administration, and they were consistent, you will
see 62 percent--
Mrs. Hayes. My time has expired. I have to yield back.
Secretary DeVos.--62 percent, and so we have continued to--
Mrs. Hayes. My time has expired. I have to yield back. I am
sorry.
Chairman Scott. The time has expired. The gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Allen?
Mr. Allen. Good morning, Madam Secretary. And I thank you,
too, for I know that you and I share a common faith in I think
just probably what has sustained us in these things,
persecution is just a part of it, and there is a lot of
disagreement about how to do things here. But I do remember,
and, of course, we are in a different Congress, but--and a lot
of different, new faces here, and a lot of new ideas. But in
the last Congress we actually marked up the Higher Education
Authorization.
And one of the most criticized pieces of that by my
Democratic colleagues was a piece we put in there holding both
public and private schools of higher education accountable to
both students and the Federal Government for the federal debt.
In fact, later if we go back and pull the records, but I would
like to enter the record of exactly that language that went
there, the vote on it, and the comments about that, making
schools of higher education more accountable, because obviously
young people had been misled.
I come across young people all the time and, you know,
their first request is could you please forgive my student loan
debt? Because they were ill-advised, and frankly, this thing
kind of ramped up in the last, you know--well, I have been a
member, this is my third term, but I think I began hearing
about this about 10 years ago. Because the idea then is every
young person should get a college degree so the idea is, okay,
we are going to loan people the money and not tell them how in
the world they are going to pay it back. And that is wrong.
And the Federal Government should have--I mean, I put the
blame right here on this body. I mean, whoever came up with
this idea in the beginning, and did not put into place and
provide for and to keep young people from being misled, that is
the tragedy here.
And I realize you inherited a lot of this, and so what I am
going to do right now--and, General Brown, you have got some
charts over there, if you haven't been able to share exactly
what you are trying to do to correct this situation, I welcome
that opportunity.
For you to have that opportunity, we have got 2 minutes and
22 seconds remaining. If there is something over there that you
think would help my colleagues here understand what you are
trying to do and how quickly you are trying to do it, I would
be glad for you to share with us.
Chairman Scott. If the gentleman would direct the question.
Mr. Allen. All right, well, Secretary DeVos, if you would,
whatever you have to do, to defer to General Brown or whatever,
however you want to do that, please proceed.
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congressman, thanks for that. And
you are right, we inherited a difficult situation. We are
trying to put in place a process, and we have now a second time
put in place a reasonable process, one that treats students
fairly, taxpayers fairly, institutions fairly, one that is
balanced in its approach.
And I will just stop and see if there is something that
General Brown feels we have not been able to share with regard
to that new process.
General Brown. Yes, ma'am. Just very quickly, I will show
you on Exhibit 2. And while he is getting that up, just to
correct one error here, 100 percent of those people who were
impacted with credit report ratings have been corrected, and
almost all with very few exceptions, and those we work today
have had refunds given to them. We have a system of 11 loan--
Mr. Allen. I have to add one thing, that was a mistake with
my credit report that I didn't know about when I went to buy
something and so it happens. Okay. So, go ahead.
General Brown. Yes, sir. I will just quickly tell the
committee that we have 11 loan services and 13 collection
agencies across the country, and those are not systems that
work together. Those are individual silos of at least four
different systems, so to get information from these systems,
you actually have to go out to the individual loan servicers
and craft the questions exactly right to get it back, which is
not the way any of you do your consumer banking, it is not the
way that most people do business in this century.
So, what we are trying to do is to take ownership of loan
servicing back into Federal Student Aid, so that there is one
system that we own, so that if you ask us a specific question
we can get it from our systems without going out to the loan
servicers and, therefore, reduce the errors.
We call that the next generation of Federal Student Aid,
and we are almost there. Some of it we are implementing now,
and most of it we have implemented next year.
Mr. Allen. All right. Secretary, hang in there. I am with
you. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Shalala.
Ms. Shalala. Thank you very much. Thank you, Secretary, for
joining us today. Secretary DeVos, you have repeatedly said
that your new partial formula is necessary for individualized
review of claims from defrauded borrowers. Is that correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Ms. Shalala. Isn't it true--
Secretary DeVos. But not only for individual, but just for
a framework and a process.
Ms. Shalala. All right. Isn't it true that your new partial
relief formula does not allow for individualized review of
claims?
Secretary DeVos. No, it does allow for individualized
review of claims.
Ms. Shalala. You are sure of that?
Secretary DeVos. Yeah, each is being reviewed individually,
by General Brown's robust--
Ms. Shalala. So the partial review relief formula does
allow for individualized review of claims?
Secretary DeVos. Yes. Yeah, I mean, each of them are being
reviewed individually, that is why there are three times the
number of attorneys that we have had previously.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady yields. Ms. Shalala?
Ms. Shalala. Yes.
Chairman Scott. Are you asking whether or not the
individual case is reviewed, or whether or not the individual
dynamics, whether that person's income is individually
reviewed?
Ms. Shalala. The latter.
Secretary DeVos. Oh, well, no. It is a program-to-program
review, so if a borrower has submitted a claim with regard to
the specific institution, and the program that they studied,
the information, the median earnings information from that
program, from all of those who graduated from that program at
that institution is reviewed against the median earnings of
like programs from other institutions around the country.
Ms. Shalala. That is not an individualized review, you have
set up a formula there.
Secretary DeVos. It is individualized to program, because
as someone said earlier, you could have an individual who has
done remarkably well financially that has made a claim against
a program that, upon review, falls short simply because that
individual has earned more they should not be penalized in that
case.
Ms. Shalala. Okay. Let me ask a quick question to follow up
with colleague, and I have another question. At what date are
you going to notify the 18,000 people that have claims have
been denied?
Secretary DeVos. I believe that has been rolling out, and
continues to roll out, and General Brown would have the
specifics.
General Brown. It is happening, ma'am, even as we speak.
Ms. Shalala. And when will all of them be notified by?
General Brown. That first tranche, I suspect they will be
notified over the next couple of weeks, some of which have been
notified.
Ms. Shalala. Okay. Right, but when will the 18,000 be fully
notified?
Secretary DeVos. As part of that.
General Brown. Over the next couple of weeks, ma'am, they
will be. And it has already started.
Ms. Shalala. All right. Let me ask a question. How many
staff people does the General have for these individualized
reviews?
Secretary DeVos. I am going to ask him to comment how he
has staffed up at my urging the area reviewing them.
General Brown. So, ma'am, we will have up to 64, and we
have most of those already hired now, that's more than three
times as many as we have ever had, the peak of which, if you go
back over the last 3 years or 4 years, has been 14, we will
have up to 64.
Ms. Shalala. So, Madam Secretary, let me ask you a very
specific question about this. So, if he has around 60, and you
have 227,000 claims that have to be individually reviewed, and
you have already indicated that you intend to do that over 12
months, that is about 300 per person. Even the VA and Social
Security with the equivalent of a brigade can't review that
many.
So, explain to me how in 12 months, you're going to be able
with that limited number of people to process, individually,
200--over 200,000 claims.
Secretary DeVos. Well, General Brown has assured me that he
has the personnel in place to be able to do that, and he has
followed through on all of his commitments to do PSA and--
Ms. Shalala. Madam Secretary, that is about 300 a day for
an individual. That is technically impossible. The VA cannot do
it. Social Security cannot do it. We have a lot of experience
in government. So, I am questioning the credibility of being
able to do that in 12 months, which you have assured us you are
going to be able to do.
Secretary DeVos. I am going to ask--again, I am going to
ask General Brown to comment more specifically on that.
General Brown. So, ma'am, I would say that all claims are
not the same. The complexity of some are far more than the
others. The amount of--so our documentation is far greater than
the others. So, we have people that have been working at this.
They have looked at the various complexities. The number that
we are at, today, for processing, we are very early in the
process. We hope to grow that to a number that exceeds the
amount that are coming in, and we are not stagnated. So, if 64
is the wrong number, then we will hire more. We will go back to
the Secretary to ask for more resources, and we will look at
the production on a weekly basis.
So, I would not get fixated on 64 other than to say that is
greater than the amount that we have had in the past. We are
looking at this each month, and if we need to bring on more
attorneys, we will.
Ms. Shalala. Yes. With all due respect, Madam Secretary, I
am focused on 200,000, not on the number of staff people. I am
simply suggesting that the--that, technically, given the number
of staff people, you actually cannot process that number and
you ought to look at that. If I have one more second--
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, if I could just--
Ms. Shalala. Yeah.
Secretary DeVos.--comment. There are--many of these claims
have been adjudicated to the point of being able to be
processed. So, there are a lot that are already several steps
into the process. Now, they have to just complete the process.
Ms. Shalala. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. Thank you. Who do you have next?
Comer?
Mrs. Foxx. Mr. Smucker.
Chairman Scott. Oh, oh, I am sorry. Mr. Smucker? Gentleman
from Pennsylvania, Mr. Smucker.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary, for being here. I appreciate your work, appreciate
your comments earlier in regards to the need for congressional
oversight, which you stated you understand the need for. You
have done, I think, an excellent job of outlining your response
and the Department's response to the questions that have been
raised, legitimately, here today, but I find it unfortunate
that, you know, you continue to be asked about reading a
specific memo, and that, you know, I do not understand what
that has to do with your Department policy on these issues,
which is important that we understand. And, in fact, the memo,
that you are being asked about was written in January 10, 2017,
prior to you taking office. So, I just want to make that clear
for the record.
I also find it offensive, earlier comments that were made,
in regards to your view of public education. Anyone who looks
at your body of work and says that you do not care about
children, does not care about public education, that is untrue.
It is false and it is offensive. I also find it offensive that
the same statement was made about Republicans, and anyone can
look at my record and others on the Republican side of the
aisle and know that we have worked hard to ensure that every
child gets the education that they deserve, and that public
education is working effectively in our states. So, the
committee has reached a new level when we were throwing those
kind of accusations against the other side, and it is
unfortunate, and should not be part of a hearing here today.
You do have--there have been some questions in regards to your
authority and to the idea of partial--what is the word?
Secretary DeVos. Partial relief.
Mr. Smucker. Partial relief, I am sorry, and I want to make
this clear, and I want to ask you a question in this regard.
Partial relief could be for someone who has already graduated
from the institution and who is in the workforce, correct?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Smucker. We are talking about someone who may have
graduated years before the school closed, who has had a
beneficial education, and has had a job as a result of that
education. What I am hearing Democrats say here today is they
do not even want us to look into that. They want, instead, you
to make a blanket relief, 100 percent, of any additional
student loans that student has outstanding. Am I correct on
that?
Secretary DeVos. Well, there is--I know there is a--an
attitude that many, if not all, of these loans should be
completely forgiven.
Mr. Smucker. Okay, no court of law would look at a
situation like this. No insurance company would look at a
situation like this. And for us to expect that taxpayers would
support something along that line, I think, is not a good
precedent. I do want to put a few things on the record, and I
am going to run down through a series of questions.
So, Borrower Defense, first, it--you agree, it is a
provision included in the Higher Education Act, correct?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Smucker. That statute in Section 455H of the law
states, ``Notwithstanding any other provision of state or
Federal law, the Secretary shall specify in regulations which
acts or omissions of an institution of higher education a
borrower may assert as a defense to repayment of a loan, made
under this part, except that in no event may a borrower recover
from the Secretary in any action arising from or relating to a
loan paid under this part an amount in excess of the amount
such borrower has repaid.''
Those are the only provisions that restrict the activities
that you can take in writing a rule. Am I right on that?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Smucker. My interpretation means this: one, that the
Secretary will issue regulations on this issue; and, number
two, as I said, that is the only limit that you have in
providing relief.
Turning to the rulemaking activity then. There are three
different regulations: President Clinton's in 1995, President
Obama's in 2016, and yours this year. Is that correct, as well?
Secretary DeVos. That will take effect next July, yes.
Mr. Smucker. Yes, and the regulation applicable to the loan
is dependent on the date the loan was disbursed?
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Smucker. Under the 1995 Clinton regulations, did the
regulations allow the Secretary to grant partial relief?
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mr. Smucker. Under the 2016 Obama regulations, was the
Secretary allowed to grant partial relief?
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mr. Smucker. Under the 2019 regulations--
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mr. Smucker.--was the Secretary allowed to grant partial
relief? Do you believe that authority is clear and not in
dispute?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, I do.
Mr. Smucker. If members of Congress disagree with the
policy decision, they defer to the Department. Can they
introduce and pass a bill mandating that--you to provide full
relief, and would you continue to follow the law that Congress
has written if that were the case?
Secretary DeVos. Congress could, indeed, pass that law, and
if that law were passed, I would, indeed, follow it.
Mr. Smucker. Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman yields back. The
gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Levin?
Mr. Levin. Thank you. Good afternoon, Madam Secretary. I am
going to lead you, just to let you know, through some yes or no
questions, just like Mr. Smucker did so ably. Let us see if we
can get a yes or no answer over here, as well.
In a November 7th letter to Chairman Scott, you wrote the
following in reference to claims from defrauded Corinthian
borrowers, and I quote, ``The clear intent of the prior
administration was to eventually provide blanket relief,
without review of the facts and evidence.'' Does that
accurately represent your reviews on the Obama Administration's
process for reviewing Corinthian claims?
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mr. Levin. Okay, thank you. So, I have in my hands here two
memos that were uncovered yesterday in a story by National
Public Radio. These memos, which were produced by Education
Department staff in late 2016 and early 2017, show a detailed
analysis documenting pervasive and consistent fraud by
Corinthian schools.
The committee has been requesting relevant documents from
you for the last year. Did you provide these documents to the
committee?
Secretary DeVos. We have been providing documents.
Mr. Levin. Did you provide these documents, these two
memos?
Secretary DeVos. I cannot--I do not know what memos you are
holding up, and I--
Mr. Levin. They are the memos that were--we have been
talking about all morning, ma'am.
Secretary DeVos. Yes.
Mr. Levin. You do not know whether you submitted them or
not?
Secretary DeVos. The NPR memos that--yes.
Mr. Levin. Yes. Did you submit them or not to us?
Secretary DeVos. I am sure that they were part of
whatever--
Mr. Levin. You are sure you did submit them?
Secretary DeVos.--document dump of 18,000 pages. I cannot
say with certainty.
Chairman Scott. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Levin. Yes, I would.
Chairman Scott. We have not seen those documents.
Mr. Levin. Okay. So, you did not submit those documents to
us. So, did you halt and curtail loan relief for defrauded
Corinthian borrowers without reading this detailed review of
the fraud conducted by your own career staff, by these schools?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I had many discussions, early
on in my term, but can I--
Mr. Levin. So, let me just ask you, do you know whether you
have read these?
Secretary DeVos. Can I finish?
Mr. Levin. No, no, you can't. Do you know whether you read
these or not?
Secretary DeVos. I had discussions about the previous
administration's views and policy toward these pending
applications.
Mr. Levin. Okay. So, let us move onto the substance of the
memos. According to the memo, dated October 24, 2016, the staff
at Corinthian-owned schools repeatedly lied to perspective
students by telling them that their credits would transfer to
other schools. The memo quotes one of the many similar claims
from students. The student says, and it is on the screen, here,
``I was told my credits would transfer to University of South
Florida, for my B.A. in finance, and they did not. So, I was
stuck with all these loans and no school will take them.''
Madam Secretary, does that sound like fraud to you, yes or no?
Secretary DeVos. Sir, we are considering each--
Mr. Levin. Okay. So, let me go on. There's more. That same
memo documents another form of fraud in which Corinthian
schools repeatedly told students they were accredited, when
they, in fact, were not accredited. The memo quotes a claim
from one student, typical of many, who says, ``There was
speculation that the school was not accredited, but they
continuously posted fake documents around the school, claiming
that they were accredited, and that any credits we received
would transfer over without any problem.'' Madam Secretary,
does that sound like fraud to you?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I--
Mr. Levin. Will you go to the ends of the Earth--
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I am--
Mr. Levin.--to defend a for-profit company that posts fake
documents--
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I am not--
Mr. Levin.--on its walls?
Secretary DeVos. I am not committed to protecting any
institution, no matter what their organization is.
Mr. Levin. Okay. Madam Secretary, the--
Secretary DeVos. I am committed to students and the
students that have--
Mr. Levin. All right. Let us talk about that, Madam
Secretary. Let us talk about your commitment to students, the--
Secretary DeVos. Can I finish a sentence, please?
Mr. Levin. No, you may not.
Secretary DeVos. I may have--
Mr. Levin. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau found
fraud at Corinthian Colleges. The state attorneys general of
California, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin found systematic fraud
at Corinthian colleges. The career Education Department staff
found fraud at Corinthian Colleges. Madam Secretary, you appear
to be the only person who does not believe there was fraud at
Corinthian Colleges. Can you state to me here whether or not
you think Corinthian Colleges committed any significant amount
of fraud against its students?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I know that there are student
Borrower Defense claims pending for students that attended
Corinthian College, and--
Mr. Levin. Do you think Corinthian Colleges--we all know
there are--
Secretary DeVos. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Levin. We all know that there are--
Secretary DeVos. Mr. Chairman, if I cannot answer a
question--
Mr. Levin. So, did--do you think--I am asking about you,
yourself, after all these many months as serving as Secretary
of Education that Corinthian Colleges committed fraud against
its students?
Chairman Scott. The time of the gentleman has expired, and
the Secretary will answer.
Secretary DeVos. I know that there are Corinthian College
students that have valid Borrower Defense claims, and we are
committed to ensuring that each one of those is considered
individually and that the relief is properly attributed to each
student that has filed valid claims.
Mr. Levin. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Texas, Mr.
Taylor?
Mr. Taylor. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Secretary,
appreciate you taking the time to be here, and, Mr. Chairman,
appreciate this hearing. And I will just say that in my own
experience, you know, my general experience is when talking to
witnesses, letting them know ahead of time that there is a
particular memo I want to talk about or a particular issue that
might be a little off the beaten path, it is generally really
helpful to getting a good response because then they have a
chance to review it and read it. And the sooner you get it to
them, the better the answers generally are and the more
thoughtful they are. And also, I guess, I come from--I was in
the Texas Legislature for a period of time, and served on the
Education Committee there. And I am used to a more professional
environment where people allow the witnesses to answer their
questions. I generally find the answers are better if you do
not cut them off.
I just wanted to talk a little bit about the operational
challenge that lies in front of you, Madam Secretary. So, you--
I believe your testimony is that there has been a 5,000 percent
increase in the number of Borrower Defense claims. Did I get
that number correct?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, that is correct, Congressman.
Mr. Taylor. And then, over what period of time have you
seen this 5,000 percent increase?
Secretary DeVos. Since 2015.
Mr. Taylor. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. It was like a spigot was turned on.
Mr. Taylor. Right. Well, and I will just say, you know, I
served on the Homeland Security Committee, and we saw a similar
crisis on the U.S.-Mexican border, a 3,000 percent increase in
the number of families that were coming over the border over a
very short period of time. And that, of course, creates an
operational problem.
How do you process all of those people? And I think you
have a very similar situation here, where a previous
administration, for whatever reason, made a series of policy
choices that then caused a massive increase, and then you are
left, unfortunately, I think, in some sense, to clean up the
mess. Can you speak to what you are--how you have ramped up
your operation to be able to handle this kind of increase?
Because, clearly, you did not have--the ability to handle the
situation, as we find it now, did not exist in the previous
administration. So, you have had to create it, whole cloth, a
whole new process to handle this tremendous burden that has
been placed upon you.
Secretary DeVos. Well, thanks, Congressman. In addition to
developing the initial methodology to--considering the claims,
Federal Student Aid, itself, I have hired General Brown, who
has undertaken a review of the structure internally, has made
some significant organizational changes for operational
efficiency, and he has also, as you heard previously, stood up
on three time--threefold number of individuals that are
committed to this specific area. And we will continue to
adjust, as necessary, based on the claims that we have, with
the hope that--I mean, frankly, we should be returning to the
kind of level of Borrower Defense claims that were resident
prior to 2015. From '95 to 2015, there were a total of 59
claims. That is--I think that is what we should aspire to in
the future, that students have the information they need, that
institutions are very transparent about what their programs
are, and that they are accurate in what they represent. And I
think that we will all be in a better place, if that is the
case.
Mr. Taylor. Sure, and I will just make an observation that,
in my own time, in working in the education space in the state
of Texas, over and over again articulation between a community
college and a public university, which is what, generally, we
were working with, articulation, getting credits to go from A
to B, is a real problem. And it is not just with for-profit
schools. It is with community colleges. It is with dual-credit
classes, and it is even within public university to public
university. And so, this is something that, certainly, I have
seen for many years.
And I was intrigued that those were some of the things that
were claimed, you know, a claim of fraud. It is like, well, I
have seen that all over the place in the public space for
years. Do you want to--is there anything you would like to add
at this point? I know you have been cut off many times in this
hearing, and it is unfortunate that you are not given a chance
to answer your questions.
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congressman, I would just reiterate
the fact that nothing bothers me more than the fact that we
have had all of these claims pending for as long as we have
had, and I am very hopeful that with the implementation of this
new method, we will be able to quickly address and process
through. And, you know, I feel for the students involved--and I
am, also, very sympathetic, broadly, to students, and we want
to make sure that students have good experiences and that they
have good information in making decisions about their
experiences.
Mr. Taylor. Sure. And, again, I just want to say I
appreciate that you have basically been handed a mess, and that
you have had to create a solution. And it seems like you have
created a solution that is going to address that in a timely
manner. And I am grateful to you for your service to this great
Nation and to the students of this country. Mr. Chairman, I
yield back.
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady from North Carolina, Ms.
Adams?
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for holding
this hearing. And thank you, Secretary DeVos, for being here.
Earlier this year, you repealed the Gainful Employment
regulations, that the Obama--these Obama regulations evaluated
programs based on earnings data, just like your partial relief
formula.
In repealing these regulations, the Department wrote that
Gainful Employment was quote, ``fundamentally flawed and an
unreliable proxy for program quality.'' Gainful Employment was
a regulation to prevent low-quality for-profit colleges from
obtaining federal funds. You are now using its data to evaluate
colleges, exactly what you said it should not be used for. But
instead of using it against bad schools, you are using it to
deprive students of loan relief.
So, Secretary DeVos, which is it? Should we grade schools
on earning data or not? If you can just give me a simple
answer, yes or no, I would appreciate it. Should we grade them
on earning data or should we not?
Secretary DeVos. Ultimately, no.
Ms. Adams. Okay, thank you.
Secretary DeVos. All in--unless you are going to do all
institutions equally.
Ms. Adams. Okay, thank you. So, you are willing to--so, we
should not? So, you--
Secretary DeVos. Unless you are going to do all
institutions--
Ms. Adams. Okay.
Secretary DeVos.--equally.
Ms. Adams. All right. So, you are willing to use the
earnings data to tell defrauded students that fraudulent
schools they attend is high quality? Will you commit to using
this data to tell students which schools are low quality by
reissuing the Gainful Employment regulations?
Secretary DeVos. No.
Ms. Adams. Oh.
Secretary DeVos. We are moving ahead with a process--
Ms. Adams. So--
Secretary DeVos.--to consider all of the Borrower Defense
claims that are pending. And we are very hopeful that, with the
additional information, that we have--
Ms. Adams. Oh, okay.
Secretary DeVos.--released for the College Scorecard,
that--
Ms. Adams. All right, I want to--
Secretary DeVos.--that could be--
Ms. Adams. I need to reclaim my time.
Secretary DeVos.--a very important and useful tool for
students.
Ms. Adams. All right. I need to reclaim my time because I
really want to get through my questions so it doesn't sound
like you are interested in doing that.
Secretary DeVos, Gainful Employment data only seeks to,
speaks to the outcomes of those who graduate. I was a college
professor for 40 years. I have worked with students, I know the
struggles that they have. I even had student loans myself.
But we all know that many students, who attend an
institution like Corinthian and I know it has continued to come
up, don't graduate. They drop out with a significant amount of
debt. So how is it possible that a metric that speaks to the
outcomes of graduates only is being used to determine the level
of harm for those who dropped out. Just using that one metric?
How is that?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, we believe the methodology
that we have just implemented is one that is very
scientifically robust and one that is going to ultimately treat
the, all of the pending claims fairly and will answer students'
questions about whether they have that, had financial harm
ultimately or not.
Ms. Adams. Okay, let me move on. So in your statement
regarding the new partial relief formula, you said and I quote
we cannot tolerate fraud in our education nor can we tolerate
frivolous giving away taxpayer money to those who have
submitted a false claim or aren't eligible for relief end of
quote. Yet the new partial relief formula is not about those
false claims of those who were ineligible for relief.
So what possible rationale would you have to deny the full
measure of relief to students who we all agree have been
defrauded and left worse off?
Secretary DeVos. Every student claim is going to be
considered and if they have received financial harm,
demonstrable financial harm, that will be relieved at some
level.
Ms. Adams. Okay. I am concerned that we are one data breach
away from hundreds of thousands of borrower's private data
being compromised. So the Department's Borrower Defense Unit is
currently in possession of private data from hundreds of
thousands of students. So are you taking the appropriate steps
to protect the personal data of defrauded borrowers?
Secretary DeVos. I am very concerned about data security
for all students and that is a high priority for me and my
department and for Federal Student Aid.
Ms. Adams. Well, are you taking any steps?
Secretary DeVos. We have taken steps ever since I have been
in office to ensure the protection of data and that is not a
onetime process.
Ms. Adams. All right.
Secretary DeVos. And it's not an episodic one. It is a
continuing one.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much and let me just make the
assessment. Given the errors that you and your servicers have
committed regarding borrower defense data and just borrower
data in general, can you commit to reviewing the security of
that data and reporting back to this committee to assure that
current and future applicants and their data is being managed
responsibility. Can you commit to that?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, I commit to that.
Ms. Adams. Great.
Secretary DeVos. Just as I commit to continuing to be
responsible for and responsive about data security across the
board.
Ms. Adams. Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Wisconsin,
Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Yes, first of all I would like to thank you
one more time for over here. Thank you one more time for taking
this job. I mean, you knew you were inheriting a mess and you,
you know, and just looking at the student loan debt, I think
over the past administration it more than doubled from 6
billion to 1.3 trillion and I don't mean to be partisan here,
it almost doubled under the Bush Administration as well. So
this institution and prior administrations allowed the student
debt to get completely out of control. They should have known a
mess was here and you are the one who is stuck cleaning up the
mess. So thank you for trying.
I know this isn't the only mess you have. I know there has
been fraud in the income driven repayment program. I know there
is the public loan service--the public service loan forgiveness
program has problems. All of which you inherited so again, we
all know you didn't need this job and thank you. I am going to
ask a couple questions. As I understand it, in the past, they
have been advertising that your student loans may be eligible
for forgiveness, right? Is that so?
Secretary DeVos. That's my understanding as well.
Mr. Grothman. And Facebooks ads, that sort of thing and
obviously if, you know--if you look on--you can get your loan
forgiven, they are going to be all sorts of people lining up to
do that.
Of course, some of those claims will be legitimate and some
of the claims won't be legitimate. Have you guys uncovered any
instances of unfounded claims filed by borrowers?
Secretary DeVos. Of claims that are not valid?
Mr. Grothman. Right. Anything, I think there are a lot of
people out here that just want to forgive everything but.
Secretary DeVos. Yes. There is, there are many of them.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. There are many of them.
Mr. Grothman. Do you want to elaborate on that at all?
Secretary DeVos. Well, there are different kind of invalid
or, you know, claims that cannot be in any way relieved
financially. Some of them fall outside the bounds of the
various rules and times of submission.
Some of them are clearly not based on anything close to
fraudulent. I referenced the one about I didn't, you know, my
professor was mean or I didn't like my professor. I'm sorry,
that's not a valid claim for your student loan relief.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Secretary DeVos. So it's a wide variety.
Mr. Grothman. But it's certainly indicative of why we just
can't forgive all loans.
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Grothman. Yeah. How are you mitigating cases of
baseless claims in borrower defense? Are you doing anything to
mitigate that?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I am very hopeful that as we
implement the new rule and continue to work through the
processing of these claims that the conversation around this is
going to be much more around ensuring that those students that
actually have a claim of financial harm are the ones that are
getting relief and that we will have fewer than 1,200 plus
applicants a week accruing in the Federal Student Aid
department.
Mr. Grothman. When fraud is committed, do you have the
right to go after any of the colleges and universities that
committed fraud?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I think that that's a very important
question and, you know, unfortunately the bulk of a large
volume of the pending applications are from institutions that
have closed and in that case, obviously it's a different
situation.
But for those institutions that are found to have claim,
valid claims that are in, are still operational, the schools
would be the first place to go. The taxpayer shouldn't have to
be footing the bill in the case that they, that the
institutions still exist.
Mr. Grothman. Do you think it would be better if some, if
this institution did something in the future to make sure those
loans didn't get so high in the first place? Or I guess I'll
put it this way. If this institution would do more to educate
young people that not every student loan is a good student
loan?
Secretary DeVos. There are many things that both Congress
and, you know, writ broadly we all can do to ensure that
education experiences in the future are entered into with more
thought and more wisdom.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Do you, you have new regulations coming
out. Could you, would you like to elaborate at all on how your
new regulations protect the students but the taxpayers and the
institutions all at once?
Secretary DeVos. If you're speaking about the--
Mr. Grothman. Correct.
Secretary DeVos. Our new borrower defense--
Mr. Grothman. The new ones, yes.
Secretary DeVos.--regulation, it really does protect
students, taxpayers, and gives institutions an equal footing.
It treats all institutions equally.
It's a much, I think a much better and more balanced
approach to this issue and one that will continue to let
students file and claim, make valid claims and give schools the
opportunity to review and respond to and students respond back.
I mean, there has to be a due process component for
institutions and frankly we need to have a more tight
definition of what constitutes fraud or misrepresentation which
is part of the 2019 rule.
Mr. Grothman. Thanks and I would like to apologize for some
of my colleagues, you know, we got a big swamp here who
sometimes they are a little bit intemperate but thank you for
coming over here today.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlemen from California,
Mr. Harder.
Mr. Harder. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary DeVos, I
want to start by telling you a story about my constituent,
Artemisia. Back in 2009, she became a student at Heald College
in Modesto just months after it was purchased by Corinthian
Colleges.
Artemisia wanted to make a difference in her community. She
was pursuing a medical assistant degree. She chose Heald
because she saw in the commercials that it had an 85 percent
job placement rate. Seemed like a good investment.
But then she graduated and she couldn't find a job. And now
she owes a whopping $40,000 in student loan debt for a degree
that hasn't helped her get hired. That may not seem like a lot
of money to you, Secretary DeVos, but in the real world, that
is devastating.
Turns out Artemisia wasn't alone in not being able to find
a job. Corinthian Colleges across the country lied about their
job placement rate. They told her it was an 85 percent job
placement rate for Heald. Turns out the actual rate was zero.
Not 85 percent, zero. That's a big difference.
Artemisia and tens of thousands of students were defrauded
by Corinthian. We all know this. We all agree. In 2014, the
Department of Education fined them $30 million for this fraud.
Everyone agreed.
But here, five years later, Artemisia still has that
$40,000 in student loan debt. She still hasn't found a job in
her field and she hasn't gotten any help whatsoever.
The reason for that is because you have put roadblock after
roadblock in front of helping these students. Your job is to
fight for them. But instead, your actions suggest you would
prefer to be the chief lobbyist for the predatory schools that
defrauded them.
After being ordered by a Federal court to stop collecting
debts from cheated Corinthian students, you ignored the order
and kept stealing money from these students. You were even held
in contempt of court because of it. You are not standing up for
them, you are working for the schools that defrauded them.
Maybe you have forgotten to refund these students. Maybe
Artemisia's $40,000 in student loan debt just doesn't sound
like a lot to you because it is only one tenth of one percent
of one of your families' ten yachts.
Artemisia and tens of thousands of others have been waiting
years for your help. You have deliberately violated a federal
court order. And I am confused why.
So I guess I just have one question for you, Secretary
DeVos. Are you deliberately violating this Federal court order
because you are too corrupt to uphold the law or because you
are too incompetent to do your job?
Chairman Scott. The gentleman will address the facts and
figures and not question the character of the witness.
Mr. Harder. Secretary DeVos, why have you been held in
contempt of court?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congressman, let me begin by saying
I took great personal offense to everything you just said. I
come to my job every day on behalf of students. I don't need to
sit and listen to what you just spewed out of your mouth. I--
Mr. Harder. I don't understand how you can take--
Secretary DeVos. I did not defy any court order. I
instructed Federal Student Aid to follow the court order. If
you had been here earlier, you would have known that mistakes
were made on the part of Federal Student Aid employees and on
the part of loan servicers that when they were discovered were
immediately acknowledged and corrected.
Mr. Harder. Secretary DeVos--
Secretary DeVos. They have been--
Mr. Harder. Reclaiming my time please.
Secretary DeVos.--remediated. They have been remediated--
Mr. Harder. I understand that you have been held--that you
are taking offense. The reality is there are tens of thousands
of students whose financial futures have been ruined by three
years of inaction. And you are just making excuses. You are
blaming this problem on somebody else.
You have been Secretary of Education for three years. And
you are trying to defy the facts of this matter. Yes or no were
you held in contempt of court and fined?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, I have not been able to
address all of the Corinthian College claims because a court
stopped us in May of 2018.
Mr. Harder. That is simply not true.
Secretary DeVos. That is true.
Mr. Harder. The court said there was nothing stopping the
Department from processing these borrower defense claims.
Secretary DeVos. There was something stopping. There was a
lack of process. The court said we could simply forgive them
all but that was not the right answer.
The right answer is to do what is right for students and to
do what is right for taxpayers and that is my goal and that is
going to continue to be my goal.
Mr. Harder. Secretary DeVos, what is right for students is
helping the tens of thousands of students who have been
defrauded. Students like Artemisia.
And blaming this problem on somebody else, taking three
years to make absolutely no progress, it is not helping these
students. It is only helping the scam colleges that defrauded
them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Secretary DeVos. Where students have been financially
harmed they are going to have relief. We have a new methodology
which once again if you had been here earlier, you would have
known.
We have just implemented it last week. We are beginning to
process them again and students will be considered, their
claims considered individually and I am looking forward to
addressing all of them.
Nothing disturbs me more than all of the pending claims
that have been there and that we have not been able to address
appropriately.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being here.
This is quite a mess. I wanted to ask you, this is an important
issue in my state in the past 10 years. 30 - for-profit schools
have closed. In fact, a year and a week ago today Brightwood
College closed in Las Vegas.
And as we saw with Corinthian Colleges, ITT Tech, ECA,
schools with shaky financials are often completely reliant on
federal student loan dollars.
And when they collapse until their bankruptcy it is us, the
tax payers as well as thousands of students who are left high
and dry. So I really want to in my line of questioning, get to
how are we going to prevent this from happening?
So I wanted to ask you just a simple yes or no question. Do
you believe it is important that the Department have
information about the financial conditions of colleges?
Secretary DeVos. Yes, it is important.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. You know, you spoke many times today
about protecting taxpayer dollars and I could not agree with
you more. Yet, I am feeling that a lot of the tension in this
room today is because there is concern about protecting tax
payer dollars from frivolous BD claims or like I would like to
focus on, on how do we protect taxpayer dollars from these
fraudulent, predatory schools to prevent this from happening
before we throw thousands of students into turmoil? And so I
want to ask you a second question. Isn't the point of financial
responsibility monitoring to predict school closures before
they happen so that something can be done proactively to
protect the taxpayer dollars from going to those institutions
through student loans?
Secretary DeVos. Well, Congresswoman, let me just say first
of all I don't think, I think levying a claim of predatory
against any school that is organized--
Ms. Lee. Well, these, I am talking about schools--I want to
define what fraud means. Okay. Because it has been used here a
lot today. The definition is the wrongful deception intended to
result in financial or personal gain. And it is not lost on
anyone here, the preponderance of - for-profit schools in the
education space and -profit for-profits schools that are now
publicly traded companies. So there is a for-profit motive.
There has been fraud. And that students have been left on the
hook.
And so my question was simply yes or no. Do you believe
that the point of the financial responsibility monitoring is to
predict?
Secretary DeVos. To the extent possible I think that's
probably desirable, yes.
Ms. Lee. Okay. I agree with you. I think that is the
purpose. You want to predict that these schools are shaky
operators, that they might be fraudulent because there are so
many kids that are going to these schools and not able to come
out and have a job and therefore defaulting on their loans
because they didn't get the jobs that they were promised.
And so that is the purpose of these triggers and these
rules is to predict it so that we are not sending taxpayer
dollars to these schools and then they go bankrupt and the kids
can't pay them and then the taxpayers pay it. So--
Secretary DeVos. And the same is--
Ms. Lee.--my question--
Secretary DeVos.--true for, of institutions that don't, I
mean, there is lots of institutions that--
Ms. Lee. I understand.
Secretary DeVos.--provide--
Ms. Lee. I am not, I understand there are great
institutions. I am talking, I am--this is really about
ferreting out the bad actors in this space.
And, you know, I think the lesson for all of us is the
regulations that we enact here have consequences intended and
unintended which have led us to the situation where we have had
thousands of -for-profit schools close.
80 percent of the school closures are -for-profit schools.
And many of these are bad actors, okay. And so and by the way,
it is minority and low income students who are being preyed
upon in these cases.
So I really just want to get to one other question and talk
about some of the changes that have been made to your borrower
defense rule. Specifically around what these triggers are to
identify if these schools are eventually going to go under. And
under the 2016 rule, publicly traded for-profit schools were
required to report any instant--incident or occurrence of an
SEC filing or a warning letter against that institution under,
and can you clarify this.
Under the recent rule that was issued, isn't it the case
that an institution would only be required to report that when
the SEC suspends trading of that stock or if the stock is de
listed from the exchange?
Secretary DeVos. There are changes in the reporting
requirements for financial measures for an institution in the
2019 rule--
Ms. Lee. Okay. So the--
Secretary DeVos. But there are a number of different
measures that are required and there are triggers that will
happen to send up flags if an institution is in jeopardy. I
think it is also important to distinguish--
Chairman Scott. The gentlelady's time is expired.
Secretary DeVos.--to acknowledge the fact that--
Chairman Scott. Okay. Gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Meuser. I apologize for being a little abrupt there. Expect to
call a vote shortly and we have several members that still are
trying to ask questions. Gentleman from Pennsylvania.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for your
professionalism and decency as always. Madam Secretary, nice to
sees you very much again. I want to thank you for your service.
Clearly you work very hard and you have made a lot of progress
which I want to ask questions about and outline.
And if people had any idea of what your background really
was, the level of work and philanthropy and good that you have
done, maybe they'd act a little bit more civilly but perhaps
not.
You know, we are trying to--these hearings are supposed to
be about ideas, not insults. Right. Solutions rather than
salvos. Reality rather than revisionist history and questions
rather than accusations. Actual problem solving rather than
pointing out problems. But I guess that's just a tradition
around here lately.
So I would like to ask you when you became secretary three
years ago, my understanding is back in 2015 the number of
claims and problems escalated tremendously. And there were a
number of reasons for it.
One of them was at Vistria where low and behold the former
number two in the Obama Education Department, Deputy Secretary
Miller who left in 2013 and became a partner and chief
operating officer at Vistria who was on track to become
chairman of the university's parent company if the sale went
through, had a little--and that is just when Vistria had--all
its problems began.
Would you say that was a contributing factor to this
unbelievable escalation in claims and problems?
Secretary DeVos. I think it is certainly possible that it
was a contributing factor.
Mr. Meuser. Well, what were the number of claims, what was
the number of claims under the borrower defense repayment rule?
It's increased exponentially in the last four years. Do you
have any numbers on that?
Secretary DeVos. Well, from 1995 to 2015, there were
exactly 59 borrower defense claims made and since then, that
number has increased 5,000 percent to now nearly 300,000
claims.
Mr. Meuser. And when did those increases begin?
Secretary DeVos. In 2015.
Mr. Meuser. 2015. So 2015, 2016, that was the Obama
Administration. We are going to want to revise history here.
You came in January, 2017. Right.
Secretary DeVos. February but close enough.
Mr. Meuser. February. Dealing with a mess, a nightmare
situation and what did you do to work on this situation? You
and General Brown?
Secretary DeVos. Well, when I--
Mr. Meuser. He wasn't there yet.
Secretary DeVos.--took office, there were 64,000
unaddressed claims from the previous administration. It was
clear that promises had been made to approximately half of
those and we followed through on the promises immediately.
I also asked the Inspector General to do an investigation
into what the process was for considering these claims. And
that yielded some significant deficiencies in the--in other
words there was no process.
So we set forth to be, to put a process in place to be able
to consider each claim for its merit and its validity and we
implemented that in early 2018 and we were well underway with
processing the pending claims and we were stopped by the court
in May of 2018 based on the data we were using, not on the
approach to the relief methodology.
Since then, we have been waiting for the court. We have
appealed it. We have, we don't agree with the court's decision.
It's been appealed. We're still waiting.
And in the meantime, we implemented another methodology
which we just were able to implement, begin implementing last
week and it will we hope be able to address the claims, the
pending claims very expeditiously.
Mr. Meuser. How many deserving claims were relieved,
received relief this past year or the year previous under your
jurisdiction versus 2015 or 2016?
Secretary DeVos. Well, the--
Mr. Meuser. How many more people were helped--
Secretary DeVos. Yeah.
Mr. Meuser. How many more people received loan relief under
your jurisdiction and General Brown's versus your predecessor?
Secretary DeVos. So the percentages of claims of students,
claims that received relief were the same between the previous
administration and the ones that we have been able to process
thus far.
There is a chart here that shows that 62 percent were
approved during the Obama administration and we have continued
at that level of approval.
Mr. Meuser. Sixty-two percent but with many more claims so
more people were helped.
Secretary DeVos. Correct.
Mr. Meuser. Thank you. I yield.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from Maryland, Mr.
Trone.
Mr. Trone. Thank you, Madam Secretary, for your service. I
know public service can be very hard but of course with it, you
know, comes an accountability to help these young students who
have been defrauded and help them if we can in a timely manner.
Before coming to Congress, I was the CEO of a business with
over 7,000 employees. I know how important people are to any
organization. At the end of the day the buck always stopped
with me to make sure we had the right staff to serve our
customers.
So let us talk about staffing if you don't mind under your
leadership. To follow up on what Secretary Shalala was touching
on a bit ago, within the first year in office, you actually cut
the staff in the Borrowers Defense Unit, in that unit, during
the first year by 75 percent from 29 people to 7 people.
While this might make great sense if we saw a decrease in
the number of claims, the opposite as you have clearly stated
is actually the opposite. We saw a dramatic increase in claims
from 54,000 to now as General Brown said over 300,000 are out
there.
So when my business had more work I hired more people. So
why when you had in the past this dramatic increase in
borrowers defense claims, did you decide to cut jobs instead of
hiring more people to do that work?
Secretary DeVos. Congressman, good question. We had
significant attrition when I first came into office and since
then I have instructed and urged General Brown to staff that
segment of the Federal Student Aid office to the extent that we
need to be able to address these claims now that we again have
a process to be able to unveil and to implement.
Mr. Trone. And that's great. I guess the question that is
still there is that now three years later, you know, we are
actually at seven--
Secretary DeVos. Well, we were--yeah, we were--
Mr. Trone. We were actually at 7 people at one point.
According to the public document of March 31, 2019 you had 7
employees remaining in the Borrowers Defense Unit.
Secretary DeVos. Well, we were processing the claims under
the previous methodology and--
Mr. Trone. Yes.
Secretary DeVos.--that was moving along well. When the
court stopped us--
Mr. Trone. I have heard about that and I--
Secretary DeVos. Yeah.
Mr. Trone.--I have been here the entire time and I respect
that. There is still 300,000 as General Brown said of folks
nationally who are paying the price that because the Department
I think has intentionally slow-walked this by not having enough
staff to process those claims for literally over three years
now. It has been three years.
Do you believe that the insufficient number of staff in the
past three years is contributed to the Department's inability
to process these borrower defense claims?
Secretary DeVos. No, sir, I don't. It really has been the
court decision that stopped us from continuing the process.
Mr. Trone. But the court decision we and I know we have
talked about that. The court decision did not stop you from
continuing to process. You could have continued to process
while you went through the appeal. Let's talk about the facts a
second.
Secretary DeVos. Only if I was going to say yes, full
forgiveness or no, you don't qualify.
Mr. Trone. And I'm guessing there is a lot of full
forgiveness out there given the horrible work that Corinthian
and others did.
Secretary DeVos. But we couldn't use the data. We couldn't
use the data that we were using so--
Mr. Trone. Let's look at the data--
Secretary DeVos.--practically speaking we could not
process.
Mr. Trone. Let's look at the data a second on that. Let's
look at the data a second. So on March 31 if you have 7
employees, how many claims does an employee process in a 40
hour work week?
Secretary DeVos. That is not a relevant question because we
haven't not been able to process--
Mr. Trone. No, how many--it's a really, really relevant
because--
Secretary DeVos. No, because since May of 2018--
Mr. Trone.--you got to have the people to do the work.
Secretary DeVos.--we have not been able to process.
Mr. Trone. You have to have the people to do the work.
Secretary DeVos. Since May.
Mr. Trone. Right now you talked about ramping up the 64--
Secretary DeVos. And we have.
Mr. Trone. So you are clearly ramping up the people because
now you said whoa. We missed the ball. We saw that in 2016 it
went through the roof, the claims did. You got hammered. But
you only, but while you were cutting back the 7 people, now you
have done a hockey stick and ramped it back up to 64--
Secretary DeVos. No, sir. This--it's a convenient narrative
but it's inaccurate.
Mr. Trone. But the only way you are going to figure out
staffing is how much work is there to do, how long does it take
to do that work and then I can do my staffing model from that.
Secretary DeVos. And we have continued to staff up and will
continue to add to that if necessary to process the claims now
that we have been able to implement the new methodology.
Mr. Trone. We appreciate that. General Brown told the staff
that since you've been in office about 50,000 people have had
their claims reviewed.
Well, if there is 300,000 out there, at that current rate
it is going to be 15 years for the first three years it took
you to do 50,000.
These young people want to be educated but they were lied
to by these institutions and I think the response has been a
bit to run out the clock. A bit of tough luck. So we just need
informed decisions based on the data to keep focusing if you
could on the customer. Thank you.
Chairman Scott. The gentleman's time has expired. The
gentlelady from Michigan, Ms. Stevens.
Ms. Stevens. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary DeVos, we
are here today to provide the public with a full understanding
of the Department's failure to provide defrauded borrowers with
a relief they are legally entitled to.
I would like for you to know a fellow Michigander, Erica.
Someone I have had the privilege of getting to know. She, when
she was a child, she wanted to become a lawyer and growing up
she faced multiple challenges as many Americans do. She ended
up dropping out of high school but still managed to get her GED
at 21 while raising two children.
And she saw a commercial one day for Everest College, a
Corinthian College in 2011. And she was recruited into the
school's paralegal program. The recruiter told her that in
order to become a lawyer, she had to be paralegal first. Erica
was ecstatic to go back to school. She earned a 4.0 while she
was there and after her first year, she took that next step.
She contacted a law school to learn what she had to do next
to become a lawyer. And that's when she learned that Everest
was not considered a legitimate program and she felt cheated,
she was saddled with student loan debt and realized that the
best choice she could make for herself and her family was to
cut her losses and leave Everest.
Secretary DeVos, do you think Erica made a mistake in
attending Everest?
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, I can't comment to her
decision there but I certainly can feel for her if that story
is accurate and I look forward to if she's among the BD claims
pending, making sure that we can address it promptly now that
we have been able to--
Ms. Stevens. Would you--
Secretary DeVos.--start the process again.
Ms. Stevens. Would you have advised Erica to continue
attending Everest?
Secretary DeVos. I can't comment to a hypothetical like
that.
Ms. Stevens. Erica is currently not working either as a
paralegal or a lawyer but is instead living to paycheck to
paycheck with no way to pay for more school to pursue the
career she wanted and dreamed of and she is now in her mid-
40's.
Do you believe she received any value from the education
she received at Everest?
Secretary DeVos. Again, I can't comment specifically to her
situation. The story as you tell it is one that I can, I
certainly feel for.
Ms. Stevens. She, Erica applied for borrower defense in May
2015 and had her loans placed into forbearance. Three years
later, the Department finally approved her application but then
denied her a full discharge and it said that they would only
relieve 50 percent of Erica's loans.
Why did she deserve to only have 50 percent of her loans
relieved?
Secretary DeVos. Well, I have to assume from what you've
told me about her story that we were considering her under the
first methodology that we had utilized. And that her, the
program she attended, the earnings information from that,
others that had graduated from that program were compared with
earnings from like programs of other schools across the
country.
And that was again, a formula and process that was put into
place to consider each student's claim individually and
uniquely.
Ms. Stevens. Despite a court order, Erica's servicer
started illegally collecting on her debt in 2019, this year and
she became extremely worried when she saw all of her loans were
back in repayment because she knows there is no way she is
really going to be able to pay them.
What is stopping the Department from taking action to
protect the hundreds of thousands of students like Erica who
were cheated in this predatory way by these institutions?
Secretary DeVos. Well, again, I can't comment specifically
to her experience right now. I am happy to have General Brown's
team look into it--
Ms. Stevens. That would be great.
Secretary DeVos.--and give specific information.
Ms. Stevens. And I know Erica would, excuse me. I know she
would love that and she said to me when I last spoke with her,
she said, you know, the one thing I really want to do is make a
difference for future people and make sure this doesn't happen
again.
And, you know, I had a little bit of time to read through
your testimony and kind of buried in there are thousands of
stories like Erica's and she did want me to share this story
and I appreciate you both taking it to heart and hopefully we
can all continue to step up to address this for all Americans,
all Michiganders so they have the opportunity to pursue their
dreams and provide for their families going forward. And with
that, Mr. Chairman, I will yield back.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentleman from
Massachusetts, Ms. Trahan.
Ms. Trahan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary DeVos, thank
you for being here today. Two days ago you announced the
Department's new formula for calculating relief for students
who have been cheated by fraudulent predatory for-profit
colleges.
This formula would make, would take median earnings and
subtract from it two standard deviations to determine the
amount of one's borrower defense discharge relief. Now that is
a lot of jargon. So I wanted to just try to put it into an
example just so it made sense to me.
So a young woman, and we will name her Betsy, gets her
diploma in business and administration and management from
Corinthian. And it says here on this chart that the median
comparison earnings for that degree is about $18,000. And two
standard deviations is about $20,500.
Any, I mean, not to put you on the spot but do you know
what 18,000 minus 20,500 equals? I hate public math. It equals
negative $2500.2,500 dollars.
So using the new formula, you are basically telling us that
in order for someone like Betsy to get full relief for the debt
that she unknowingly incurred from a fraudulent institution she
would have to earn negative $2,500. Does that sound right to
you using your formula?
Secretary DeVos. No, it does not.
Ms. Trahan. Because that is what the numbers bear out. The
Department of Education calculates the median earnings of
Betsy's peers in her program at roughly $11,700 to determine
the percentage of relief that she will receive.
Any idea what the federal minimum wage is right now? We are
trying hard in this committee to raise the minimum wage but
today it stands at $7.25.
So look. I just want to--if Betsy earns $11,700 on an
annual basis, that means her hourly wage is $5.63. That's $2
below the federal minimum wage.
So I guess are you, I--it is astounding to me but I think
what you are telling me is that student borrowers like Betsy
who graduate from a fraudulent program and earn $2 less than
the Federal minimum wage can only get 25 percent of their loans
forgiven because they didn't have negative earnings.
Secretary DeVos. No, Congresswoman, I don't think the story
you're using here is an accurate one.
Ms. Trahan. I trust my math. I look at, I poured over
several examples and I used your two standard deviations. I
have, I don't have confidence in much, but I have a lot of
confidence in the formula and how I used it for Betsy's use
case.
Look, the new partial relief formula that you came out with
two days ago, it doesn't benefit students who have been
fleeced. It doesn't take into account individualized earnings,
debt load, whether Betsy is back in a full-time or a part-time
accredited college program which is why my friend from
Pennsylvania, Representative Wild and economists alike call it
nonsensical.
These are students who wanted nothing more than to get
ahead, who took out loans in good faith and they were taken
advantage of instead. And your response to them is to cheat
them again. So, I know right now, you have the authority to
provide full fair and immediate debt relief to student
borrowers who were defrauded by these predatory colleges. And
every day that goes by is a violation of students' rights and,
frankly, it's criminal.
There are hundreds of thousands of innocent students with
pending claims. That includes almost 3,000 in my home State of
Massachusetts. On this Committee, our focus is creating
opportunity and value for students with high quality affordable
education.
The formula that you have developed, it is too little by
far and it is too late and it does not demonstrate your
commitment to our students. I yield back.
Secretary DeVos. Mr. Chairman, if I could respond to that a
moment.
Chairman Scott. You can respond, please.
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, I am committed to treating
each of the students who have filed borrower defense claims
fairly and we believe that this methodology that has been
developed is one that will treat each of them as an individual
and will look at their program of study. If you are advocating
for 100 percent loan forgiveness for all students who claim
borrower defense claims, you have the power to get a law passed
in this body and I encourage you to do so. If you pass that
law, I will enforce that law.
Ms. Trahan. The formula, the way it is designed right now,
it takes in median program earnings from other people who have
been defrauded. Therein lies the problem. That is not a formula
that makes sense when you're taking into account kids who have
taken out loans, who have to go back to college, go back to
school, with accredited program. Their debt load is already
sinking them and now they are taking on more. Your formula is
flawed.
Secretary DeVos. I guess we will have to agree to disagree.
Chairman Scott. Gentleladies, time has expired. Gentlelady
from Minnesota, Ms. Omar.
Ms. Omar. Thank you, Chairman. Secretary DeVos, thank you
so much for being here and giving us the opportunity to have
this conversation with you. I am curious if you are familiar
with the Minnesota School of BusinessBusiness and Global
University?
Secretary DeVos. I'm not familiar with that specific
school.
Ms. Omar. Okay. Do you know that they were found to be
engaged in consumer fraud?
Secretary DeVos. If they were, I am assuming there are some
borrower defense claims pending for them.
Ms. Omar. Okay. So, let me just enlighten you. We have sent
you many letters from our delegation. In my district, in 2016,
the Courts found that Minnesota School of Business and Global
University engaged in consumer fraud and purposefully deceived
their students by misrepresenting the job opportunities that
would be available to their criminal justice graduates.
Madam Secretary, that same year, your department
independently reviewed the evidence and came to the same
conclusion as the Courts. The students were blatantly misled
and taken advantage of. 1,336 Minnesota students were
systematically misled to believe that they will obtain a degree
and credits that were essentially meaningless, losing not only
$33.8 million but their time and countless opportunities.
Let's take a minute to just imagine if these students, if
these were not just students, let us imagine that they were
corporations. The administration and our colleagues on the
other side of the aisle and probably you would be up in arms.
Corporate executives would not only get their debt forgiven by
our government, they would also get compensation for their lost
time, lost opportunities, and psychological distress.
But Madam Secretary, you don't seem to be up in arms.
Nobody seems to be concerned with what is happening with these
students, students who do not have access to corporate
attorneys to make their case. Instead, they are struggling to
make ends meet as they continue to face incurring interest,
negative credit reporting, and the inability to restart their
education. All the while hoping the government will do the
right thing.
I would like to request unanimous consent to enter into the
record 2 affidavits.
Chairman Scott. WithoutNoobjection.
Ms. Omar. These are from my constituents Whitney and Cheryl
Slattern whose borrower defense application have been on hold
since January of this year. Between the two of them, they have
approximately 78,000 in crippling student debt. To make matters
worse, once a borrower defaults, the consequences are severe
and results in a snowball effect where a borrower might lose
their eligibility to receive additional federal student aid and
see devastating effects to their credit.
Memo after memo, the Education Department career staff sent
you memos that indicate that these students deserve nothing
less than full relief. I know that you have said you have not
read these memos yet, but reports have come out and I would
have expected that you would take the time to read them before
appearing before us today. I ask for unanimous consent to enter
these 3 memos into the record.
Chairman Scott. WithoutNoobjection.
Ms. Omar. I feel like you should be ashamed of the fact
that you do not have answers to these memos, that you have not
looked at these memos, that you have not taken the
responsibility that you have as a leader to be prepared to give
us a response. And I think the public should be ashamed that
they have a Secretary of Education that is not putting the
interests of students before the interests of the wealthy that
are benefiting from defrauding these students. I yield back.
Secretary DeVos. Mr. Chairman, if I may respond.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. The gentlelady's time has
expired. The Secretary can respond.
Secretary DeVos. Congresswoman, with all due respect, I am
very much focused on doing what is right for these students.
And the memos to which you are referring, preceded me and they
may have been relevant to--they were relevant to conversation
about how we proceeded with policy, but administrations changed
and policies change.
Ms. Omar. They are precisely relevant to the conversation
you were preparing to come to talk to us today. And in your
preparation, you should have read those memos. I yield back.
Chairman Scott. Gentleladies, time has expired and I
recognize myself for 5 minutes. First, a lot has been said
about whether or not these are for-profits, private,
nonprofits, or public. The fact is we have several hundred
thousand complaints to fraud of borrowers defense for the
public colleges. How many public, nonprofit, and public
institutions have been subject to allegations of fraud?
Secretary DeVos. How many. I do not have the specific
breakdown here. I would be happy to get back with you on the
question for the record.
Chairman Scott. Do you have very many complaints, public
complaints?
Secretary DeVos. There are quite a few. I mean, it is
frankly surprising the number of--
Chairman Scott. If you can get that to us.
Secretary DeVos.--claims that have been filed, like
surprising institutions, so.
Chairman Scott. You have also indicated that you have
remediated the credit report problem?
Secretary DeVos. Yes. We have remediated the problems that
it occurred.
Chairman Scott. Does remediate mean you have corrected the
credit reports or that you have reimbursed people for loss of
job or higher interest rates they might pay, or did you just
correct the reports?
Secretary DeVos. Whatever the issue was, we have remediated
for with the--
Chairman Scott. Does that mean you--
Secretary DeVos.--small exception of those whose addresses
we can't track down.
Chairman Scott. Does that mean you have corrected the
reports or compensated people for lost jobs or higher interest
rates they may have paid for a diminished credit report?
Secretary DeVos. We have corrected or remediated their
credit reports.
Chairman Scott. Just credit reports.
Secretary DeVos. Just specific credit report question.
Chairman Scott. Are you aware that the University of
Phoenix recently agreed to $191 million settlement?
Secretary DeVos. I understand that and I also understand
that the leadership there are formerly lead employees,
political appointees of the Obama Administration.
Chairman Scott. That's fine. How many has the--did that
settlement involve federal student loans?
Secretary DeVos. I imagine that there are some Federal
student loans involved there.
Chairman Scott. Were any Federal student loans involved in
the settlement?
Chairman Scott. Excuse me, General Brown
General Brown. Not that I am aware of or that we would--
Chairman Scott. There are requests for borrowers defense
from the University of Phoenix. About 8,000, is that right?
General Brown. Right now, today, we have 14,000 of those
borrower defense claims are from the University of Phoenix.
Chairman Scott. Okay. What is the status of those?
General Brown. Those applications are in various stages
depending on when they were received.
Chairman Scott. Has any relief been granted?
General Brown. I do not believe that--I can get that for
the record and provide it for you, sir.
Chairman Scott. Okay. Now, as I understand it, if you have
been defrauded, you should get relief if you have suffered
financial harm and we have had back and forth about how you
establish financial harm. If you have two similar schools and
you have your comparison group where they did not lie and cheat
and defraud the students, they just acknowledge that the
credits were not transferable and you were not going to get a
job, but people went anyway. And you have another school that,
in fact, defrauded the students, lied to them about
accreditation, lied to them about transferability, and lied to
them about job placements, is it true under your formula you
would get no relief because you don't show financial harm?
Secretary DeVos. Mr. Chairman, the methodology looks at all
programs across the country that are like programs to the one
that the borrower is making the claim against.
Chairman Scott. Right. And if the one you are making a
claim against in fact defrauded the students where the
comparison group did not lie about the placement rate, did not
lie about accreditation, did not lie about transferability or
credits and ended up with the same income as the one that, in
fact, defrauded the students, is it true that under your
formula the students that were defrauded get no relief?
Secretary DeVos. If there is no financial harm to the
student making the claim, that would be correct.
Chairman Scott. Okay. And is it--I think we established
that there is no individualized consideration that it is
considered by class. You went to that college, if you make a
lot of money or you did not make any money, you would get
exactly the same relief?
Secretary DeVos. The claim is against the student, not
against that school and program.
Chairman Scott. Okay. Can you briefly describe what the
Department admitted to when it admitted to gross negligence in
the lawsuit that provoked the contempt of court?
Secretary DeVos. I think those are attorney's words. What
we have acknowledged--
Chairman Scott. The Department admitted gross--
Secretary DeVos. What we acknowledged is that there were
human errors made at Federal Student Aid and with our student
loan servicers and that we acknowledge them. We take
responsibility for them and we have corrected them.
Chairman Scott. Defendants respectfully submit that the
Department's compliance report the undersigned counsel's
representation in the October 7 hearing and the further
information contained in this brief establish that compliance
errors at issue here were not the result of any willful or
intentional conduct but as the Court has recognized gross
negligence, including negligent oversight of the department
servicers. My time has expired and I yield to the Gentlelady
from North Carolina for a closing statement.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I want to say
publicly thank you for your response to what I considered
inappropriate comments made earlier. I very much appreciate
your response to that.
As we agree, oversight, and I said earlier, oversight is
important and I stand ready. The Secretary has said she stands
ready to work with the Chairman to conduct good oversight of
not just the Education Department, but every venue we have any
jurisdiction over. But we need to work in a bipartisan manner
with the Secretary and solve the problems efficiently and focus
as the Secretary does on helping students and not playing
gotcha games with the Secretary.
And I ask you, Madam Secretary, to commit again today to
working faster and harder to get to the information requested
and respond as quickly as possible so we can all be clear and
more direct about the concerns we have and whatever information
we need.
And, Mr. Chairman, I would say when requests go to the
Department, they be as specific as possible and, again, not
trying to play gotcha games. Say did you get this memo on
January 10th written before you came into office. Those are the
kinds of things that should be said instead of going on fishing
expeditions. The Higher Ed Act does not prohibit the Secretary
from providing partial relief for successful borrower defense
claims.
And I want to make an analogy here. I will bet you there is
not a member of this committee who has not had a car accident
or a problem in homeowners insurance. And I'll guarantee you
that the insurance companies don't write you a check for what
you think is your damage. They assess that damage. They look at
your car. They came to your home. What these members are saying
is you just write a check from the taxpayers and say it's okay
if you tell us you have been defrauded or you have been
damaged. That is not the way it works.
We have set the federal government up as the biggest loan
institution in the country. Now, we want it to be the biggest
insurance company in the world and that is just not right. What
has been going on is nothing new. Regulations under President
Clinton, President Obama and, now, President Trump have all
allowed for partial relief for successful borrower defense
claims.
The grandstanding today but unfairness could all be
resolved if Congress had amended the borrower defense
provisions in any of the HEA reauthorizations over the last two
decades. If Members of Congress do not like how much authority
the statute has given the Secretary, then we should work
together to amend the statute. No one has asserted that the
Secretary has not followed the law. That is what oversight
should be asserting if that is what it is we are doing.
And Mr. Chairman, we disagree on policy a lot of times, but
we do not disagree that students represent not only our current
situation in the nation but our nation's future deserve all the
opportunities to succeed. And frankly, I am saddened that I
need to remind my colleagues of this. I think we need to
respect this institution and honor it with the decorum that it
deserves and show the students how we should behave and be
examples for them. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your indulgence
today.
Chairman Scott. Thank you. I want to thank the Secretary
for your participation today. We have heard very valuable
information. Members may have additional questions for you and
we will submit them to you in writing. Remind the Members that
questions for the record must be submitted within 7 days and
the hearing record will be open for 14 days.
I just want to say and, finally, no question of whether
partial relief is available or not. But in some of these cases,
the fraud was so widespread and the findings of the previous
administration was at some of these degrees were absolutely
worthless.
The University of Phoenix had a $191 million settlement for
fraud. Nothing has been done so far on federal loans to provide
that relief. We would think that if the fraud has been well-
established, that each person would not have to come up
individually to prove individual fraud. If there is such
widespread fraud, I think the burden ought to shift to the
business.
And finally, a lot has been said about the Obama process.
The memos that we have presented show that there was a process.
They discharged loans for 28,000 borrowers and had a process
that would have eliminated the backlog in a couple of months.
As indicated we had not seen it. Obviously, we had seen it. We
had not seen them in the submissions. But we got those memos
showing the process from the media, not from submissions. So,
we would expect if we had gotten those earlier we could have
discussed them not as gotcha but as part of the process.
If there is no further business to come before the
Committee, without objection, the Committee stands adjourned.
[Additional submission by Mr. Courtney follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[Whereupon, at 1:14 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
