- SUSTAINABILITY IN THE LIVESTOCK SECTOR: ENVIRONMENTAL GAIN AND ECONOMIC VIABILITY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SUSTAINABILITY IN THE LIVESTOCK SECTOR: ENVIRONMENTAL GAIN AND ECONOMIC
VIABILITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON LIVESTOCK AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 3, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-28

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-643PDF             WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Chairman

JIM COSTA, California                GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania,
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts     Ranking Minority Member
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina, Vice  ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
Chair                                Arkansas
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York            DOUG LaMALFA, California
SHONTEL M. BROWN, Ohio               RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine               DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
Northern Mariana Islands             DON BACON, Nebraska
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois               JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York       JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   CHRIS JACOBS, New York
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
RO KHANNA, California                TRACEY MANN, Kansas
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida              RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
J. LUIS CORREA, California           MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               BARRY MOORE, Alabama
JOSH HARDER, California              KAT CAMMACK, Florida
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
JIMMY PANETTA, California
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia

______

Anne Simmons, Staff Director

Parish Braden, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture

JIM COSTA, California, Chairman

ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota,
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            Ranking Minority Member
J. LUIS CORREA, California           SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JOSH HARDER, California              VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
RO KHANNA, California                DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              DON BACON, Nebraska
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia      TRACEY MANN, Kansas
------                               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
BARRY MOORE, Alabama

Daniel Feingold, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Submitted letter on behalf of Lotanna Obodozie, Climate
Campaign Director; David Howard, Co-Policy Director,
National Young Farmers Coalition...........................    63
Johnson, Hon. Dusty, a Representative in Congress from South
Dakota, opening statement......................................     4
Submitted article............................................    65
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
Pennsylvania, opening statement................................     5

Witnesses

Stackhouse-Lawson, Ph.D., Kimberly R., Director, AgNext and
Professor, Department of Animal Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO...................................     7
Prepared statement...........................................     8
Burroughs, Rose Marie (Rosie), Producer, Burroughs Family Farms,
Denair, CA; on behalf of National Sustainable Agriculture
Coalition......................................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    14
Medeiros, Melvin, Producer, Medeiros Holsteins; Chairman, Western
Area Council, Dairy Farmers of America; Member, Executive
Committee, National Milk Producers Federation, Laton, CA.......    19
Prepared statement...........................................    21
Brackett, Kim, Co-Owner, Brackett Ranches, L.P.; Chair, Beef
Industry Long Range Plan, Homedale, ID; on behalf of National
Cattlemen's Beef Association...................................    24
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Meier, Ernie, Chair, U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry &
Egg; Director, Quality Systems, U.S. Supply Chain, McDonald's
USA, Chicago, IL...............................................    29
Prepared statement...........................................    31

Submitted Material

Horsfield, Geoff, Government Affairs Manager, Environmental
Working Group, submitted statement.............................    66
Potts, Julie Anna, President and Chief Executive Officer North
American Meat Institute........................................    70

SUSTAINABILITY IN THE LIVESTOCK SECTOR: ENVIRONMENTAL GAIN AND ECONOMIC

VIABILITY

----------

THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Jim Costa [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Costa, Spanberger, Hayes,
Harder, Axne, Rush, Plaskett, Craig, Bishop, Pingree, Panetta,
Johnson, DesJarlais, Hartzler, Bacon, Baird, Mann, Feenstra,
Moore, Thompson (ex officio), and Fischbach.
Staff present: Daniel Feingold, Prescott Martin III, Emily
Pliscott, Caleb Crosswhite, Josh Maxwell, Patricia Straughn,
Erin Wilson, and Dana Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

The Chairman. Good morning, everyone. Dusty, there you are.
Ten o'clock hour has arrived, 10:01, to be precise, and the
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture will now come
to order. I think we have a good Subcommittee hearing this
morning. We have some very talented individuals who have hands-
on experience in production agriculture dealing with
sustainability, economic sustainability, while improving
environmental conditions as it relates to their operations, and
making it pay off. So, as we do with typical Subcommittee
hearings, after opening remarks, Members will receive testimony
from our witnesses today, and we will then open it up for
questions. In consultation with the Ranking Member, Rule XI(e),
I want to make Members of the Subcommittee aware that other
Members of the full Committee may join us today, and we welcome
their participation. And so we look forward to that occurring,
and the opportunity to get some things done, as we look at the
challenges facing American agriculture, and issues involving
American agriculture under these challenging times that we are
living in. It is important for the Subcommittee to focus on
this as we prepare not only for this year's legislative agenda,
but also as we set the table for next year's farm bill. And I,
in my mind, look at these efforts as all tied in, in one
fashion or another, and I want to thank the Members of the
Subcommittee and Members of the full Committee that are
participating, because it is a good opportunity for us to try
to maintain the bipartisanship that has always been a hallmark
of the House Agriculture Committee that I think we are all
proud of.
Having said that, let me start by saying good morning. I
want to thank our witnesses, Ranking Member Johnson, and
Members of the Subcommittee today, for our opportunity to
discuss the impacts of climate change, and sustainability in
the livestock sector. I think many of us have personal
relationships with constituents that are among the most
innovative in the livestock community in America. I know I
certainly do, and I am very proud of those folks that are
involved and engaged. I do not think we can waver from the
impacts that climate change is having, with regards to not only
the air, and the water, and the other important resource issues
that we consume, but also the impacts worldwide.
And, as a third-generation farmer, a person that has been
engaged and seen a lot of changes over the years, I like to say
that I think farmers, ranchers, dairymen and -women, are among
the most concerned of stewards of the environment, because the
whole renewability, and the ability to maintain the
renewability of that resource, the air, and the water, and the
land, is essential, critical, to their ability to maintain
their farming operations. The Biden Administration has rejoined
the Paris Agreement. I think this is an opportunity for us to
look on how we work together not only in this country, but
around the world. That means reducing our carbon footprint, as
it relates to emissions, in ways that make sense, working with
industry, and that is part of the reason for this Subcommittee
hearing, to figure out how we deal with the impacts, and ensure
that we have measurable outcomes. I can tell you that in
California we have been doing that for a number of years. I am
glad that we have some witnesses from California that can share
their experiences with us today.
I think we all feel very strongly about agriculture and its
important role in putting food on America's dinner table every
night. It is, as I think many of you have heard me say time and
time again, a national security issue. And I think agriculture,
certainly the folks that I work with at home, understand that
the issue of climate change is important. Water, and the
snowpack that we get in California's mountains are critical to
our sustainability of having adequate water supply, and yet we
see increasing changes of our snowpack and our water
availability. And, of course, a result of that, in part, are
the horrific fires that we have had to address in California.
But like all farmers, I am an optimist. I think you have to be
an optimist if you are a farmer, a rancher, or a dairyman or -
woman, and I think the flipside of the value of these
challenges we face is that agriculture can, and is, making a
meaningful contribution toward reducing and offsetting
emissions.
Today we will hear from producers and others on how they
have advanced their own operation's sustainability initiatives
so that we can better understand the challenges on how farmers,
ranchers, dairymen and -women are coming together to do what
they can do, certainly when incentives are provided, to impact
climate change, and what the barriers are, and incentives, that
we need to factor in to help them in achieving these goals.
In addition, I think we need to account for the impact: in
terms of cropping patterns, in terms of availability of water
resources, in different regions of our country, and throughout
the world, frankly, that climate change is going to have. There
are a lot of areas where the sustainability of agriculture
around the world is going to be very difficult in semi-arid
regions because of a lack of water. And so we all have a
responsibility here. I mean, deteriorating conditions have some
example in grazing lands, impacts our livestock producers. I
have family that farms on the West Coast ranged mountains of
California, and when they look at 10 year averages, and the
amount of precipitation they get to grow those grasses to feed
their cattle, it becomes a very difficult challenge, in terms
of the amount of years that they can count on enough feed to
make that operation work.
So that only puts a further strain on our food production.
I think the panel that we have here is an impressive caliber of
knowledge on what is being done to build sustainability in our
livestock system. I know the two individuals from California
certainly have a lot of experience there. I look forward to a
productive discussion with Members of the Subcommittee so that
we can work together in a collaborative fashion, in a
bipartisan fashion, with our livestock producers to scale up
adoption of climate-smart practices.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costa follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress from
California
Good morning. Thank you to our witnesses, Ranking Member Johnson,
and the Members of the Subcommittee for convening today to discuss
climate change, sustainability, and the livestock sector. Climate
change is a global problem, and we cannot waver in our commitment to
addressing it. The Biden Administration has rejoined the Paris
Agreement and the opportunity is before us to actually deliver on our
commitments to this important climate agreement. This means reducing
emissions in a meaningful way, working with industry to make an impact,
and ensuring measurable outcomes.
Agriculture has an important role to play in addressing climate
change, and it is critical that we acknowledge that, while agriculture
delivers tremendous value to society, it does so at a cost to the
climate. But like all farmers, I am an optimist, and I believe that the
flip side of the value proposition that I just described is that
agriculture is positioned to make a meaningful contribution toward
reducing and offsetting emissions.
Today we will hear from producers, and others working to advance
sustainability initiatives, so that we can better understand how
farmers are coming together to combat climate change, what work lies
ahead, and the barriers and incentives that factor into these efforts.
In addition, it is vital that we account for the impact that global
warming will have on agriculture as it impacts different regions of our
nation in different ways. We have already seen staggering drought this
year with Lake Mead, a critical water resource in the West, reaching
its lowest level since being filled, and I am concerned that conditions
will only deteriorate further if we don't take steps to mitigate
greenhouse gas emissions now.
Deteriorating conditions will not only affect the grazing land that
our livestock producers need, they will also impact crops that are used
to supply feed for our livestock, and will lead to water shortages that
constrict herd sizes. These conditions will put further strain on food
production.
This panel contains an impressive caliber of knowledge on what is
being done to build a more sustainable livestock system, and what steps
we still need to bridge to a more climate-smart future. I look forward
to a productive discussion on how we can work together to combat
climate change and incentivize our livestock producers to scale-up
adoption of climate-smart practices.
Before the introduction of our witnesses, I'd like to recognize the
Ranking Member, Mr. Johnson of South Dakota, for any remarks he'd like
to make.

The Chairman. So I would like to introduce my friend and
colleague, Ranking Member Dusty Johnson from South Dakota, for
any remarks that he would like to make at this time.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DUSTY JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM SOUTH DAKOTA

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank
you and your team also for how collaborative you are in the
lead-up to these hearings. I want to echo what you said about
this being an impressive panel, and I am looking forward to
hearing from these knowledgeable and solutions-focused experts.
But let us be clear, there are threats because there are less
knowledgeable and less solutions-focused people who are sharing
their views in other venues.
I was disappointed earlier this week to see the New York
Times had an opinion piece titled, and I am not making this up,
Meet The People Getting Paid To Kill Our Planet.* And the
opinion piece made sweeping, inaccurate statements about
American agriculture. The piece seemed oblivious to the kind of
progress that we are making as a country. The piece was
terrible, and it was made worse by the fact that some Members
of Congress, including Senator Corey Booker, cooperated with
the project. So let us be clear, because the facts are not in
dispute. In recent decades the U.S. beef industry has reduced
net emissions by more than 40 percent, and so net emissions
from U.S. beef production are ten times lower than net
emissions in other parts of the world. Additionally, U.S.
ranchers are producing the same amount of beef today as they
did in 1977 with 33 percent fewer animals, and, of course, less
land being used as well. And farm productivity was 287 percent
greater in 2017 than it was in 1948. I mean, that is just
incredible, 287 percent greater.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: the article is located on p. 65.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
And so, Mr. Chairman, you are exactly right. The American
farmer, the American rancher, they are producing more with
less. They have made the United States the most efficient
producer of food and fiber in the world. And, Mr. Chairman,
that environmental progress will continue because of the
solutions being worked on by the witnesses on our panel today,
as well as progress being made by others. And those solutions
are coming in many forms. I would call out one, precision
ranching technologies being developed by South Dakota State
University, and the Western Research and Extension Center, and
this is a neat project. I mean, they are deploying a series of
precision measuring technologies in Phillips, South Dakota.
So what do they do? They are using GPS, they are using
precision scales, to track individual cattle location, and
weight, on a daily basis. And these tools also allow producers
to manage grazing rotations with a smartphone. And so,
collectively, these tools are giving us unprecedented insight
into the grazing practices of these cattle, what they are
eating, what that means for weight gain, and what that means
for food quality and sustainability. This is an incredibly fun
project, and it is an important one as well.
And so I would just close by saying this, Mr. Chairman. A
better, more sustainable future will not come from the harsh,
scolding voices of the naysayers. It is going to come from the
leadership and innovation of people like the researchers at
SDSU and our witnesses today. I am looking forward to the
discussion, and with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. I want to thank my friend and colleague from
South Dakota for making those points. I could not agree with
you more. The collaborative and the constructive efforts on
behalf of American agriculture on a region-by-region basis I
think has been significant. Yes, we can do more, and that is
part of the purpose of this Subcommittee hearing. The fact is
that American agriculture does more with less, as the numbers
you have stated, substantially, and yes, we have challenges out
there, but the fact is that nobody, in so many different ways,
on a region-by-region basis, is trying their very best to
implement best on-site farm management practices that will
ultimately produce results. But there is more, obviously, that
we can and should do.
As is the common courtesy of this Subcommittee, and other
subcommittees, we always recognize, when we hold a Subcommittee
hearing, the Chair and the Ranking Member of the full
Committee, if, in fact, they are participating, and they wish
to make a comment. Maintaining that tradition, my friend from
Pennsylvania, Mr. G.T. Thompson, is here this morning,
participating with us, and I would yield him an opportunity to
make any comments that he may choose to make. Representative
Thompson?

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GLENN THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Thompson. Well, good morning, Mr. Chairman, thank you
so much. Ranking Member Johnson, thank you both for this
hearing. I certainly want to align myself with the comments
that have been made here. American agriculture, from the very
beginnings, has always been science, technology, and
innovation, but that means that we are not static. We are
dynamic, with incredible opportunities ahead. Although, it has
always been science, technology, innovation, the rate of
innovation today is happening exponentially. It is very
exciting. Very exciting for America, and certainly for our work
together in the Agriculture Committee. I also would like to
thank each of our witnesses for their participation today.
As you have heard previously, U.S. farm productivity and
management practices have improved dramatically over the past
70 years. Specifically productivity increased 287 percent,
while the inputs and land use have remained relatively
unchanged. Quite frankly, we've used less land, and sadly,
we've seen acreage go out of agriculture production. In short,
we are producing much more food and fiber, while using maybe
the same amount, but I would argue less resources than we did
generations ago. I believe this is something that is not talked
about enough. U.S. producers are the shining star when it comes
to resiliency, sustainability, and to summarize that, if you
would prefer, with the word climate. Agriculture is the
solution; it is not the problem. It is research, innovation,
and technology.
Now, just as they have been for the past 70 years,
innovation and research have to remain at the forefront of
these efforts moving forward, certainly at the forefront of our
efforts as a Committee. From biotechnology, to promising new
livestock feed ingredients, to precision agriculture, and new
cropping systems, support for development and adoption of
innovative products and practices will be critical to ensure
farmers have the tools necessary to continue sustainability
enhancing productivity.
Now, policies from Washington should acknowledge the
agriculture sector's success, and contributions that we make to
sustainability and climate, environment, the economy, and build
upon it by focusing on the efforts to voluntarily do more,
ultimately by incentivizing pro-growth solutions. That is why I
introduced the SUSTAINS Act (H.R. 2606), which provides an
opportunity to the private-sector to partner with USDA to
further engage farmers and ranchers in supporting voluntary
conservation initiatives. Bipartisan solutions should revolve
around a commitment to these proven programs, reducing
bureaucratic red tape, and, ultimately, regulations.
Now, I fear that the opposite approach, burdensome top-down
regulations and costly complicated policies will harm rural
economies, while displacing U.S. production with that of less
efficient foreign producers. I know that is something that we
all want to avoid. And I certainly look forward to hearing from
today's witnesses, and learning more about their voluntary
initiatives, and thoughtful recommendations. And with that, Mr.
Chairman, thank you so much for the opportunity to be a part of
this Subcommittee hearing. I yield back.
The Chairman. I want to thank the gentleman from
Pennsylvania for his comments, and I would like to request that
Members of the Subcommittee submit their opening statements for
the record so that witnesses may begin their testimony, and so
that we can ensure that there is ample time for questions. As
we have, and some of the witnesses today before us have
testified before, and I am trying to see if the witnesses have
it available to them, because it would be more helpful if they
do, I do not seem to have it on my screen, but this new world
that we live in and virtual hearings, sometimes makes it
complicated to participate.
But there is 5 minutes of time that is allotted for
everyone's testimony, and, of course, Members are allotted the
same amount of time for their comments or questions that they
wish to make when it comes to their turn. So I am pleased to
welcome our distinguished panel of witnesses here today, as we
have noted. They bring a wide range of experience and expertise
around the country on the issues of climate impacts and
American agriculture, so we thank you all for joining us.
Our first witness today is Dr. Kim Stackhouse-Lawson. She
has her Ph.D. as the Director of NextAg, and Professor in
Department of Animal Sciences at Colorado State University in
Fort Collins, Colorado, which is one of America's premier
universities, and we are very pleased that Dr. Lawson--
Stackhouse-Lawson, excuse me, that you are available today. I
hope you have the screen available so that you can see, and
that--you can begin with your comments for 5 minutes, and I
will try to be appropriate at the time that you are concluded.
But please begin your presentation for Members of the
Subcommittee.

STATEMENT OF KIMBERLY R. STACKHOUSE-LAWSON, Ph.D., DIRECTOR,
AgNext AND PROFESSOR, DEPARTMENT OF
ANIMAL SCIENCES, COLORADO STATE UNIVERSITY, FORT COLLINS, CO

Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. Chairman Costa, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to speak today. I am Dr. Kim Stackhouse-Lawson,
Director of AgNext, and a Professor of Animal Science at
Colorado State University. AgNext is a first of its kind
research collaborative, focused on sustainable solutions for
animal agriculture. Sustainability is defined using a three-
pillar approach, social, economic, and environment. Each pillar
is dependent on the other, and no one pillar is more important.
Due to the complexity and importance of animal agriculture
systems, we must consider interactions and potential unintended
consequences of solutions towards enhanced sustainability.
By 2050 our planet's population will increase by 2.2
billion, requiring food production to increase by 70 percent.
Estimates suggest that animal agriculture production will need
to increase 100 percent to ensure adequate nutrition to this
rapidly growing population. Climate change is going to have a
major impact on our food supply chain. These changes alone are
going to challenge and require improvements in the adaptive
capacity and resiliency of our farmers, and ranchers, and rural
communities. There is no question that this will be the
greatest challenge of our lifetime. Providing this nutrition,
and doing so within the bounds of our planetary resources in an
equitable way, should be our focus.
The critical nature and timeliness of ensuring food
security and doubling food production, while also meeting
sustainability goals, is no small task. In sustainability,
silver bullets do not exist. We must take a more inclusive and
systematic approach to ensure we do not solve one problem, and
create other unintended impacts. It is critical that we develop
solutions that are place-based, practical for farmers and
ranchers to adopt, and economically viable.
Further complicating sustainability is the pace at which it
is growing in importance. Many leading companies and industries
have announced aggressive sustainability goals, including net-
zero targets by 2040 and 2050, that will have real and lasting
impacts on the food system as we know it today. Many countries
and governments, including the U.S., have made similar
commitments. While I appreciate the intention and momentum
behind setting these aggressive targets, the road maps to
achieve these goals are elusive. More information is needed to
inform these strategies, namely the development of appropriate
baselines, and real world solutions that result in tangible,
science-based outcomes. Filling this knowledge gap will allow
the livestock industry, academia, and policymakers to
understand how food production interacts with and impacts
climate change. The livestock industry and academic community
continue to actively explore how to effectively measure,
validate, and continually improve livestock sustainability,
including reducing greenhouse gas emissions in a holistic and
comprehensive way.
Greenhouse gases from livestock are difficult to measure,
and until the last decade scientists did not have an effective
method to quantify greenhouse gas emissions from livestock in
their natural environments. Today emission estimates are based
on models. They use limited absolute emission data. Absolute
emission data from livestock is needed to fully understand
mitigation potential. Without a robust baseline, farmers and
ranchers, and others along the supply chain, are faced with a
challenge to reduce emissions, but lack an understanding of
where to begin, which makes it nearly impossible to determine
if mitigation strategies are effective.
An additional component of this research must focus on
scalable solutions that are also possible for producers to
promote economic growth, while ensuring that the food system
can produce the amount of nutrient-dense food that will be
required to meet the nutritional needs of a growing population
over the coming decades. To develop truly sustainable
solutions, all stakeholders need to be engaged and invested in
the process, and this should include government entities and
policymakers. Currently there is limited access to Federal
funding, grants, and private investments to research greenhouse
gas emissions in livestock systems. Private investing in the
space of sustainability is rapidly increasing, and evolving
faster than ever before, and there is an opportunity to
leverage these funds, and this momentum, as we work together to
meet this challenge.
While sustainability has become a major focus recently, the
livestock industry has been dedicated to continuous improvement
for several decades. The majority of livestock production in
the U.S. happens on family-owned and operated farms and
ranches, and U.S. livestock operations are a critical element
to the affordable, high-quality protein available to domestic
and international consumers. Pressure is being placed on
farmers and ranchers to mitigate impact without the appropriate
tools that they need to be successful. As we move toward
researching sustainable solutions for the livestock industry,
it is critical that these strategies generated are applicable
to the appropriate region in which the operation is located,
and improve the overall sustainability of the food system.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before this panel,
and I would be glad to address your questions, and I look
forward to the discussion.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kimberly R. Stackhouse-Lawson, Ph.D., Director,
AgNext and Professor, Department of Animal Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. I am Kim
Stackhouse-Lawson, Director of AgNext and a Professor of Animal
Sciences at Colorado State University. AgNext at Colorado State
University is a leader for research in animal and ecosystem health
while enhancing profitability of the supply chain and serves as the
crossroads for producers, industry partners, and researchers to come
together to innovate real-time solutions for sustainability in animal
agriculture. Our research focuses on advancing the science of animal
agriculture to ensure a continued safe, secure, and nutritious food
supply. Our mission is to identify and scale innovation that fosters
the health of animals and ecosystems to promote profitable industries
that support vibrant communities.
Prior to leading AgNext, I served as the Director of Sustainability
for JBS USA where I was responsible for coordinating the company's
corporate sustainability program and strategy. In this role, I served
as the Chair of the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Beef. Prior to my
time with JBS USA, I was the Executive Director of Global
Sustainability at the National Cattlemen's Beef Association where I
developed the beef check-off sustainability research program and the
U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Beef. I believe strongly in engaging
with the value chain and demonstrate this commitment through active
leadership that fosters strong private-public partnerships.
Livestock Agriculture is a Complex System
Due to the complexity and importance of animal agriculture systems,
we must consider interactions and potential unintended consequences of
solutions towards enhanced sustainability. Sustainability may be best
described as a ``wicked'' problem as no definitive formulation of the
problem exists. It does not have one solution and stakeholders often
have different frames of reference or perspectives (Kebreab, 2013). An
integrated science-based approach is necessary when assessing
sustainability, where multiple aspects of the system should be
considered to understand the tradeoffs when the system is altered. For
example, those solutions developed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
should only be implemented if they do not sacrifice (and ideally
improve) different ecosystem elements. Those elements include, but is
not limited to, land, air, and water quality, water use, food security,
animal health and well-being, worker safety and satisfaction, impacts
on public health, racial and gender equality, and value chain
profitability. We must consider unintended consequences and trade-offs
as we start to explore sustainability in livestock systems.
Sustainability Defined
Sustainability is a term used across many industries and it has
increased in interest and research over the last 20 years. However, the
complex nature of sustainability and its varying interpretations makes
a definitive definition elusive. In the broadest of terms, it can be
defined as meeting the needs of the society today, without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their needs (EPA, 2021).
However, over the past decade the most cited definitions of
sustainability have advanced to include the three pillars: social,
economic and environmental. Each pillar is dependent on the other and
no one pillar is more important. The overlap between the pillars
(socioeconomic, eco-environmental, and socio-environmental) are equally
critical to prioritize because it is within these complexities that
systems must function (see Figure 1). Further complicating this topic
is the importance that an individual places on the different aspects of
sustainability, which adds an emotional element. Generally,
sustainability includes aspiration focused on continuous improvement
across all aspects; however, measuring and tracking that progress is
challenging due to the complex nature of the topic itself.
Figure 1: Schematic detailing the complexities of sustainability,
please note this does not include an exhaustive list of
metrics.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Further complicating this area of study, is the pace at which the
space of sustainability is growing in importance. Many leading
companies and industries have announced aggressive sustainability
goals, including Net Zero targets (defined as climate or carbon
neutral) that will have real and lasting impacts on food systems as we
know them today. Many of these commitments are directly in line with
the recommendations released in the 6th assessment report from
International Panel on Climate Change which suggests a crucial need to
focus specifically on reducing global temperature through greenhouse
gas (GHG) reduction. Additional research will be critical for the
livestock industry to make progress toward GHG reductions.
Livestock's Contribution to Food System Resiliency and Food Security
In food production, sustainability is generally described alongside
our need to feed a growing population. By 2050, our planet's population
will increase by 2.2 billion requiring food production to increase by
70%. Estimates suggest that animal agriculture production will need to
increase 100% to ensure adequate nutrition to this rapidly growing
population. There is no question that this will be the greatest
challenge of our lifetime. Providing this nutrition and doing so within
the bounds of our planetary resources in an equitable way should be our
focus.
The livestock production system in the U.S. is based largely on
family-owned ranches that produce beef, dairy and lamb. These livestock
operations are a critical element of the affordable, high-quality
protein food production systems for domestic and international
consumers. Particularly in the highly variable arid and semi-arid
climates of the United States, the ability of ruminant livestock to
convert non-human consumable forage to human-edible food on lands
unsuitable for crop production presents an opportunity for sustainable
intensification, while achieving multiple social-ecological objectives
(Booker, et al. 2013, Sayre, et al. 2017).
Ranching-based livestock systems are the dominant land use in much
of the North American Great Plains. These ecosystems have experienced
less conversion to cropland compared to the wetter, more mesic systems
of the eastern part (Augustine 2019) and represents largely intact
native ecosystems still exist in western ecoregions. These ecosystems
are suited to both livestock production and provision of multiple
ecosystem services, including biodiversity and habitat connectivity,
carbon sequestration, grassland bird habitat, and cultural services
such as open space, tourism opportunities, and recreation.
Livestock food production is an essential food system; however, it
is often criticized for its environmental impact, especially its impact
on climate change. The critical nature and timeliness of ensuring food
security and doubling food production while also meeting GHG emission
reductions is no small task. We need to focus on solutions that also
consider the social, environmental and economic tradeoffs and the
impact that extreme decisions could have on the system as a whole. In
sustainability, silver bullets do not exist, we must take a more
inclusive a systematic approach to ensure we do not solve one problem
and create three more.
GHG Impact from Livestock Systems
The livestock accounts for 3.8% of U.S. greenhouse gas emissions
and enteric methane accounts for approximately 30% of methane emissions
in the U.S. (EPA, 2021). To curb continued increases in temperature,
President Biden has committed to Net Zero emissions in the U.S. by 2050
and a reduction in methane emissions by 30% by 2030 relative to a 2020
baseline. Additionally, numerous food companies in the animal
agriculture supply-chain have committed to Net Zero emissions by 2040
or 2050 and there is further pressure from financial institutions and
investors to demonstrate improved performance related to GHG emissions.
However, minimal research on emissions from cattle has occurred in
production environments or exploring the additive effect of current
technologies, thereby necessitating a first step of baselining
emissions of livestock in a production environment.
Over the past several decades, large improvements in production
efficiency and land utilization have occurred in the livestock
industry. This has been driven by innovations in feeding management and
diet formulation, improvements in animal health and welfare, animal
genetics and utilization of feed additives. Relative to 1977 production
practices, cattle production produced 81% of the manure, 82% of the
methane, and 88% of the nitrous oxide, all while producing more human
edible protein with less animals (Capper, 2010). While sustainability
has become a major focus recently, it is critical to acknowledge that
this livestock industry has been dedicated to continuous improvement
for several decades and has already set audacious net zero emission
goals across multiple livestock sectors.
Livestock systems are incredibly diverse. There is tremendous
variability across industries from dairies to ranches to feedyards and
differences within each industry. Practices that are implemented on
livestock operations in one region will vary greatly from another
because of the resources available and climatic differences. For
example, dairies in Pennsylvania are different than in Colorado. A
ranch in Florida is distinctly different than a ranch in Idaho.
Sustainable solutions for mitigating environmental impact will vary
greatly based on the location, size and scale of the livestock
operation. It is critical that the U.S. conducts research across
multiple segments of the supply chain and across geographical regional
differences so that we can develop solutions that are practical for the
region, practical for farmers and ranchers to adopt, and applicable to
that operation.
There is a significant gap in this research, especially related to
livestock's contribution to climate change. Greenhouse gases from
livestock are difficult to measure, and until the last decade
scientists did not have a non-invasive method to quantify enteric
methane emissions in production environments. This means that models
utilized to quantify emissions were not developed from animals behaving
normally and in normal environments. Furthermore, quantifying other
important greenhouse gases related to livestock (i.e., nitrous oxide)
is extremely expensive and difficult due to the impact the weather
conditions and topography can have on the ability to quantify these
emissions. Filling this knowledge gap will allow both the livestock
industry and climate scientists to have a better understanding of how
food production interacts with the environment by improving the current
models.
Economic Impacts from Livestock Systems
Livestock producers, feeders and processors also play a critical
role in the U.S. economy and support rural economies. A successful
agriculture sector supports economic growth overall while also
providing a safe and nutritious food supply. An additional component of
this research must focus on scalable solutions that are also profitable
for producers to promote economic growth, while ensuring that the food
system can produce the amount of nutrient dense food that will be
required to meet the nutritional needs of a growing population over the
coming decades. As we move toward researching sustainable solutions for
the livestock industry it is critical that any solutions generated are
economically viable and scalable across a wide range of operations.
Sustainable Solutions in Livestock Systems
The livestock industry and academic community are actively
exploring how to effectively measure, validate and continually improve
its overall sustainability in a holistic and comprehensive way. This is
not easy as a one size fits all approach which is not applicable to
biological systems like food production. Currently, there is limited
access to Federal funding, grants, and private investments to research
sustainability and greenhouse gas emissions in livestock systems. The
equipment needed to conduct this critical research is available, but in
order to gain access to this cutting-edge technology more funding will
be required to begin to thoroughly understand the baseline of GHG
emissions from livestock systems.
Without a robust understanding of baseline emissions, producers and
others along the supply chain are faced with the challenge to reduce
emissions, but without an understanding of where to begin, which makes
it is nearly impossible to understand if mitigation strategies are
effective. Pressure is being placed on producers to mitigate impact and
they are being asked to adapt and reduce emissions without the
appropriate tools that they need move as quickly as they are being
asked to. It is imperative that solutions that are generated are
scalable, economically feasible and practical for producers to utilize
to encourage high adoption rates.
For enteric methane emissions, a high priority area is to establish
baseline emissions and develop practical solutions for producers in
grazing systems. These systems are the largest contributor to the
footprint of the beef industry but most research on enteric methane
reduction strategies occur in controlled feedlot environments and
diets. This will require investment in research as emissions and
production systems exist as gradient in grazing systems. Forage types,
local weather/climate, and individual producer management decisions all
influence the emissions from grazing animals.
Developing affordable methods in quantifying nitrogen loss to the
environment is a crucial need for food production systems. While we
understand how weather events influence nitrogen deposition, we need to
improve methods for quantification of nitrous oxide emissions, ammonia
emissions, and nitrogen leaching. The development of interventions that
reduce nitrogen losses and improve nitrogen use efficiency has the
potential to improve the sustainability of both livestock and cropping
systems.
Today there is considerable interest in utilizing grazing systems
to sequester carbon in the soil to offset emissions from the food
supply chain. This includes various carbon markets being developed to
incentivize producers to manage their landscapes in a way that improves
carbon sequestration and soil health. While the literature does
indicate this is possible, arid environments do not appear to have
capacity to increase soil carbon stocks due to a lack of moisture.
Furthermore, how grazing management influences soil carbon and soil
health is very inconsistent. More work is needed to come to a
scientific consensus on appropriate grazing management across different
climatic gradients.
Often lost in the discussion of sustainable livestock systems is
the suite of other ecosystem services that producers offer for society
as stewards of the land. This includes culture and leisure, energy,
water quality, managing for wildlife habitat, fuel reduction, and
biodiversity. Investment in research that quantifies these benefits and
offers economic returns to producers can help them improve the
sustainability of their operations while providing benefits to greater
society.
Climate change is going to have a major impact on our food supply
chain. Currently, we expect to see positive changes such an increased
growing season and increased forage production. However, we also expect
increased climate variability, including the frequency of extreme
weather events such as drought and flooding. These changes alone are
going to challenge, and require improvements, in the adaptive capacity
and resiliency of our producers and rural communities. With further
market and political variability, producers need investment from public
and private sources to improve their ability to navigate future
challenges while continuing to provide a safe and nutrient dense food
supply.
Public investing in the space of sustainability is rapidly
increasing and evolving faster than ever before. This has led to
companies across a multitude of industries, including agriculture,
committing to a net-zero future. In his 2022 letter to CEO's, Blackrock
CEO and President Larry Fink said ``Every company and every industry
will be transformed by the transition to a net zero world . . . . all
markets will require unprecedented investment in de-carbonization
technology.'' We need transformative discoveries on a level with the
electric light bulb, and we need to foster investment in them so that
they are scalable and affordable. To develop a truly sustainable
solutions all stakeholders need to be engaged and invested in the
process, and this includes government entities and policy makers.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before this panel. I would
be glad to address your questions and I look forward to the discussion.

[References]

Augustine, D., Davidson, A., Dickinson, K., Van Pelt, B. 2019.
Thinking like a grassland: challenges and opportunities for
biodiversity conservation in the Great Plains of North America. Rangel.
Ecol. & Manage. (6 Nov. 2019 online) https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rama.2019.09.001.
Booker, K., Huntsinger, L., Bartolome, J.W., Sayre, N.F., Stewart,
W. 2013. What can ecological science tell us about opportunities for
carbon sequestration on arid rangelands in the United States? Global
Environ. Change 23: 240-251. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.gloenvcha.2012.10.001.
Capper, J.L. 2010. The environmental impact of beef production in
the United States: 1977 compared with 2007. Journal of Animal Science.
89: 4249-4261. https://doi.org/10.2527/jas.2010-3784.
EPA. 2021. Sustainability and the ROE. Available from: https://
www.epa.gov/report-environment/sustainability-and-roe.
Food and Agriculture Organization for the United Nations (2009).
2050: A third more mouths to feed https://www.fao.org/news/story/en/
item/35571/icode/.
Kebreab, E. 2013. Sustainable Animal Agriculture. CABI.
Sayre, N.F., Davis, D.K., Bestelmeyer, B., Williamson, J.C. 2017.
Rangelands: Where anthromes meet their limits. Land 6(2): 31. https://
doi.org/10.3390/land6020031.

The Chairman. Well thank you very much, Dr. Stackhouse-
Lawson, for your comments and your points. I think they are
well taken. The ability to provide measurements that are
understandable, and solutions that can achieve those goals, are
critical toward our ability to manage this, and your point
about sufficient funding to do a lot of the research that is
necessary is something that we should take into account as it
relates to the next farm bill, and some of the other efforts
that are ongoing with legislation. I think your perspective
really points out something I like to talk about regularly that
I think is--really makes the United States in some ways so
different than other parts of the world, and that is our land-
grant universities, our agricultural schools, like yours, that
have played an important role historically in terms of research
that has allowed American agriculture, over 100 years, to
really achieve levels of quality, and production, and best
management practices that, without that academic involvement, I
don't think would have been possible. So keep up the good work.
And our next witness today is a person--and her family,
Rosie Burroughs, with the Burroughs Family Farms in Denair,
California. They are a marketing flagship for organic and
regenerative grass-based pasture-raised added value products
produced by the family enterprises include almonds, beef,
chicken, dairy, eggs, sheep, olive oil, walnuts, meat, birds,
and turkeys. Their farming and ranching efforts are like
California, diverse, and therefore we are very proud of their
efforts. And, Ms. Burroughs, please, you have 5 minutes to
present to the Committee. We are looking forward to hearing
your comments.

STATEMENT OF ROSE MARIE (ROSIE) BURROUGHS,
PRODUCER, BURROUGHS FAMILY FARMS, DENAIR, CA; ON BEHALF OF
NATIONAL SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
COALITION

Ms. Burroughs. Good morning, Subcommittee Chairman Costa,
Ranking Member Johnson, Members of the Subcommittee, and
Members of the full Committee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you about my family's farms, and our experiences
farming with regenerative practices. My husband Ward and I farm
with our children, and their families, in the rolling foothills
of the San Joaquin Valley in California and northern Merced
County, and in Bonanza, Oregon. We are carrying on the
Burroughs family farming legacy, which spans over a century,
and over the last 20 years we have formed partnerships with our
children. Thank you for mentioning all of our products under
the Burroughs Family Farms marketing flagship.
Our nation's greatest resource is the rancher and the
farmer families who are the stewards of our grasslands and
farmlands, and are devoted to producing our country's food and
fiber. Our future survival depends on how we handle climate
change, and the extreme weather patterns of drought, and
devastating storms which are symptomatic of the warming of our
planet. It is extremely important that U.S. agriculture
responds to these problems by adopting regenerative agriculture
practices. As we started our farming/ranching journey as
conventional farmers, we didn't know what we didn't know, and
we were part of the problem. Around 40 years ago we discovered
the holistic approach to ranching and farming, and 20 years ago
our path to organic ranching and farming, using regenerative
practices.
Let me take a moment to explain regenerative agriculture.
It is a system of farming principles and practices that seek to
regenerate and enhance the entire ecosystem of our farms, our
ranches, by concentrating on building soil health, which
increases soil biodiversity and organic matter, leading to more
resilient soils that can better withstand climate change
impacts like flooding and drought. Regenerative practices help
us fight the climate crisis by pulling carbon from the
atmosphere and sequestering it in the ground. Healthy soils
leads to strong yields, and nutrient-dense rich crops.
To do this, on our farms we are using these practices to
build soil health. No-till, or minimum-till, planting cover
crops, keeping the soil covered with a diversity of plants for
as long as possible, and we have integrated animal grazing on
our rangelands, irrigated pastures, and orchards when possible.
We use compost and manure for our fertilizer. Research
conducted by Ecdysis and Cal State East Bay in a comparative
study, including our regenerative almond orchard, showed that
regenerative orchards can have a 30 percent higher soil organic
matter, significantly greater carbon sequestration, and soil
health, six times higher water infiltration rates, six times
higher insect biomass, and measurably greater soil microbial
activity, and similar yields.
This is proof that regenerative age practices will work to
ensuring our farmers and ranchers continue their work by being
sustainable and viable while protecting our environment. We are
very proud to be part of the regenerative agriculture movement,
which has been gaining momentum, but we need more support to
continue forward in research and education. I am here today to
implore this Committee to support funding in the new farm bill
for regenerative agriculture practices.
In closing, I have listed more information, with links in
my written testimony. We are hosting a farm field day on
February 17, and I would really like you to take special
attention to the two links for the Center for Regenerative
Agriculture and Resilient Systems at CSU Chico, and the Ecdysis
Foundation, both excellent resources on current research and
education. Thank you for your opportunity to testify, and share
my experiences about our family's farms, and I hope and pray
that you will take the information in this hearing to support
the sustainability of livestock systems.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Burroughs follows:]

Prepared Statement of Rose Marie (Rosie) Burroughs, Producer, Burroughs
Family Farms, Denair, CA; on Behalf of National Sustainable Agriculture
Coalition
Good morning, Subcommittee Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson,
and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you about my family's farms and how we strive to be the
best stewards of our land. I am Rosie Burroughs of Burroughs Family
Farms. My husband Ward and I have always felt a strong responsibility
for taking care of the land and passing it down to the next generation
in better condition than we inherited it. For our forefathers, my
husband and I, and our children, we are proud to have continued the
stewardship of our farms over the course of five generations.
With my husband Ward, we farm with three of our children and their
families, in the rolling foothills of the San Joaquin Valley of
California in northeastern Merced County and Bonanza, Oregon. We are
carrying on the Burroughs family farming legacy which spans over a
century. Over the last 20 years we have formed partnerships with our
children in Full Circle Dairy, Burroughs Family Orchards and California
Cloverleaf Farms
We are committed to Organic/Regenerative family farming practices
and to promoting the preservation of quality farmland in a way that
nourishes and regenerates the land & enhances the soil, air, water and
the overall environment.
We have integrated regenerative farming practices into our farms
including cover crops & management intensive grazing livestock in our
minimum/no-till orchards that enhance our interrelated holistic systems
to reduce water use and improve soil fertility by focusing on
nourishing soil biology and increasing biodiversity. We rely on no
synthetic inputs of any kind, and maintain a sustainable loop of
resources.
Hedgerows of more than 60 varieties of native plants, trees and
shrubs, have been planted to provide habitat for pollinators and other
beneficials across all farms. We have something in bloom every day of
the year.
Burroughs Family Farms is the marketing flagship for Organic/
Regenerative, grass-based, pasture-raised added value products produced
by the family enterprises including almonds, beef, chickens, dairy,
eggs, sheep, olive oil, walnuts, meat birds, & turkeys.
Farming/Ranching organically using Regenerative Practices and
management intensive grazing is the key to the future. To do this, we
are using the practices to build soil health: minimum or no-till the
soil, cover the soil with a diversity of plants for as long as
possible, use as many plant species as possible, integrate livestock
grazing when possible. We use compost and manure for our fertility.
Ecdysis Foundation and Cal State East Bay have conducted research
on our farm over the last 3 years. The research on our orchards has
shown that we have improved organic matter, increased water holding
capacity and infiltrations rates, significantly increased our carbon
sequestration, increased our insect biomass, increased soil microbial
activity, used less water and our yields are improving.
On December 31, 2020, we milked for the last time, at our
California Cloverleaf Farms Dairy. California Cloverleaf Farms Dairy
was closed because it was no longer financially viable. We have always
followed the National Organic Program (NOP) rules but could not survive
doing it. The organic dairy industry doesn't have a level playing field
because the NOP has not enforced the pasture rule uniformly across the
nation. Congress has directed the NOP to publish the final rule on
Origin of Livestock, which NOP has NOT done. Having the NOP make the
origin of livestock final rule will ensure all dairy farms are
operating under the same rules.

Our other family organic dairy, Full Circle Dairy, is headed down
the same
road . . . because the pay price is too low and the costs are too high
to be economically viable. There is too much supply of cheap organic
milk which lowers the pay price because the NOP has not done its job.
This creates an unfair advantage for those operating under the intent
of the National Organic Program and the intent of the organic rules.
The following information is a short summary of our work and Congress's
directive to issue the final rule in 2020 and has still not been
addressed. In 2008, dairy producers across the country worked together
to establish meaningful and enforceable standards for dairy cows and
their progeny to be on productive grassland. Congressional Support
required USDA to issue a final rule by including the following language
in both the House and Senate passed Agriculture Appropriations bills
for Fiscal Year 2020:
``No later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this
Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall issue a final rule based on the
proposed rule entitled `National Organic Program; Origin of Livestock,'
published in the Federal Register on April 28, 2015 (80 Fed. Reg.
23455): Provided that the final rule shall incorporate public comments
submitted in response to the proposed rule.''
We are losing or have lost the very pioneers of the organic dairy
movement. We've lost those who were models of pasture-based organic
dairy production, working with the land, environment, and Mother Nature
to provide the organic milk consumers were looking for. The organic
dairy industry was built on the backs of producers following the true
intent of organic rules. To reduce organic dairy production to just
numbers, minimum guidelines, and methodologies takes away from those
working to keep integrity in the organic seal.

Despite these challenges and building on our successes outside of
organic dairy, during this past year of 2021 we have started our
transition out of each business partnership and will complete our
succession to the next generation and to our grandchildren in 2022.
We believe that our greatest legacy is passing down the farm, the
most precious of natural resources, to future generations, in better
condition than when we inherited the land.

Our nation's greatest resource is the family Rancher/Farmer who are
the stewards of our farmlands and grasslands and are devoted to
producing our country's food and fiber!

Investors from China are purchasing farm land with water in Merced
County. We were told by one realtor that when s/he asked ``why are you
interested in purchasing farm land''? The person replied we are
preparing for the future to ensure we have food to send to our people
of China. Our Country needs to have the same priority about food,
farming, ranching and the land that sustains our lives. How can we let
food grown on our farm land be exported to feed other countries?
Thank you for the opportunity to testify and share my experiences
about our family's farms. I hope and pray that you will take this
information in this hearing to support by ensuring the sustainability
of livestock systems so that more Farmers and Ranchers can get the
support they need to become more resilient and do our part to produce
food and fiber as climate change creates extreme weather challenges.
We are hosting a farm field day on February 17, 2022, we offer our
farm to educate farmers and our community about the practices we are
using. Please join us.

https://noregretsinitiative.activehosted.com/
index.php?action=social&
chash=e3796ae838835da0b6f6ea37bcf8bcb7.4596&s=10f642e253f53f2b31
2c02
17a0ddcf73
www.burroughsfamilyfarms.com
https://www.facebook.com/BurroughsFamilyFarms
Ecdysis Foundation: https://f1000research.com/articles/10-115
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fsufs.2021.664359/full
https://peerj.com/articles/4428/
www.ecdysis.bio
Center for Regenerative Agriculture and Resilient Systems--
CSU, Chico (csuchico.edu)

We are committed to Organic/Regenerative family farming practices
and to promoting the preservation of quality farmland in a way that
nourishes and regenerates the land & enhances the soil, air, water and
the overall environment.

Rosie Burroughs
Attachment
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[https://calclimateag.org/leopold-conservation-award-recognizes-
burroughs-family-of-farms/]
Leopold Conservation Award Recognizes Burroughs Family of Farms
Posted on Tuesday, December 8, 2020 by Renata Brillinger

We are so pleased to learn that Ward and Rosie Burroughs, long-time
farmer advisors to CalCAN, are this year's recipients of the
prestigious California Leopold Conservation Award.\1\ They are living
examples of the Leopold Award criteria: responsible management of
natural resources, economic sustainability, land health, leadership,
innovation and outreach.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://sandcountyfoundation.org/our-work/leopold-conservation-
award-program/state/california.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Ward, Rosie and their children are the owners of Burroughs Family
of Farms,\2\ a diversified, regenerative farming operation in
California's Central Valley, near Denair. They produce organic almonds,
pasture-based dairy, beef, pastured chickens and free-range eggs, and
olives. Ward and Rosie's children are the fourth generation of farmers,
and everything the family does assures the long-term economic,
environmental and social sustainability of the businesses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.burroughsfamilyfarms.com/.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Over the past 18 years, the Burroughs have transitioned all of
their operations to meet certified organic standards. Their farms rely
on no synthetic inputs of any kind, and they use a regenerative
approach that puts an emphasis on nourishing soil biology at the center
of their management decisions rather than depleting the soils or
relying on chemical fertilizers. Years ago, Ward told me that he
considers himself ``a grass farmer'' rather than a dairy farmer,
focused on the health of the soil and forage that is the key to
productivity and ecosystem health.
The Burroughs are continually innovating with the integration of a
number of practices including:

Combining cover crops and compost application--They produce
4,000 tons of compost each year from organic waste products
such as cow manure, orchard trimmings, paper and cardboard.
They also shred their almond tree prunings and leave them on
the orchard floor to decompose and add organic matter to feeds
soil biology.

Silvopasture--The Burroughs rotate cattle and chickens
through their orchards at specific times of the year to graze
down the cover crops (rather than chemical burning or mowing).
This adds manure directly to the soil to increase its soil
carbon content and minimizes methane emissions associated with
manure lagoons. It also increases forage quality and quantity
and helps them achieve as much as 80 percent time on pasture
annually which is virtually unheard of in the arid climate of
the Central Valley.

No-till--Due to the combination of cover crops, compost and
animal grazing, the Burroughs no longer till their orchard
floors because the soil has such healthy structure. This
protects their soil structure and keeps more carbon in the
ground.

Compost tea--They inject a liquid extract of compost into
irrigation lines to increase nutrient cycling, root growth, and
soil porosity improves water retention and aquifer recharge.

Drip irrigation--They installed drip irrigation long before
it was common practice in orchards, thereby conserving water
and energy to pump it.

Hedgerows--They use a combination of native flowing plants,
shrubs and fruit trees throughout their orchards and along
field and road borders, providing habitat for native
pollinators, beneficial insects, insects and birds and storing
carbon.

Whole almond orchard recycling--When their orchards are
replanted, the old trees are chipped, spread, and incorporated
back into the soil to promote higher levels of organic matter,
increase soil fertility, and increase soil water retention.

Renewable energy--Eighty percent of the farm's almond and
pasture irrigation (3,173 irrigated acres) is supplied with
solar energy from 19 solar tracking sites.

Over time, the integrated combination of practices they have
developed has had synergistic benefits to their system and to their
community. Their farm sequesters carbon in soil and woody plants,
replenishes the groundwater, improves air and water quality, creates a
healthy environment for their animals and workers, and increases
biodiversity and wildlife habitat.
The leadership demonstrated by Ward and Rosie and their children
extends beyond the farm. They have contributed in many ways to the
larger community in the Merced area and in the farming community. Among
their many volunteer roles, Rosie and Ward as has served as CalCAN
farmer advisors since our founding almost 13 years ago. They received a
Leadership Award \3\ at our sixth Climate and Agriculture Summit in
2019. Our work is more powerful and impactful for their involvement,
and we are so pleased to see their work recognized with the Leopold
Award.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://calclimateag.org/agricultural-climate-leaders-
recognized-at-calcan-summit/.

See here to read the announcement of the Award.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://sandcountyfoundation.org/our-work/leopold-conservation-
award-program/ward-rosie-burroughs-burroughs-family-of-farms.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The Chairman. Ms. Burroughs, we thank you very much for
your first-time experience, and trying to ensure that your
farming operations are as sustainable as they possibly can be,
and the experiences you have had to deal with, you and your
family, in making those changes and adjustments, and we look
forward to having an opportunity to question you on your
February 17 farm day. Please get my office the information. I
don't know that it is possible that I could be there, but if it
is, I would certainly like to see it firsthand.
Our next witness is an individual who I have known for a
number of years, who farms in my area. His family has been
active in dairy in California for generations. He operates
Medeiros Holsteins in California. He is also a member of the
Executive Committee of the National Milk Producers Federation,
and he is now working on Melvin, the third or fourth generation
in your family to maintain that involvement, but you don't farm
the way your father did, nor your grandfather, nor do I, and we
look forward your comments. Please begin.

STATEMENT OF MELVIN MEDEIROS, PRODUCER, MEDEIROS HOLSTEINS;
CHAIRMAN, WESTERN AREA COUNCIL, DAIRY FARMERS OF AMERICA;
MEMBER, EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE, NATIONAL MILK PRODUCERS
FEDERATION, LATON, CA

Mr. Medeiros. Well, thank you. Thank you, Jim. Good
morning, Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of
the Subcommittee, and I thank you for the opportunity to
testify today, and share the dairy industry's perspective on
sustainability. My name is Melvin Medeiros. I have been
dairying since 1981 on a farm started by my parents. Today my
wife Kelly and I own and operate Medeiros Holsteins, along with
Medeiros Dairy, a 1,600 cow dairy operation in California,
along with our two sons. I am honored to serve as Chairman of
the Western Area Council for Dairy Farmers of America, the
leading dairy co-op and milk marketing cooperative in the U.S.
I am testifying before you today on behalf of the National Milk
Producers Federation, of which DFA is a member cooperative, and
I serve on the Executive Committee.
U.S. dairy farmers are environmental stewards. We tend with
great care to our land and water, and ensure future generations
can carry on the important work of feeding the U.S. and the
world. We value proactive--about sustainability, and have
adopted agricultural practices and technologies that have
evolved over time. As a testament to the dairy's endeavors, by
2007 producing a gallon of milk used 90 percent less land, 65
percent less water, with 63 percent smaller carbon footprint
than in 1944. More recently, research shows that producing a
gallon of milk in 2017 requires 30 percent less water, 21
percent less land, 19 percent smaller carbon footprint, and 20
percent less manure than by 2007.
As a farmer-owned cooperative, DFA is always working to
identify new, innovative ways to conserve resources, and is
committed to working to a 30 percent reduction in the emissions
across the cooperative by 2030 from a 2018 baseline. More
broadly, in 2009, U.S. dairy industry launched the National
Dairy FARM Program to demonstrate that the U.S. dairy farmers
are committed to producing the best milk with integrity. The
FARM Program's environmental stewards pillar provides a
comprehensive climate, greenhouse emissions, and energy use on
dairy farms, with resources for farmers to measure and improve
their footprint. Today, organizations representing 99 percent
of the U.S. milk volume participate in the FARM Program
overall, with almost 80 percent of the milk volume
participating in the environmental stewards portion.
Farmers are always striving to produce more with less,
focused on continuous improvements in that area, as part of the
commitment to provide the world with responsibly produced dairy
foods. In 2020 the U.S. dairy sector set aggressive new
environmental sustainability goals to become greenhouse neutral
or better, improve water quality, optimize water usage by 2050.
My cooperative is determined to do its part in the dairy
industry and achieve these goals. To do this, the dairy
industry will need to identify, technological and other
advancements to accelerate improvements. National Milk, and the
industry's partners, have mobilized through net-zero initiative
to do just that.
However, sustained low milk prices, high input costs have
created many challenges for recent dairy producers. Dairy
farmers are eager for policy improvements that will unlock
additional revenue streams, and make advanced environmental
protection a source of economic strength for all dairy farms.
To help U.S. dairy farmers enhance their ongoing
sustainability, leadership, the dairy industry needs your
support. National Milk recommends two broad areas to improving
policy. First, USDA conservation programs must be instrumental
in achieving sustainable goals, but we urge better tailoring of
programs towards manure and feed management. Enteric emissions
account for roughly \1/3\ of dairy farm greenhouse gases. For
the footprint--key area of opportunity for progress, and we
support increasing program funding to keep and achieve these
goals, and are grateful to the Members of both parties that
have put forth legislation to bolster conservation programs.
Second, National Milk supports policies that spur and adopt
innovative technology and practices. Dairy farmers see great
value in adopting anaerobic digesters, and to reduce emissions,
but lack sustainable markets for this energy produced on a
farm, and it has limited their economical viability. Similar,
new animal feed additives significantly reduce enteric
emissions, but current U.S. policy hinders timely approval, and
puts U.S. farmers at a competitive disadvantage. To solve these
problems, we support creating an incentive tax credit to cover
up-front costs of digesters, and we urge expediting FDA's
approval of safe, effective animal feed ingredients.
Before I close, I want to emphasize how critical
sustainability is to remaining a competitive global supplier.
More than 16 percent of U.S. milk production is exported. The
U.S. dairy sector is well positioned to meet environmental
demands of consumers worldwide. Our farmers have the lowest
greenhouse gas footprint per gallon of milk compared to other
suppliers around the world, but our competitors are
continuously making investments, working on positioning their
way of farming as more sustainable. This type of support I have
outlined today is needed to help us counter that. In
conclusion, I want to note that the agricultural industry has
been focused on sustainability for many generations. While we
might have talked different, our goals have always been to
leave the resources to our farms better for our children. Your
participation can help fill these policy gaps, and make even
further strides. So thank you for the opportunity to represent
the dairy industry, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Medeiros follows:]

Prepared Statement of Melvin Medeiros, Producer, Medeiros Holsteins;
Chairman, Western Area Council, Dairy Farmers of America; Member,
Executive Committee, National Milk Producers Federation, Laton, CA
Good morning, Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members
of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today to share the dairy industry's perspective on sustainability.
Introduction
My name is Melvin Medeiros. I have been dairying since 1981 on a
farm started by my father. Today, my wife, Kelley, and I own and
operate Medeiros Holsteins, a 1,600 cow dairy operation in California.
I am proud that all three of our sons work with us; our two oldest own
their own dairies as well, while our youngest manages the 550 acres of
double-crop wheat and corn required to supply our silage needs.
I am honored to serve as Chairman of Dairy Farmers of America
(DFA)'s Western Area Council. DFA is the nation's leading diversified
milk marketing cooperative, owned and governed by 12,500 dairy farmers
across the country. DFA's family farmers are invested in 84 processing
facilities that produce a wide range of dairy products, including fluid
milk, cheese, butter, ice cream, and dairy ingredients. The DFA Western
Area includes nearly 225 farmers residing in California, Nevada, and
Western Arizona as well as eight manufacturing plants.
I am testifying before you today on behalf of the National Milk
Producers Federation (NMPF), of which DFA is a member cooperative and
where I serve on its Executive Committee. NMPF develops and carries out
policies that advance the well-being of dairy producers like me and the
cooperatives we own. NMPF's member cooperatives produce the majority of
the U.S. milk supply, making NMPF the voice of tens of thousands of
dairy producers on national issues. Sustainability is one of our
priority issues and has only become ever more important in recent
years.
Dairy Sustainability Leadership
U.S. dairy farmers are environmental stewards. We tend with great
care to our land and water to improve the resources on our farms and
ensure future generations can carry on our important work of feeding
the nation and the world. Dairy farmers have dealt with changing
weather patterns for years, and we have been addressing changing
temperature and moisture challenges for generations. We value a
proactive approach to sustainability, which can take many different
forms, and we have adapted as agricultural practices and technologies
have evolved and improved over time. Farmers place a high importance on
land and water stewardship, and our family farm-owners continue to
perfect these practices through sustainable innovations on the farm.
As a testament to dairy's endeavors, in 2007, producing a gallon of
milk used 90 percent less land and 65 percent less water, with a 63
percent smaller carbon footprint than in 1944. More recently, research
shows that producing a gallon of milk in 2017 required 30% less water,
21% less land, had a 19% smaller carbon footprint, and produced 20%
less manure than it did in 2007.
As a farmer-owned and farmer-governed cooperative, DFA works to
identify new, innovative ways to conserve resources, reduce waste, and
work efficiently--on farms, in plants, and on the road. Our own
science-based target commits to working toward a 30 percent reduction
in absolute emissions across the cooperative by 2030. Nearly all DFA
member-owners who grow crops implement a soil management plan to
maintain or improve soil health, while 82% practice crop rotation and
63% plant cover crops. Good soil health supports water conservation,
efficient use of nutrients, and creates a more stable structure for
plant roots. In 2009, our cooperative created DFA Energy, a company to
help our producers navigate the emerging and complex field of on-farm
energy conservation and renewable energy production by connecting them
with credible partners and available funding opportunities to offset
some of the cost of expensive, but important, technologies.
More broadly, in 2009, the U.S. dairy industry launched the
National Dairy FARM Program: Farmers Assuring Responsible
Management
TM
``to show customers and consumers that the
dairy industry is taking the very best care of cows and the
environment, producing safe, wholesome milk and adhering to the highest
standards of workforce development.'' Created by NMPF in partnership
with Dairy Management Inc., the FARM Program helps ensure the success
of the entire industry by demonstrating that U.S. dairy farmers are
committed to producing the best milk with integrity. The FARM Program's
Environmental Stewardship pillar provides a comprehensive estimate of
greenhouse gas emissions and energy use on dairy farms with a suite of
tools and resources for farmers to measure and improve their footprint.
Today, organizations representing 99% of U.S. milk volume participate
in the FARM Program overall, with almost 80% by milk volume
participating in the Environmental Stewardship portion.
Farmers are always striving to produce more with less and are
focused on continuous improvement in this area. As part of its
collective commitment to provide the world responsibly produced dairy
foods that nourish people, strengthen communities, and foster a
sustainable future, in 2020, the U.S. dairy industry set aggressive
environmental sustainability goals to become greenhouse gas-neutral or
better, improve water quality, and optimize water usage by 2050. My
cooperative is determined to do its part to help the dairy industry
achieve these goals.
To reach these 2050 goals, the U.S. dairy industry will need to
identify technological and other advancements that can accelerate
productivity improvements, enabling nimble adaptation and focusing on
technology and practices that can be scaled for maximum impact. To meet
these challenges, NMPF and its industry partners have created and
mobilized through the U.S. Dairy Net Zero Initiative (NZI), a
partnership of the U.S. dairy community that seeks to unite the assets
and expertise of trade, professional, and industry organizations. This
collaborative effort creates a path and growing portfolio of strategies
and programs to achieve greenhouse gas neutrality, as well as
significant improvements in water quality and optimization of water
use, through adoption of economically viable technologies and
practices.
As part of the groundwork needed to launch this initiative, the
dairy industry has worked to develop scientific models to quantify the
economic and environmental benefits associated with certain dairy farm
technologies and practices, and various technologies have been
catalogued and evaluated based on their effectiveness, resilience, and
business prospects. The industry, within this initiative, will explore
the impact of multiple technologies and management practices that have
an ability to aid in reducing dairy's greenhouse gas footprint and
water quality impact while optimizing water use. This effort will
identify which technologies and practices work well for different types
and sizes of operations, topography of land, the region's climates, and
the unique needs of a farm's soil and water.
Policy Recommendations
Sustained low milk prices and high input costs have created many
challenges in recent years for dairy producers, exacerbated by the
significant damages wrought by the COVID-19 pandemic. Dairy farmers are
eager for policy improvements that would unlock additional revenue
streams and make advanced environmental protection a source of economic
strength for all dairy farms. Currently, practices or technologies that
yield real sustainability benefits while also providing an alternative
revenue stream are gaining adoption in the dairy sector, but economic
challenges present obstacles to more widespread adoption.
To help U.S. dairy farmers enhance their ongoing environmental
leadership, NMPF recommends several priority areas of policy focus.
First, under this Committee's purview, USDA conservation programs will
be instrumental to attaining the dairy industry's sustainability
improvements over the next 30 years. NMPF last summer led a dozen
agricultural and conservation organizations in urging Congress to
substantially increase funding for conservation programs, emphasizing
areas that can yield meaningful environmental and sustainability
benefits. We are grateful that Members in both parties have put forth
legislation to enhance conservation programs and believe that
additional program funding will position producers to expand their
efforts as this Committee begins the process of crafting the next farm
bill.
However, current USDA programs have neglected manure and feed
management, key areas of opportunity in dairy production. Enteric
methane emissions account for approximately \1/3\ of a dairy farm's
greenhouse gas footprint. Enhancements to conservation programs could
help dairy farmers adopt new approaches to feed management, such as
using feed additives and optimizing feed rations, to reduce enteric
methane emissions. USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service should
review its existing feed management practice standard and consider
establishing a transition program for switching feed rations to reduce
environmental impact. Dairy farmers thank this Committee for its work
in the 2018 Farm Bill to create on-farm Conservation Innovation Trials,
and we support increasing funding for the program with emphasis on
initiatives that can use feed and diet management to reduce enteric
methane emissions. NMPF is pleased that this proposal is moving forward
in Congress as one of many conservation program enhancements that will
help dairy farmers advance their sustainability leadership.
NMPF also supports policies that create or enhance mechanisms to
spur adoption of innovative technologies and practices. For example,
dairy farmers see great value in adopting anaerobic digesters to
maximize the value of manure and diversify farm income as well as
reduce odors and emissions. The first anaerobic digester was installed
on a dairy farm in the late 1970s, creating one of the first
opportunities for significant greenhouse gas mitigation of farms'
manure. Digesters capture emissions from manure and create energy in
the form of renewable natural gas, electricity, and heat. However,
significant financial challenges persist in this area. A lack of
sustainable, reliable markets for the energy produced on farm has
resulted in digesters not being economically viable for many farmers.
We support the bipartisan Agriculture Environmental Stewardship Act to
create an investment tax credit to cover 30% of the up-front capital
costs of installing digesters. This important bill also creates a
similar credit for nutrient recovery systems which can separate manure
nutrients, like nitrogen and phosphorus, and enable dairy farmers to
use these nutrients on and off the farm in a more sustainable manner.
This bipartisan measure has begun to move forward in both chambers of
Congress.
In this vein, we also support expediting approval of animal feed
additives with meaningful sustainability benefits for dairy. New
additives such as plant extracts, fats, oils, and other byproducts can
significantly improve digestibility and redirect production pathways of
enteric methane emissions, reducing enteric emissions by 30% or more
according to growing research. Current U.S. policy prevents timely
market availability, hindering widespread adoption of these products.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) reviews and approves animal food
ingredients to ensure their safety as they enter the marketplace, but
it uses the same approval process it uses for antibiotics and hormones,
even though feed additives move solely through the animal's digestive
tract. This regulatory barrier encourages feed additive makers to
bypass the U.S. on account of its market approval process in favor of
other countries that have a more streamlined process. That puts U.S.
dairy farmers at a disadvantage with our global competitors. NMPF
thanks the Members of this Committee for securing funding and language
in this year's pending budget bill to direct FDA to expedite approval
and market delivery of these important feed additives.
From an economic perspective, I also wish to emphasize how critical
sustainability is for us to remain a competitive supplier to global
markets, as more than 16% of U.S. milk production is exported overseas.
With significant global interest in sustainable food production, the
U.S. dairy sector is well positioned to meet the environmental demands
of both domestic and global consumers. We stack up strongly compared to
international competitors: Our farms have the lowest greenhouse gas
footprint per gallon of milk compared to other suppliers around the
world.\1\ But our competition is continually making investments and
working to position their way of farming and their products as more
sustainable. The type of support I outlined above is needed to counter
that. We appreciate the work the U.S. government has done to advance a
positive sustainability agenda during the U.N. Food Systems Summit
process and more recently during the COP26 conference. With climate and
sustainability issues commanding a greater focus worldwide than ever
before, we as an industry are eager to work with this Committee and its
other governmental partners to combat voices that are driving a harmful
narrative that does a major injustice to dairy's proactive, producer-
led efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FAO and GDP. 2018. Climate change and the global dairy cattle
sector--The role of the dairy sector in a low-carbon future. Rome. 36
pp. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA-3.0 IGO https://
dairysustainabilityframework.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Climate-
Change-and-the-Global-Dairy-Cattle-Sector.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
As I conclude, I want to note that the agriculture industry has
been focused on sustainability for generations. While we might have
talked about it differently before, our goal has always been to leave
the land better for our children. We raise our families and our herds
on the same land, drinking the same water and breathing the same air.
Caring for what we have is part of who we are.
Thank you for the opportunity to represent the dairy industry today
during this important conversation on sustainability. As I said in my
opening comments, sustainability can take many different forms, and
ensuring that farms of all types and sizes can participate in this area
is important as consumers here at home and abroad demand more. Your
partnership can help us to fill in the policy gaps that dairy farmers
need to make even further strides. If we work with one another, I am
confident in our success. I look forward to your questions.

The Chairman. Thank you, Melvin, and your family, and your
comments, and we look forward to the opportunity to ask you
some questions, and get some better insight on challenges you
are facing. Our next witness is the Brackett family, the
Brackett Ranches in Nevada and Idaho border, lands where they
graze cattle, and are private lands owned by the family, and
they also deal with Federal allotments owned by the Federal
Government, and they manage in a partnership with Federal
agencies. They have had a long history, and been involved with
the National Cattlemen's Beef Board, and the Idaho Cattle
Association, and have a long track record of experience in
dealing with the challenges that the cattle industry faces. So
at this time I would like to recognize Kim Brackett for your
comments and testimony, and we look forward to hearing your
thoughts.

STATEMENT OF KIM BRACKETT, CO-OWNER, BRACKETT RANCHES, L.P.;
CHAIR, BEEF INDUSTRY LONG RANGE PLAN, HOMEDALE, ID; ON BEHALF
OF NATIONAL CATTLEMEN'S BEEF ASSOCIATION

Ms. Brackett. Thank you, Chairman Costa, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee for inviting me to
testify today. My name is Kim Brackett, and together with my
husband Ira, and our four children, we manage Brackett Ranches,
which is a cow/calf operation on the Idaho and Nevada border.
The lands where we graze our cattle are both private lands,
which are owned by my family, and Federal allotments owned by
the Federal Government, and managed in partnership with Federal
agencies. As Chairman of the beef industry's 5 Year Strategic
Plan Task Force, I can tell you that we have a key industry
objective to intensify efforts in reaching, improving, and
communicating U.S. beef industry sustainability, so I am very
happy to be here today to talk with you about that work.
Collectively, cattle producers in the United States manage
livestock on approximately 815 million acres. That is nearly
\1/3\ of our nation's continental land mass. In addition to
providing grass for our cattle, pastures and rangeland provide
important ecosystem services, sequestering carbon in the soil,
naturally filtering water, and improving wildlife and habitat.
The beef cattle industry has a great sustainability story. This
is proven by generations of successful production. According to
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, direct emissions from
beef cattle only represent two percent of all greenhouse gas
emissions. Not only are beef cattle not significant
contributors to the full emissions profile, the work cattle and
cattle producers do helps to avoid other kinds of emissions,
like those from catastrophic wildfire, and it makes lands more
drought resilient.
Cattle ranchers are the original protectors of
biodiversity. My family and our ranch are no exception. One of
the examples of this is that, for us to get drinking water to
our cattle in our sagebrush country, we have an underground
pipeline system that starts at the head of the Jarbidge
Mountains, and runs 70 miles down that mountain, across the
Bruneau Desert. Our pipeline system is a prime example of the
value of a holistic, systems-based approach to managing our
ranch. That pipeline provides water for our cattle, but it also
brings drinking water to wildlife and birds on our rangelands.
By maintaining and expanding this pipeline system over the
years, we have increased wildlife and bird habitat, thus
increasing biodiversity.
Another example of a sustainable practice on our ranch is
targeted grazing. When cattle are allowed to graze at the right
time of year, it will reduce seed production, and reduce long-
term spread of invasive annual grasses that can be fuel for
massive wildfires. Preserving these large, unbroken landscapes
is critical for environmental health. When ranchers are
regulated out of business, these vast lands are often divided
and sold in small acre parcels, greatly impeding wildlife
migratory habitats.
Our industry came together last year to develop long-term
sustainability goals. I would like to share those with you. Our
industry has committed to: first, demonstrate the climate
neutrality of U.S. cattle production by 2040; second, create
and enhance opportunities that result in a quantifiable
increase in producer profitability and economic sustainability;
third, enhance trust in cattle producers as responsible
stewards of their animals and resources by expanding
educational opportunities in animal care and handling programs
to further improve animal well-being; and fourth, to
continuously improve our industry's workforce safety and well-
being. Our goals embrace the idea that sustainability is a
three-legged stool. Cattle operations, and our industry, must
be environmentally sensitive, economically viable, and socially
responsible to stay in business.
Every day our industry loses vital grasslands to
development for other non-agricultural uses. It is of the
utmost importance that we preserve our legacy carbon sinks
across this country, especially our grazing lands. By creating
private market value for ecosystem services, like wildlife
habitat, water filtration, and carbon sequestration, we can
ensure that grassland managers are being compensated for all
the services they provide, food production and conservation.
Congress also has an important role to play here, by ensuring
that ranches can effectively be passed to the next generation,
and by working to protect cattle producers from unaffordable
regulatory burden. Combating regulatory burden is necessary to
maximize our industry's potential to reduce emissions. Our
family remains committed to environmentally, economically, and
socially sustainable for generations to come. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Brackett follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kim Brackett, Co-Owner, Brackett Ranches, L.P.;
Chair, Beef Industry Long Range Plan, Homedale, ID; on Behalf of
National Cattlemen's Beef Association
Thank you, Chairman Costa and Ranking Member Johnson, for inviting
me to testify today. My name is Kim Brackett. Together with my husband,
Ira, and four kids, we manage Brackett Ranches, a cow/calf operation on
the Nevada and Idaho border. The lands where we graze our cattle are
both our private lands, owned by my family, and Federal allotments,
owned by the Federal Government and managed in partnership with the
Federal agencies. By ranching on public lands, we invest our time,
money, and energy in the lands and waters that are enjoyed by millions
of people each year. Our work helps conserve water and plants, control
fires, and protect wildlife habitat. I'm quite involved in the beef
cattle industry, having served as the chair of the Idaho Beef Council,
then the National Cattlemen's Beef Board, and I'm currently the
President-Elect of the Idaho Cattle Association. I was also the chair
of the National Beef Quality Assurance Advisory Board and the Beef
Industry Long Range Plan Task Force, where I led the development of the
beef industry's 5 year strategic plan. Outside of the Beef industry, I
serve on the boards of Colorado State University's AgNext and the
Intermountain West Joint Venture. Our industry's 5 year plan includes a
key industry objective to ``intensify efforts in researching,
improving, and communicating U.S. beef industry sustainability'' and
I'm happy to be here today to talk with you about that work.
The beef cattle industry has a great sustainability story that is
rooted in science and proven by generations of successful production.
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, direct emissions
from beef cattle only represent 2% of all greenhouse gas emissions in
the country. A recent study published by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture found that emissions from cattle ``were not a significant
contributor to long-term global warming.'' Not only are beef cattle not
significant contributors to the full emissions profile, the work cattle
and cattle producers do helps to avoid other kinds of emissions, like
those from catastrophic wildfire, and makes lands more resilient
nationwide.
Collectively, cattle producers in the United States manage
livestock on approximately 815 million acres, nearly \1/3\ of our
nation's continental land mass. In addition to providing grass for our
cattle, pastures and rangeland provide important ecosystem services--
sequestering carbon in the soil, naturally filtering water, and
improving wildlife and habitat. Since our livelihood is made on the
land, through the utilization of our natural resources, being good
stewards of the land not only makes good environmental sense, it is
fundamental for our industry to remain economically viable. The
positive role of cattle and beef in a healthy, sustainable food system
came to light when the cattle industry came together to develop long-
term sustainability goals this past year. But before I get to the
goals, I want to tell you about my family ranch.
Taking care of the land is a top priority for our ranch, as well as
most ranches in the United States. To get drinking water to the cattle
in this sagebrush country, we have an underground pipeline system that
starts in the Jarbidge mountains and runs 70 miles down the mountain
and across the desert country. There are numerous spurs off that main
pipeline that carry water to various troughs in different fields and
allotments. Not only did this system provide water for the livestock in
the area, but it increased wildlife habitat as well. Water is the
lifeblood of western ecosystems that are often dry and desolate, so
wildlife flock to water sources. Antelope, deer and even elk now reside
on our ranch due to the water troughs. In addition, each trough has a
bird ladder built from expanded metal that allows birds and small
animals to access the water at any level. The pipeline system is a
prime example of the value of a holistic, systems-based approach to
managing our ranch. Introducing the water and using cattle grazing, we
were able to revitalize the native grasses that for so long had
suffered due to drought and non-management. On our ranch, we use
grazing as a tool to address invasive growth, and encourage native
forages. Invasive grasses often siphon water resources, reducing
overall grassland health. Grazing at the right time of the year will
reduce flower and seed production and reduce long-term spread. Once we
brought back the native grasses in that area, the wildlife soon
followed. In other words, our work directly increased the biodiversity
of these public lands.
Cattle ranchers are the original protectors of biodiversity. All
wildlife species, including imperiled species, like the lesser prairie
chicken, or even a predator species, such as wolves, have seen their
populations improve due to the careful stewardship of cattle ranchers.
We frequently see upland game birds like chukars, mountain quail, and
sage grouse, plus a tremendous diversity of songbirds on our ranch.
Growing bird populations on a ranch are reflective of a growing
diversity of grass, forages, and insects. They are all species that
thrive in healthy soils. Essentially, an expansion in bird populations
reflects an ecosystem that is improving overall soil health.
Preserving these large, unbroken landscapes is critical to habitat
conservation and the ultimate success of local wildlife. When ranchers
are regulated out of business, these vast lands are often divided and
sold in small-acre parcels, greatly impeding the migratory habits of
these species. Put simply, wildlife depends on the work that we do to
maintain water sources, foster robust forage production, and keep
landscapes intact.
Beyond improving the land, our ranch is an example of how cattle
ranchers use various technologies to help the animals to increase
efficiency, thereby mitigating environmental impact. This increase in
efficiency and quality of cattle has always been a part of the
rancher's toolkit. Through genetic testing, we determine which of our
bulls is superior in the traits that enhance meat quality, feed
efficiency, and growth--as well as mothering ability, docility,
fertility and calving ease. Efficiency traits directly affect beef
sustainability; an animal who will reach harvest faster and yet produce
a high-quality meat product will impact the environment for a shorter
period of time. These technological enhancements are vital to
increasing efficiency and therefore environmental impact of the
nation's cowherd. This technology allows us to produce the same amount
of beef today that we were producing in the 1970's with 33 percent
fewer animals. Not only are we better at producing beef today with
fewer animals, we're also able to much better measure and target
specific environmental goals through careful grazing management.
Another way that our ranch, and many others in America, are
directly impacting the environment in a positive way is by ``up-
cycling''. Cattle are amazing in that they can eat grass, which is
inedible to humans, to create a high value, nutrient dense protein
product. Often, the conversation about western rangelands, particularly
those now managed as ``public land'' includes terms like ``marginal''.
Largely, these lands were the areas not homesteaded because there
wasn't a nearby water source, and crop production would be more
difficult than the more fertile lowland areas. Through selection of
livestock and use of their natural grazing skills, we're able to
provide a nutrient-rich protein product that gives back to the
environment at every turn.
Animal welfare is the foundation of every socially responsible
livestock operation. Ranchers continually work to improve the health
and well-being of their animals, using new technologies and
innovations. In terms of sustainability and climate, antibiotics are an
important technology that maintains healthy cattle which allows the
animals to utilize feed and water resources efficiently. A sick animal
takes longer to gain weight and/or reproduce and that results in larger
environmental footprint. Judicious and responsible use of antibiotics
ensures that we will be able to protect animal health and raise animals
in the most environmentally friendly way we can.
But when we talk about social sustainability, animal welfare is
only the beginning. Farmers and ranchers are not just business owners,
but also community members. Our ranch works with Field of Dreams--a
nonprofit that allows us to host veterans for elk hunts. As
conservators of America's grasslands, we look for every opportunity to
make sure that our community gets to enjoy all the land provides. We
strive to be good environmental stewards, good business-owners, and
good neighbors.
Now about those goals! Our industry came together last year to
develop first-of-their-kind long-term sustainability goals. These goals
required many months of development through the engagement of
grassroots producers. The final product is impressive: a commitment to
be at the table as a solution and work together to improve upon what we
do. Without further ado, the cattle industry has committed to:

Demonstrate the climate neutrality of U.S. cattle production
by 2040.

Create and enhance opportunities that result in a
quantifiable increase in producer profitability and economic
sustainability by 2025.

Enhance trust in cattle producers as responsible stewards of
their animals and resources by expanding educational
opportunities in animal care and handling programs to further
improve animal well-being.

Continuously improve our industry's workforce safety and
well-being.

Our goals embrace the idea that sustainability is a three-legged
stool: cattle operations, and our industry, must be environmentally
sensitive, economically viable, and socially responsible in order to
stay in business. And these three legs rely on each other; a ranch that
is regulated out of business is not only economically unsustainable,
but is no longer able to provide vital ecosystem services and help
support rural ecosystems. An operation that does not adequately care
for or handle their animals will likely see less return on their
investment. While all of the goals are vital to ensure the longevity of
our industry, I'd like to dive into our industry's goal to demonstrate
climate neutrality.
In order to demonstrate the climate neutrality of U.S. cattle
production by 2040, we must ensure that the United States and our
global partners are using the most accurate and up-to-date science
related to emissions intensity measurement. GWP*, developed by a team
of researchers at Oxford University, seeks to provide an accurate
accounting of emissions' impact on long-term global warming, giving
policymakers a more accurate view of how to best curb the generational
impacts of GHG emissions on the climate.
The U.S. cattle industry boasts the lowest emissions intensity per
pound of beef of any beef-producing country in the world, and have done
so since 1996. This is largely due to our technological innovation,
improved herd genetics, and enhanced grazing management practices. This
work has reduced our emissions per pound of beef by more than 40% since
1960. But our industry didn't become the global leader in sustainable
beef production by resting on its laurels--we know that continuous
improvement is an integral part of our industry's long-term success.
We're excited about innovations related to feed additives that will
reduce methane emissions from enteric fermentation, and new manure
management technology. The Federal Government has an important role to
play; by ensuring that these technologies are not caught in a world of
regulatory red tape, and funding important research, Congress and the
Administration can ensure that emissions-reducing technology is made
accessible, sooner.
But we know that technological innovation is only half of the
equation. Every day, our industry loses vital grasslands to development
or other uses. Of the utmost importance is preserving legacy carbon
sinks across our country--especially grazing lands. By creating private
market value for ecosystem services like wildlife habitat, water
filtration, and carbon sequestration, we can ensure that grassland
managers are being compensated for all the services they provide--food
production and conservation. Congress also has an important role to
play here--by ensuring that ranches can effectively be passed to the
next generation, and by working to protect cattle producers from
unaffordable regulatory burden. Regulatory burden can come in a variety
of ways--frivolous petitions to create new regulations, resource-
intensive approval processes, and overly broad rules applied to the
day-to-day activities of agricultural producers. Combating all sources
of regulatory burden is necessary to maximize our industry's potential
to reduce emissions.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony today. The U.S.
cattle industry is proud of its history as stewards of our nation's
resources. The industry takes very seriously its obligation to protect
the environment while providing the nation with a safe and affordable
beef supply. Cattle producers are America's original conservationists,
and we work hard every day to ensure that we can pass our operations on
to the next generation. Our family, and America's cattle producers, are
committed to remaining environmentally, economically, and socially
sustainable for generations to come.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Brackett, for your
comments, and I think your illustration of how you have been
able to manage your own family's livestock operation in a
responsible way, and certainly your recommendations are well
taken. I failed to note, for Members of the Subcommittee and
for our witnesses, that we are being televised this morning,
today, on C-SPAN, so you can certainly let your constituents
back home, and those family members can see this being
televised live throughout the country.
Our next witness we have is an individual who, in part,
closes the loop in our efforts to talk about the entirety of
how we produce food, as I said, throughout the country on a
regional basis that ultimately gets to America's dinner table.
And clearly, as I said, food is a national security issue, and
I get frustrated on occasion that sometimes too many Americans
think that their food comes from their grocery store or their
favorite restaurant. Not that that is bad, we obviously get our
food from multiple sources, but it is important that we know,
ultimately, the challenge of producing that food to our
family's dinner table, or to our favorite restaurant.
Which I think is a good lead-on for our next witness, Mr.
Ernie Meier. He chairs the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable
Poultry and Eggs, and Director of Quality Systems for U.S.
Supply Chain, part of McDonald's U.S.A. Chicago operations, and
a person that I think can provide some meaningful testimony. We
all deserve a break today, and, Mr. Meier, if you can provide
us with that effort, we certainly would like to get your
insight on kind of where you see the challenges making that
food available to the American consumer. You may begin your
testimony.

STATEMENT OF ERNIE MEIER, CHAIR, U.S. ROUNDTABLE FOR
SUSTAINABLE POULTRY & EGGS; DIRECTOR, QUALITY
SYSTEMS, U.S. SUPPLY CHAIN, McDONALD'S USA, CHICAGO, IL

Mr. Meier. Thank you, Chairman Costa. Hello, my name is
Ernie Meier, and I am the Director of Quality, U.S. Supply
Chain, for McDonald's U.S.A., and I am the current Chair of the
U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry and Eggs, which I will
refer to as the Roundtable, or U.S. RSPE, going forward. As a
multi-stakeholder, independent, and nonprofit organization, the
Roundtable was put together to represent the entire supply
chain of U.S. poultry and ag industries. We are grateful for
the invitation to speak with the Subcommittee, and share what
we have learned facing the same issues you are as a
Subcommittee, and as Representatives. We currently have full
time membership commitments from almost 100 farms,
organizations, and individuals, with national and international
business reach that include more than 500 individual experts.
They range across all disciplines of our business, from those
that directly care for birds, to companies like McDonald's,
offering poultry and egg products to our end customers. Each of
these individuals is plugged into the Roundtable, and working
on our shared goal, to continuously improve the sustainability
of U.S. poultry and egg supply chains.
We believe the most successful, sustainable tools are
created by both those implementing them, and those impacted by
them. Every member has an equal vote in our structure, to allow
optimal collaboration, and much of our work is open to public
input. We are driven by a diverse group, with varying resources
and sizes. For more than 3 years, farmers, integrators,
researchers, grocery stores, animal health companies,
environmental groups, equipment companies, and restaurant
chains have actively been working to build the connections and
tools we need to help meet modern food system challenges, and
continuously improve our sustainability.
Our approach to sustainability is pragmatic and holistic.
We work to identify solutions that are environmentally sound,
socially responsible, and economically viable. What is unique
about the Roundtable is that we are a community and catalyst
for progress. We are encouraging improvement by helping
facilitate connections, providing access to expertise, and
removing barriers to advancement, without ostracizing
stakeholders. The most effective sustainability strategies are
based on sound data and comprehensive, repeatable measurements.
The Roundtable, and its members, have invested their own
significant time and resources into developing the first ever
full supply chain sustainability framework for U.S. chicken,
turkey, and eggs, which I will refer to, going forward, as the
framework.
We completed the development process in December of last
year, and are full speed to create the software tool to collect
the data within this year, and there is a lot of data to
collect. The scale and importance of poultry in the diet of
Americans, and our world, continues to grow. Poultry is the
most consumed protein due to its accessibility to all cultures,
affordability in relation to its nutrition, and ease for at-
home cooking and quick service food. It is also a pillar for
the food and agricultural industry, generating more than $576
billion in annual economic impact, and $41.9 billion in taxes,
with more than two million workers employed by the poultry and
egg supply chains.
What shifted lately is the push up and down supply chain.
It is not enough for us to have fantastic sustainability
programs at McDonald's and at our suppliers. We must have
everything put together from the very beginning, from the feed
for the birds, and to the delivery of our food across the
country. McDonald's has taken learnings from the Roundtable,
and committed and invested millions of dollars in partnership
programs with its suppliers to increase the sustainability of
its poultry supply chain. One example of this is the roundtable
partnership, and the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry
and Eggs sustainability framework. Another project example is
the SMART Broiler project, focused on innovation in outcomes-
based poultry welfare assessments.
I share this with you today to offer some good news and
reassurance that the entire poultry supply chain is behind
proactively improving and communicating about their
sustainability, not resisting it. In poultry, we are not
divided by industry or discipline, but have found a way to work
together at a higher pre-competitive level to find the paths
that work for everyone. McDonald's is proud to be part of this
rapidly growing organization, and its projects, and to speak
with you about this work. From investing in renewable energy,
and partnering with organizations such as the Roundtable to
advance sustainability and regenerative agricultural practices,
we also want to help protect our planet for communities today,
and in the future.
Your effort to secure funding and direction that provide
resources to the number one most consumed protein in the United
States will be put to good use, and amplified by independent
efforts like those of the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable
Poultry and Eggs. I will do my best to entertain questions you
have. In specific areas I can speak to in my position and
experience, and I will take any questions that I cannot answer
back to the Roundtable, and tap into our community of experts
for more information. Thank you for your time and interest in
the U.S. poultry ag sector.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meier follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ernie Meier, Chair, U.S. Roundtable for
Sustainable Poultry & Eggs; Director, Quality Systems, U.S. Supply
Chain, McDonald's USA, Chicago, IL
Introduction
Hello, my name is Ernie Meier, and I am the director of quality,
U.S. supply chain, for McDonald's USA, and I am the current chair of
the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry & Eggs, which I will refer
to as ``the Roundtable'' or ``US-RSPE'' going forward.
As a multi-stakeholder, independent, and nonprofit organization,
the Roundtable was put together to represent the entire supply chains
of U.S. poultry and egg products. We are grateful for the invitation to
speak with this Subcommittee and share what we have learned facing the
same issues you are--as a Subcommittee and as Representatives.
We currently have full-time membership commitments from almost 100
farms, organizations and individuals with national and international
business reach that include more than 500 individual experts. They
range across all disciplines of our business from those that directly
care for birds to companies like McDonald's offering poultry and egg
products to our end customers. Each of these individuals is plugged
into the Roundtable and working on our shared goal to continuously
improve the sustainability of U.S. poultry and egg supply chains.

We believe the most successful sustainability tools are created by
both those implementing them and those impacted by them.

Every member has an equal vote in our structure to allow optimal
collaboration and much of our work is open to public input. We are
driven by a diverse group with varying resources and sizes.
For more than 3 years, farmers, integrators, researchers, grocery
stores, animal health companies, environmental groups, welfare
organizations, equipment companies and restaurant chains such as
McDonald's have been actively working to build the connections and
tools we need to help to meet modern food system challenges and
continuously improve our sustainability.
The U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry & Eggs Approach
Our approach to sustainability is pragmatic and holistic.
Sustainability, like food safety, is good for everyone in the industry
and our customers. We assess our impacts and benefits in relation to
our poultry, our planet and its people. We work to identify solutions
that are environmentally sound, socially responsible and economically
viable.
What's unique about the Roundtable is that we are a community and
catalyst for progress. We are encouraging improvement by helping
facilitate connections, provide access to expertise and remove barriers
to advancement without ostracizing stakeholders.
The most effective sustainability strategies are based on sound
data and comprehensive, repeatable measurement. The Roundtable and its
members have invested their own significant time and resources into
developing the first-ever full supply chain sustainability framework
for U.S. chicken, turkey and eggs (which I will refer to going forward
as ``the Framework''). We completed the development process in December
last year and are in full speed to create the software tool to collect
the data within this year.
Positive Outlook for Poultry & Egg Sectors
And there's a lot of data to collect. The scale and importance of
poultry in the diet of Americans and our world continues to grow.
Poultry is the most consumed protein due to its accessibility to all
cultures, affordability in relation to its nutrition and ease for at-
home cooking and quick service-food. It's also a pillar of the food and
agriculture industry, generating more than $576 billion in annual
economic impact and $41.9 billion in taxes with more than two million
workers employed by the poultry and egg supply chains.\1\ (That's a lot
of effort and people making your chicken nuggets and sandwiches
possible.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.uspoultry.org/economic-data/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When we say, ``billions served,'' we're not just talking about
burgers. We're talking about serving our communities, customers, crew,
farmers, franchisees and suppliers. What's shifted lately is the push
up and down the supply chain. It's not enough for us to have fantastic
sustainability programs at McDonald's and at our suppliers. We must
have everything put together from the very beginning, from the feed for
the birds and to delivery of our food across the country.
McDonald's has taken learnings from the Roundtable and committed
and invested millions of dollars in partnership projects with its
suppliers to increase the sustainability of its poultry supply chain.
One example of this is the Roundtable partnership and the US-RSPE
Sustainability Framework. Another type of project example is the SMART
Broiler project focused on innovation in outcomes-based poultry welfare
assessments. This work is currently underway with matching funding from
the Foundation for Food and Agriculture Research. It is an innovation-
focused effort using leading edge technology, and McDonald's is not
retaining intellectual property on this project, so that it can benefit
the sector as whole.
Conclusions
I share this with you today to offer some good news and reassurance
that the entire poultry supply chain is behind proactively improving
and communicating about their sustainability--not resisting it. In
poultry, we are not divided by industry or discipline but have found a
way to work together at a higher, precompetitive level to find paths
that work for everyone. Our farmers, equipment manufacturers and
veterinarians work side by side with environmental groups, welfare
organizations and consumer-facing businesses such as McDonald's and
food retailers to improve together. McDonald's is proud to be a part of
this rapidly growing organization and its projects and to speak with
you about this work. From minimizing how much packaging we use to
investing in renewable energy and partnering with organizations such as
the Roundtable to advance sustainable and regenerative agriculture
practices--we want to help protect our planet for communities today and
in the future.

Your efforts to secure funding and direction that provide resources
to the No. 1 most consumed protein in the United States will be put to
good use and amplified by independent efforts like those of the U.S.
Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry & Eggs.

I'll do my best now to entertain any questions you have. I have
specific areas I can speak to in my position and experience. I will
take any questions I cannot answer today back to the Roundtable and tap
into our community of experts for more information. Thank you for your
time and interest in the U.S. poultry and egg sector.
Additional specific issue inquiries are welcome and can be brought
to US-RSPE experts for consideration at any time by contacting US-RSPE
staff.
This testimony was respectfully submitted on February 1, 2022, by
Ernie Meier, director of quality, McDonald's USA, and chair of the U.S.
Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry & Eggs and prepared with support
from staff from the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry & Eggs.
More About the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Poultry & Eggs
Create, Collect and Communicate Objective Sustainability Data--
The US-RSPE Sustainability Framework
Logically, the first of what we call ``movable boulders'' in our
way was that lack of objective, comprehensive and consistently measured
sustainability data at the supply chain level. Temple Grandin says it
regarding welfare, but it applies to sustainability as well when she
says that you cannot improve what you aren't measuring. We need
measures. We are always looking for more support to expedite our work
from USDA and other means, but the Roundtable determined we could not
wait to start building.
Thankfully, we began this work before COVID-19 altered our way of
work and life, and we have been able to march ahead quickly and stay
connected virtually to complete the first-ever full supply chain
sustainability framework for U.S. chicken, turkey and eggs (which I
will refer to going forward as ``the Framework''). We wrapped the
development process in December last year and are in full speed to
create the software tool to collect the data within this year.
The US-RSPE Sustainability Framework is structured to address the
areas of greatest priority to the supply chain and its stakeholders
(Figure 1). They were selected and agreed upon by our multi-stakeholder
working group and informed by our public and private comment period
input processes. Within each of these areas are custom metrics that
will challenge users to measure and track indicators of sustainability
within that area with varying levels of complexity and advancement. In
essence, they form the roadmap for any part of the poultry and egg
supply chain to see how they contribute to the sustainability of the
whole and see where they need to be improving.
The results of this effort will yield an objective data set on the
current sustainability of U.S. chicken, turkey and eggs that will
better inform and expedite improvement projects such as technology
innovations, pilot projects, grants and more to ensure that poultry
products are sustainably produced and available--meeting the
expectations of U.S. citizens and our global customers while
strengthening the supply chain. We hope to have enough participation in
this voluntary project to release data as early as next year and hold
confidence in the accuracy of the data as sample of the whole sector.
Figure 1
US-RSPE Sustainability Framework
(Finalized December 2021)

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

The US-RSPE Sustainability Framework is a trade secret. Do
not circulate. Information contained in this document is
provided for informational purposes only.

2022 U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable
Poultry & Eggs
How It Works
Each entity (farmer, processor, integrator, breeder, retailer,
restaurant, etc.) will complete a series of 101 metrics across 15
priority areas with their individual and/or partner data. This will be
anonymized and aggregated into data on the supply chain level by
product (chicken, turkey or eggs) to provide an objective and holistic
look at the sustainability of poultry production. Our first year will
be to set that crucial baseline and give everyone working on solutions
a gut-check on if they're working in the right areas. From there, we
can expedite progress in sustainability by having a clear picture of
the true hot spots and success stories to calibrate our efforts for the
more efficient and impactful sustainability investments we can make.
Right now, it is overwhelming to look at the areas in need of
improvement as a never-ending to-do list instead of being able to
triage areas based on impact and opportunity for improvements.
Development Process
Far beyond anything tackled by this industry before, comments and
member engagement incorporated input from consumers, world-renowned
researchers, environmental groups, feed associations, farmer-led
organizations, welfare experts, social compliance and safety
organizations, restaurant chains, retailers and grocery stores and
poultry producers, processors, suppliers, breeders and everyone in
between in allied industries. The development process included two
recently completed public comment periods, which generated just under
200 comments, and eight full supply chain pilot assessments across
three industries (chicken, turkey and eggs) completed earlier this
year.
Securing Participation
US-RSPE has built the Framework to be scalable to meet users where
they are in their sustainability progress, offering options to measure
using multiple levels of metrics. The flexibility included in the US-
RSPE Framework allows for internal progress to be fueled in tandem with
supply-chain level efforts, showing each entity their strengths,
weaknesses and what they should be working on to improve and contribute
to a sustainably produced protein product.
Sidebar:
Public Excerpts From Supporting Partners
``What we're building here will be instantly useful. People
want to know how poultry and eggs reach their tables
sustainably. With the US-RSPE Framework metrics, we will be
able to answer the call to provide transparent reporting on the
sustainable processes in place and build better plans to
improve . . . In a time where numerous requests are being made
to complete surveys and sign onto commitments that have varying
approaches and intentions, I am most excited about the US-RSPE
Sustainability Framework. Because it was built specifically for
poultry and eggs, I can integrate it into our existing
sustainability easily. And I'm confident the metrics included
are important to our stakeholders.''
Lankford Ruffin, director of environmental affairs and sustainability
for Butterball.
``As protein demand continues to rise globally, it's more
critical than ever that poultry products are produced in a way
that conserves finite resources and considers impacts like land
use, water quality and waste produced. This collaboration is
essential to continue to raise the bar on advancing U.S.
leadership in sustainable protein.''
Courtney Hall, director of sustainable livestock systems, World
Wildlife Fund.
``The setup of the Framework allows all our growers to get a
more accurate picture of their own sustainability and challenge
them to improve significantly without overwhelming them with
unattainable goals. What a lot of these types of tools that are
out there now lack is scalability and an understanding of the
complexities of the poultry supply chain.''
John Starkey, President of the U.S. Poultry & Egg Association.
``We know our customers are increasingly interested in
knowing more about their food and where it comes from, which in
turn guides our company's broader commitments on food quality
and sourcing. Our work with the US-RSPE not only aligns with
our current supply chain standards, but also furthers our work
to advance environmentally and socially conscious practices for
the animals in our supply chain while allowing us to meet
customer expectations.''
Ernie Meier, director of quality for McDonald's USA.
``It's really exciting to be able to do this work and see all
parts of the supply chain, even those that your company doesn't
take part in and may be several steps up or downstream from
where you are, come together to create a clear picture of our
sustainability.''
Kristin Tupa, sustainability manager at Cargill Protein.
``We've built the one thing everyone needs but nobody has
yet. With the US-RSPE Framework metrics, organizations will be
able to provide transparent reporting on their sustainability
and build plans to improve.''
Ryan Bennett, executive director of US-RSPE.
``To secure a thriving food system for the future, the food
industry has an opportunity--and responsibility--to help
mitigate the impacts of climate change and find more
sustainable ways to feed people. I'm proud of McDonald's
commitment to accelerate action and achieve the widespread
adoption of more sustainable practices, even as we navigate the
impact of COVID-19. Drawing on the support of our Franchises,
suppliers and producers we can continue to build a more
sustainable and resilient industry.''
Francesca DeBiase, Executive Vice President, Chief Supply Chain
Officer, McDonald's Corporation.
More About McDonald's USA

As the global population grows, we need to feed more people
in increasingly sustainable ways. McDonald's can use our scale
to play an important role \2\ in that effort.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://corporate.mcdonalds.com/corpmcd/our-purpose-and-impact/
our-planet.html.

We believe that more of our food can be produced in a way
that not only protects the environment and contributes
positively to a thriving global food system but also helps
rehabilitate and enhance ecosystems around farms through better
soil health, improved water management and increased
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
biodiversity.

We've made it a global priority to champion sustainability
efforts across our supply chain, starting in the areas where we
believe we can have the largest impact.

We have identified seven priority impact areas for us to
address through our goals:

Climate change

Farmer livelihoods

Protecting water resources

Conserving forests

Reducing food and packaging waste

Respecting human rights

Promoting the health and welfare of animals

In 2018, we became the world's first restaurant company to
set a science-based target to reduce GHG emissions related to
McDonald's restaurants, as well as reduce emissions intensity
(per metric ton of food and packaging) across our supply chain.

McDonald's suppliers representing approximately 80% of our
spend are asked to report to CDP \3\ on Climate Change and
Forests efforts, including 100% of our globally managed beef,
chicken, dairy and cheese suppliers. We regularly update this
guidance and assess emerging risks across the supply chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.cdp.net/en.

Across the globe, our markets are in various phases of
strategy development, and in 2020 we launched a new internal
climate data and insights platform to support market-level
local climate strategies and track progress.
McDonald's Commitment To Sustainability Projects: Smart Broiler
In October of 2017, McDonald's committed to an outcome-based
chicken welfare strategy. This means McDonald's would establish
standardized Key Welfare Indicators (KWI's), KWIs are similar to a
business Key Performance Indicator and provide an overall indication of
the welfare environment a bird has had throughout its life.
Once established, McDonald's will collect KWIs across its global
chicken supply chain and aggregate the outcomes in a database format.
We then utilize that information to inform where improvement
opportunities exist, set improvement targets, then work with our
suppliers to continually improve. This allows the birds to tell us
where improvements are needed on an ongoing basis.
McDonald's understood that in order to gather KWI's in a
standardized and representative way we would need to utilize
technology. Unfortunately, that technology did not yet commercially
exist, especially to gather welfare data at the farm level.
To address this, McDonald's committed $2 million to identify and
advance technologies that measure and report chicken welfare at the
farm level, specifically focusing on monitoring bird leg health,
walking ability and activity & behavior.
McDonald's partnered with the Foundation for Food and Agriculture
Research (FFAR) to establish the SMART (Sensing, Monitoring, Reporting,
Technology) Broiler Program.\4\ FFAR Matched McDonald's $2 million and
together we launched a global, public request for proposals. We
understood that technologies that supported our goals existed in other
business sectors, they just hadn't yet been applied to animal welfare
or agriculture. To support these efforts The U.S. Poultry and Egg
Association, Amazon Web Services and Accenture joined as program
sponsors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://foundationfar.org/programs/smart-broiler/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The proposal process received submissions from all over the world
and six leading solutions were selected for the SMART Broiler Program.
SMART Broiler researchers are nearing the end of Phase 1 research
trials where they are working to demonstrate proof of concept of their
original proposals. Those that demonstrate the most future promise and
value will be refunded for Phase 2 trials to bring their technologies
closer to commercialization.

** McDonald's and FFAR are not retaining any intellectual
property through the program. The intent is to help evolve
solutions that assist in better understanding and improving
welfare.
More Resources on Poultry Sector Sustainability

The U.S. broiler industry recently conducted and update on a
full life cycle assessment.

Between 2010 and 2020 in the broiler chicken sector,
resources needed and output declined while productivity
increased. (LCA).\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://nccsite.wpengine.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/
Broiler-Production-System-LCA_2020-Update.pdf.

Intensity measures declined. For every kilogram of
live weight of broiler produced during the 10 year time
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
period:

Land use was reduced by 13%.

Water consumption was reduced 13%.

Greenhouse gas emissions were reduced 18%.

Fossil resources use reduced 22%.

Particulate forming emissions were reduced by 22%.

On-farm broiler mortality rates have reduced 72% since 1925
to 2020 (LCA).\5\

OSHA recordable injuries and illnesses reduced by 86% in the
last 25 years (1995-2020) (LCA).\5\

An estimated 65% of the cost of raising a chicken is the
feed (NCC).

The top export markets of U.S. chicken meat are Mexico,
China, Taiwan, Cuba and Canada (2020 USDA/Economic Research
Service).\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.uspoultry.org/economic-data/.

The top export markets of U.S. turkey meat are Mexico,
China, Canada, Guatemala and the Dominican Republic (2020 USDA/
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Economic Research Service).\6\

The combined value of production from broilers, eggs,
turkeys, and the value of sales from chickens in 2020 was $35.5
billion, down 11% from $40.0 billion in 2019. Of the combined
total, 61% was from broilers, 24% from eggs, 15% from turkeys,
and less than 1% from chickens (Source: USDA/NASS Poultry
Production and Value 2020 Summary).\6\ The 2022 estimates
indicate a recovery back to growth.

The prevalence of Salmonella in raw chicken is at an all-
time low. 88% of all broiler establishments are meeting and
exceeding the FSIS performance standard for Salmonella on
chicken parts like wings, breast and drumsticks (NCC).\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.chickencheck.in/sustainability/.

Over 95% of poultry litter is recycled and reused to
fertilize crops. Farmers collect and store litter to be used as
an organic fertilizer for crops, creating a closed nutrient
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
loop (NCC).

Today, about \1/3\ less water and \1/2\ the amount of feed
are required to produce a dozen eggs versus the water and feed
used in the 1960s.

Landmark 50 Year Study Documents U.S. Egg Industry Reduced
Environmental Footprint (American Egg Board).

Similarly, compared with 1960 laying hens, 2010 laying hens
have:

26 percent less daily feed use

27 percent higher hen-day egg production

42 percent better feed conversion

57 percent lower mortality

32 percent less direct water use per dozen eggs
produced

The analysis showed the following reductions in the
environmental footprint per kg of eggs produced in the U.S.
over the 50 year time interval considered:

65 percent lower acidifying emissions

71 percent lower eutrophying emissions

71 percent lower GHG emissions

31 percent lower CED

The Chairman. Well thank you very much, Mr. Meier, for
providing that perspective with the egg and poultry sector, and
the issue of sustainability, which is obviously the subject
matter of our hearing today, and environmental gain and
economic viability. You did reference, on a number of your
comments, the supply chain challenges we face, and while it is
not the subject matter of today's hearing, we have all been
dealing, over the last 20+ months of these impacts, especially
early on, when we closed schools and restaurants, and really
taking a very complicated and complex supply chain for
America's food and turning it upside down, and certainly there
have been lessons to learn from that.
But we are now in the phase of the Subcommittee hearing
that I enjoy, where Members of the Committee get a chance to
ask questions or make comments to the various witnesses that we
have had here this morning, and you have all done an excellent
job. I want to thank each of you for your testimony this
morning. By tradition, we will recognize Members in the order
that they have come to participate with the Committee, and
Committee staff has a list of all of you who are very patient
in listening, and waiting for your opportunity to ask
questions, to make comments. I will begin, as the Chairman,
recognizing myself for 5 minutes, and then refer to the Ranking
Member for his 5 minutes, and then we will alternate, as is
tradition, Democratic, Republican, Democratic, Republican,
until all the Members of the Subcommittee have had an
opportunity, and the full Committee that are participating, to
exercise the time available to them.
As I mentioned previously, climate change obviously impacts
not only regions of our country, but regions of the world,
given weather pattern and geography, so we continue to learn
more each day on how we mitigate the impacts of these climate
change. My first question is to Mr. Medeiros. As a producer,
you, as noted, are stewards of the land, you and your family,
and you have made many changes, in terms of your dairy
operation. What USDA tools or programs do you think have been
most critical in helping you accomplish these goals in reducing
greenhouse gases, and nitrate issues with your water, and how
can we improve those efforts in next year's farm bill?
Mr. Medeiros. Well, great question, Jim. And I am going to
go back in history a little bit. I was actually--2005 I had
applied for an NRCS grant, and put together probably one of the
first nutrient management programs on my dairy, at that time,
and saw that I was one of the first dairies to do that. And,
right at first, climate change and none of that was on the
radar yet. Well, through that NRCS program, I was able to
implement a nutrient management program, and started to see the
benefits of being able to move manure in a more efficient way
across my farm, and able to capture those benefits on my farm
from a methane--reducing my methane output, and being able to
utilize that nutrient management program on my crops, and
better utilize that.
So, funding through NRCS, EQIP programs, those are all
extremely valuable tools for producers today, and going
forward, we need that funding to continue because one shoe
doesn't fit all. We have to remember that digesters will not
end up in every dairy, because they are just not economically
feasible, but there are so many other things we can do in our
industry. Through manure management and through technology, we
have figured out there are ways that we can move manure,
separate manure, and apply manure so much more efficient today,
and utilize those benefits on our farms. Corroborating with
NRCS and the EQIP programs, those give us the resources to
where we can do it on a voluntary basis, and address all these
climate changes that we are facing.
The Chairman. Well, I might have to come out and see some
of the changes you have made there, and let us try to schedule
that soon. Ms. Burroughs, you talked about being the front line
of climate change as farmers, using sustainable practices that
has made your farm more resilient. How do you think they can be
scaled up on a larger basis, as we look at, again, next year's
farm bill? You are muted here, Rosie.
Ms. Burroughs. Okay. Thank you. Okay. Before I answer your
big question, I wanted to first compliment all the others that
have testified, and thank them for those wonderful comments. I
especially liked Kim because we have been a ranching family for
over a century as well. In terms of all the different programs
that are available, and the practices that we are using, they
are all part of the solution, but the first thing that has to
happen is education.
So research and education are the most important things to
have these practices work throughout the nation, and it isn't a
cookie cutter, so what works in one particular area may not
work in another, but these practices can be implemented across
the nation. I think that the one thing that has to change is
our paradigm of feeding cows. Our cows, both dairy and beef are
grazers, and I believe that God had created this symbiotic
relationship between cows, grass, and the sun. And I thing
that, depending on what--your certain farm or ranches, every
one of these practices that we talked about can all be
implemented, and it is through education.
The Chairman. Well, we appreciate that. And finally, Dr.
Stackhouse-Lawson, you talked in your testimony about trying to
develop ways to more accurately measure issues of emissions,
and develop strategies that, in fact, can achieve goals of
reducing those emissions. How do you think we best find that
effort in quantifying our data in ways that are meaningful as
we try to improve our impacts, as it relates to emissions, and
what is your university and other universities doing together?
And I think we need to be combining resources, frankly, as we
try to achieve these goals.
Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. Yes, absolutely. So I think, when we
really think about measuring greenhouse gases from these
systems, and actually trying to quantify the gas, it is really
complicated, right? So we know that, of course, methane is
produced from ruminant systems. They belch that methane, it is,
of course, a natural process of the animal's digestive
capacity. We know that, based on different diets those animals
have, different amounts of the gas that they will emit, right,
if we are measuring that for example, on a dry matter intake
basis or something.
But the challenge that we have had as scientists is that
our methods that we used to measure these things--up until very
recently we had to put animals in chambers, or their heads,
right, in respiration chambers, with head box--we would use
very tame animals; but, we would sort of encapsulate their
heads so that we could understand the emissions, or we would
put them in whole animal chambers. And, when we do that, it
changes the animal's behavior, and their desire to eat, right?
They are just--not--they continue to eat, it is--it--but they
are not eating as much. And so we believe that a more accurate
representation of the--what the animal is actually emitting in
their production environment is very important.
And the other thing we don't understand is how does that
change, right? So how is it different on Kim's range, in the
forages that she has available in Idaho, versus what Rosie has,
and the forages that her grazing animals are consuming. And
generally we think that there may even be differences, right?
And so the levers that Kim and--may be able to pull on Brackett
ranches to reduce either enteric emissions, or reduce nitrogen
emissions, may be different than the levers that Rosie can pull
reasonably, right? And we need to understand those baseline
emissions, but also how solutions can be applied in a way that
is place-based, because we have heard that over, and over, and
over again, right? Well, one-size-fits-all approach it doesn't
work in animal agriculture systems. And how do we balance--I
think there is a really good point--how do we balance knowing
everything that we possibly can, because that is also not
reasonable, that is an unreasonable expectation, with the
amount of knowledge that we need to move forward with the most
appropriate strategies.
To answer your question about other universities, we have a
new program that has started. We are developing strategic
partnerships with other institutions that have complimentary
facilities to--so actually different facilities to ours. So one
example would be we are setting up a green feed platform, where
we will have six green feeds in what we are going to call
climate-smart pens, but we are partnering with Texas Tech, for
example, who has the head box chambers. Or we might partner
with Davis, that has kind of the more full animal chamber
approach. And I do believe that we also need to be very smart,
and not duplicating, right, these very precious resources, and
really work together to develop----
The Chairman. Doctor, I think your comments are well taken,
and my time has more than expired, but I wanted to make sure
that we got an opportunity to get the academic perspective in
here. And I really do believe, as we look forward, money is
always a challenge as we try to provide ample resources, but
that we combine our research efforts in ways that make sense
through the incredible academic resource that we have in this
country on a regional basis.
So, without further ado, my friend, and Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee, Dusty Johnson, it is your opportunity here
with your 5 minutes. I look forward to hearing your questions
and comments.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and just great
witnesses. I mean, really, really a top-notch panel, and you
can tell how much they agree on it. These are happy,
optimistic, solutions-focused people who want to make the world
a better place, and they have just all done a great job. I will
start with Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson, and then we will go to Ms.
Brackett, kind of with a similar set of questions.
I thought your testimony, Doc, did a good job of talking
about the progress that we have made, as well as some of the
ambitious, proactive goals that our country has on a going
forward basis. And, in that, we want to feed the world, we want
to do so sustainably. In that kind of a landscape, it seems
that we should be doing everything we can to have American
producers feed even more of the world, because we do it better,
we do it more sustainably. I feel like so often these producers
have a target on their back, rather than being viewed as the
solution. Just sort of your reactions about that.
Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. I think one of the things that I
didn't mention in the testimony, but is really important, is
that sustainability certainly has the triple bottom line
approach, right, of environmental, social, and economic, and we
need to take that into account as we are thinking about
nutrition globally. But the other thing that I didn't mention
that sustainability has is an emotional element, right? So,
when people think about the way that they define
sustainability, and what may be most important to them,
emotions play a role in that, and some of the perceptions that
exist around our production systems today are challenging, and
in some ways align with the science that we know, and in others
don't.
So I think, Representative Johnson, it is very challenging,
and I think our farmers and ranchers should be commended for
the incredible work that they have done, but this sort of
target on their back, unfortunately, oftentimes makes it
difficult for all of the great minds that we have that could
come together to really identify collaborative solutions moving
forward. And I very much agree with you that those
collaborative solutions are necessary, and that our farmers and
ranchers should be a part of those conversations, because, at
the end of the day, they are the boots on the ground that will
mitigate the impact.
Mr. Johnson. And, listen, tell me if I am looking at this
too simplistically, because I suppose sometimes elected
officials do that, right? But if we really care about
sustainability--I think so many people are making it seem as
though producers need to do less, right? We need less of this
type of production, or less of that kind of production, when in
reality, if we care about sustainability, a really effective
solution would be to ask the American producers to do even more
to help feed the world.
Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. Right. And I think we will get
there. You described some of the technology that South Dakota
State is implementing on precision ranching technologies. I am
equally excited about that technology, right? So could we
actually, with a phone app, move cattle to a place on a ranch
at the right time the forage is growing, and optimize the
landscape, and the nutrition, and also minimize that impact,
right? Because then you can move them off, potentially,
during--if there is perhaps a migrant bird that needs to nest
in that particular environment, right? So our ability to move
virtual fences without actually building fence, it is
phenomenal. And the opportunity to get even more utilization
off of landscapes, but actually enhance the landscape, I think
is very real. And I think technology is only going to enhance
that for us. I think, at the same time, we have to be very
cognizant of the fact that measurements to continually
benchmark ourselves within documentation improvement will
continue to be important.
Mr. Johnson. Great. Thanks, Doc. And then I have 50 seconds
left. Ms. Brackett, it is yours. Any observations?
Ms. Brackett. Well, I would concur with what Dr.
Stackhouse-Lawson has said. I think, to add onto that, I would
go back to your comments about the efficiency of the U.S. beef
production system: cattle are up-cyclers. I think sometimes
people don't recognize that most cattle ranches exist on land
that is considered marginal. It can't grow crops for human
consumption. So cattle can go in there, and graze that grass
that is not human edible, and they convert that into a highly
nutritious form of protein for our fellow Americans. I think
that is really important. The other thing, when we talk about
cattle diet, they also consume a lot of our human food waste
that would otherwise go into a landfill, so they are definitely
up-cyclers in several segments of our industry.
Mr. Johnson. Yes, well said. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman always for his good
questions, and up-cyclers, I like that term, Ms. Brackett. I
will have to remember that. It is not one that I have used. But
our next Member to be recognized is the gentlewoman from
Virginia, my friend, Ms. Abigail Spanberger.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you.
The Chairman. Representative Spanberger, you are
recognized.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you,
Chairman Costa. I am so thrilled that we are having this
hearing on livestock and conservation today. I am the Chair of
the Conservation and Forestry Subcommittee, and I know that our
producers across the country, and particularly in Virginia, are
the really the original conservationists. I am also very
excited about today's hearing because of the large presence of
livestock producers in Virginia, many of whom are actively
engaged in USDA conservation programs. In December, I was proud
to host USDA leaders in Orange County, Virginia in my district
to meet with Virginia livestock producers, and I heard directly
from cattlemen and small processors about their most pressing
needs. They discussed the recently announced USDA investment
that will help keep America's cattlemen and their families
competitive in a global ag economy, and it was a really
wonderful, wonderful way to focus on these programs, and the
value that they have to our producers.
One way our producers stay competitive is by bringing
conservation practices into their day-to-day operations. That
is why I am proud to cosponsor the bipartisan Growing Climate
Solutions Act (H.R. 2820) with my colleague Congressman Bacon.
It touches on nearly every sector of agriculture, including
livestock production, and this legislation would help Virginia
cattle and poultry producers receive additional revenue sources
for the climate-smart practices that they are already
embracing. The bill is supported by nearly every major American
farm group, many major environmental groups, and several
Fortune 500 companies, because it makes sense. Notably, the
bill passed the United States Senate with 92 Senators voting in
favor it, and it continues to stun me that the House of
Representatives has failed to act on a bill that garners so
much support. We don't see that every day, and we should pass
it in our chamber. It is crucial for the farmers, the rural
communities, and the health of our planet, particularly the
farmers and producers in Virginia who were advocating for it.
It is certainly long past time.
So thank you for allowing me that moment, but, Mr.
Medeiros, I have a question about your testimony, because you
mentioned that current USDA programs have not focused enough on
manure and feed management, and that is really a key area of
opportunity, and some sustainability questions related to dairy
production. I have heard that while USDA has strong internal
expertise on conservation, that we really need more experts on
conservation practices and innovation specifically related to
livestock. Could you perhaps share your experience in what you
have experienced, and provide us with any sort of feedback on
what that looks like from your perspective?
Mr. Medeiros. Sure. And, Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson talked a
little bit about different feeds, and knowing how that room is
going to react to the different feeds, and what is it is
actually emitting. So, in the dairy sector out here in
California, about 40 percent of our rations are byproducts. And
through those byproducts, we really don't know how much
emission reductions we are getting through those byproducts. So
the question is still out there, and at UC Davis there have
been a lot of studies done on either oil-based additives,
plant-based additives, and how that is working in reducing
emissions. So we need more funding to go into that category,
and then we need less restrictions from FDA when they take a
look at those additives, because they are looking at that as an
antibiotic, and having to go through that process, it is
cumbersome, it takes a long time, and time is of the essence,
right? And some of that stuff, we need to streamline that
process, and we----
Ms. Spanberger. And some of the additives that you are
talking about that are being compared or judged as antibiotics
would--some of them are kind of natural plant-based, isn't that
correct?
Mr. Medeiros. Absolutely. Absolutely. They are either oil-
based or plant-based. You know that one of them was seaweed,
right?
Ms. Spanberger. Yes.
Mr. Medeiros. And so, when we take a look at these options,
we need to streamline that process, and we need to actually put
more funding towards that, because companies, when they start
taking a look at the process, they are not willing to invest,
right? It is taking too long, it is too expensive. So those are
the avenues, because we have to remember, 45 percent of
emissions coming from a cow is enteric.
Ms. Spanberger. Yes.
Mr. Medeiros. And we have to remember, especially in the
dairy sector, not everybody is going to be able to put in a
digester, and if we can target 45 percent of these emissions on
the enteric basis, that is extremely valuable.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you, Mr. Medeiros. You mentioned
digesters, and I have--the REAP Improvement Act (H.R. 4162,
Rural Energy for America Program (REAP) Improvement Act of
2021) would expand eligibility to the REAP Program to include
agricultural producer cooperatives that want to meet the high
demand for the program by increasing the available cost-share,
particularly as it relates to digesters. I am running out of
time, but I will be following up with questions for the record
for Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson related to the REAP Program, and what
additional access might look like, particularly for livestock
producers and our dairy industry. So thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman, for this fantastic hearing, and thank you to all of
our witnesses for your work, and the knowledge you brought to
us today.
The Chairman. Well thank you very much, Representative
Spanberger, and your focus on--with your own Subcommittee, and
how we can collaborate together with efforts on conservation,
and we look toward next year's farm bill is critical for all of
us, in terms of working with America's livestock industry to
achieve even better results. So our next witness is Ranking
Member of the full Committee. I introduced him once before, so
I don't think I need to introduce him again, my friend,
Representative Thompson from Pennsylvania. You need to un-mute,
G.T.
Mr. Thompson. Jim, thank you so much. Thank you to you, and
the Ranking Member, for assembling just a tremendous panel on
this topic, just outstanding. I could listen to these folks all
day long. These are the types of voices that we need to have at
the table as we prepare for the 2023 Farm Bill.
While many private companies have made major climate and
sustainability commitments, they oftentimes are struggling to
find ways, really, to achieve their goals, and I think to
achieve their goals in truly meaningful ways that are effective
and in line with their goal, despite having significant
financial resources. And simultaneously, USDA conservation
programs--and I would put our Agriculture Committee at the
forefront of that, because we have authorized what it is at
USDA and in the conservation space specifically--those
conservation programs are oversubscribed, and agriculture
producers have difficulty accessing these vital programs.
So, for these reasons, I introduced the SUSTAINS Act (H.R.
2606, Sponsoring USDA Sustainability Targets in Agriculture to
Incentivize Natural Solutions Act of 2021), which would allow
USDA to accept and match donated private funds to stretch the
Federal dollar. The idea is that the third parties could really
be able to demonstrate their climate credentials. They could be
climate champions by directly partnering with USDA to fund
conservation projects, more conservation projects, and expand
those through the existing programs. In terms of land-based
solutions, the documentation shows that overall our farmers,
ranchers, foresters sequester 6.1 gigatons of carbon annually.
It shows that our farmers, ranchers, and foresters are climate
heroes. But we could do better, because we know that there are
new innovations, because American agriculture is science, and
technology, and innovation.
So I want to start with Mr. Meier, or whoever would like to
respond. I am just curious, do you see a value in a concept
where we form a public-private partnership to where
organizations of all sizes, not just large corporations, but
small mom and pop businesses would get their climate champion
credentials, and could help us fund additional conservation
programs? Do you see any value in that concept? We appreciate
your insights.
Ms. Burroughs. This is Rosie Burroughs, and I would like to
share that I think it is an outstanding idea, and we need all
hands on deck, all feet working towards solving our problems.
So any and everything working towards the good of our--and I
would like to change it not just to sustainability, but to
viability, and it is about the health of our planet. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Yes. Thank you. Anyone, other thoughts on
that kind of an approach, a public-private partnership approach
to expanding our conservation program so we may have programs
through the USDA?
Mr. Meier. [inaudible] type of legislation could be
helpful--potentially--could be helpful, but one thing to keep
in mind is that the programs are built for producers, so that
means the underlying USDA conservation programs must be
accessible to poultry producers, and provide the environmental
performance to drive results towards goals per dollar invested,
and we are supportive of those practices and technologies.
Mr. Thompson. Well, Mr. Meier, I agree with you. I mean, we
need to look at the program so that all of our producers are
benefitting, whether we are talking crops, trees, or livestock,
because they all have something to offer, right? For tremendous
forces for good for the economy and the environment.
Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. Yes, if I could add, I love the
notion of this private-public partnership idea, and I truly
believe that that is where our solutions are going to come, and
those tangible outcomes are going to be made available. If I
could just provide just a few things that I think if you could
add? The ability to actually measure the outcome that we have
achieved I think would be really powerful, right? So if we have
these climate champions, and they could say they have reduced X
amount of tons, or they have helped sequester X amount of tons,
I think that that would be really helpful for a lot of these
more corporate strategies.
The other thing that I might encourage is--it is certainly
climate--I love the--sort of name of client--climate champion,
but it might also be really interesting to also measure the
improvements in water holding capacity, and soil health more
broadly, and even biodiversity in the soil, right? Because, as
we begin to improve soil health and sequester--carbon, we see
all these other really phenomenal win-win-win-win-wins, right?
And I think that that is where value lies as well.
Mr. Thompson. Absolutely. Thank you to the panel, and, Mr.
Chairman, thank you for convening this, and I yield back.
The Chairman. You are welcome, and the gentleman is always
appreciated, his participation, and, Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson, we
appreciate your enthusiasm. We need more of that. I hope it
spreads to--I know many of the Members of the Subcommittee
certainly are expressing their enthusiasm as it relates to
today's hearing. Our next Representative, my friend from
Connecticut, who is very focused on these issues,
Representative Hayes, please. You have 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, Chairman Costa, and thank you for
having this hearing today. Connecticut's Fifth District is a
hotbed of sustainable livestock farming. There are countless
farmers from my district who operate small family dairy farms
with a focus on sustainable and organic agriculture.
One example is Adamah Farms, a diverse, direct market farm
and educational program in Falls Village, Connecticut. Adamah
is part of Hazon, a national organization which advocates for
agricultural and environmental sustainability in connection
with the Jewish faith. And then there is Laurelbrook Farm, a
fourth generation, 1,100 cow dairy farm which makes
sustainability center of their practices by composting manure
and re-selling the product as organic fertilizer to the local
community. The owner of Laurelbrook is Christian Jacquier. He
is also the Chairman of the Agri-Mark Dairy Cooperative, and is
extremely active in the Connecticut dairy community.
In Connecticut, rather than treating sustainability as an
afterthought, our farmers know that good stewardship over our
land and environment must be central to all agricultural
practices. However, Connecticut family farms are struggling.
Consolidation in the dairy industry has hit us hard, leaving
Connecticut with fewer than 100 remaining dairy farms, having
lost nearly 200 in the past decade.
My questions today are for Ms. Burroughs. Given that you
run a diversified sustainable farm similar to those in my
district, can you share details about the effect of
consolidation on the uptake of sustainable practices throughout
the livestock sector? Specifically, what are the implications
that larger operations pose for the adoption of sustainability
measures?
Ms. Burroughs. Thank you, Representative Hayes, for the
question. I think it is the key to our future to have the
ranchers, and farmers, and grazers that are able to utilize
their farms and ranches in a way that protects the environment
and brings health to the planet. There are more microbes in 1
teaspoon of healthy soil than there are people on the planet,
and these microbes, with this symbiotic relationship between
animal grazing and the land, they create the water infiltration
system that replenishes the aquifers when it does rain. And
when we lose a farmer to his farm or land because of
consolidation, or because efficiency and bigger, more corporate
type of farms, we have lost our farms and ranchers forever.
They will not ever get an opportunity to come back.
We ourselves have had two grass-based organic dairies, and
they were the premiere grazing dairies that worked beautifully.
And we could show you all the research and the good things
about it, but the economic--and I like what Kim said, the
economic viability did not work because we do not have an equal
playing field when the NOP has not enforced the pasture rule
uniformly across the nation. And Congress has directed the NOP
to publish the final rule on origin of livestock, but the NOP
has not done that. So, number one, we need an equal playing
field so that those of us that are using grazing practices can
be rewarded by the consumers who support, and businesses that
support our type of farming that is bringing benefits to the
planet, and health to all people, from the birds in the air, to
the microbes in the soil. Thank you.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, Ms. Burroughs. I am smiling, because
my next question was how would finalizing the NOP help organic
farmers avoid similar outcomes than the one you experienced
with your organic farms, and you led right into it, because it
is all connected. Exactly what you have just talked about is
what I am hearing from small farmers in Connecticut. Our
landscape in my district is just outlined and created by the
farmers, their investments in the communities, what they do for
neighbors, for our schools, our agroscience programs, and it
would be devastating for Connecticut's Fifth District for these
farmers to not be sustainable, and for us to continue to lose
at the rate that we have been losing. So thank you so much for
your work in this area, and for your very thoughtful comments.
Mr. Chairman, that is all I have. I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlewoman from Connecticut for
your comments, and your insight. Our next Member is the
gentleman from Indiana, Representative Jim Baird, who
represents the Fourth Congressional District, I believe. Good
to have you involved, my friend.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member. And
I really want to add my appreciation to all the witnesses here
today. The expertise they bring to this Committee is really
beneficial to our ability to make decisions as we talk about
the farm bill. And, we have heard several people mention--not
only the witnesses, but the Committee Members--the significant
improvement that agriculture has made in almost 50 years, 70
years, of 287 percent increase, with very little change in the
kinds of inputs that we put into agriculture. So I am really
glad that we are giving farmers and ranchers the credit they
deserve for all the conservation efforts, and the things that
are important to maintain our environment.
And, there are many things I would love to talk about, like
soil health, grazing management, nutrient management, feed
additives, methane digesters. Maybe I will have a chance to get
to some of those. But, there is one area that we haven't talked
about, and I am not sure how much interest some people have,
but I am very excited about biotech, and the potential that
these technologies will have in benefitting the environment,
and not only the environment, but the human and animal health,
and the world's demand for sustainability produced proteins.
These technologies could be beneficial to cattle and the dairy
industry, with researchers and companies developing gene-edited
traits for heat tolerance. And by using biotech to raise cattle
to carry a heat tolerance gene called slick, we could have
cattle that are better able to regulate body temperature during
periods of heat stress than non-slick cattle, and help them
maintain productivity.
So, Mr. Medeiros, I am going to start with you, and then
Ms. Brackett will follow up, but can you touch on your
respective industry's view to the benefits of biotech in all
this discussion?
Mr. Medeiros. Why absolutely, and, being a representative
from Indiana, you see a lot of the biotech in seeds and crop
rotations, and we see it out West also, and the benefits it
brings to the environment. From an animal aspect, I will share
a little story with you. I am a diehard Holstein guy that has
changed his mind, and let me elaborate on that. And we talk
about heat tolerance and all that. I have switched to Jersey
breeds on one of my farms, and one of the things I noticed is
the tolerance that they have to heat is much greater than a
Holstein, and then their footprint on the environment is much
less than the Holstein, so we have found, just through our own
research on our own farm, the benefits of just changing the
breed on how that has impacted out footprint on the
environment. So, it is little things like that. And then, we
will take it as far into crop rotation, on biotech corn, and
tolerance to droughts. And, we know all about droughts out here
in California.
Sustainability goes anywhere from emissions from that cow
to water, right? And we want to encompass all that in our
operation, so we take a look at all that in our operation. So
that is some of the stuff that we address in our operations, is
breeds, and, of course, our crop rotations.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you very much for that insight. Very
informative information there. Ms. Brackett, would you care to
address that same concern?
Ms. Brackett. Certainly, thank you, Representative Baird. I
would certainly echo Mr. Medeiros's comments on breed
selection. That is so critical in the cattle industry, that you
match the breed to the climate that you live in, the region of
the country that you are in. So I would say that is probably
the first--that might be an old school technology, but an
important one for us. In the cattle industry, another important
biotech would be feed additives. We have talked a lot about
feed additives to reduce methane emissions. I think that there
is a lot of interest going on, some exciting research in that
area.
When we talk about technology in the cattle industry, we
also talk broader than just biotech. We have a need for, and
Representative Johnson mentioned his precision grazing
technology, so that is also really exciting to us. And I think,
finally, I would just mention that we need to have--be spending
this time on updating our emission science, getting that
baseline, and understanding where we need to go from here.
Mr. Baird. Well, thank you very much. And I see my time is
almost up, and I don't think the Chairman will give me any more
time, and I have all kinds of questions, and I would enjoy
visiting with all of you for the rest of the day, but thank
you. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman is always welcome, and
certainly have an opportunity, as all Members of the Committee
do, to submit further questions to our witnesses. And I agree
with you, as others have stated, we have a great group of
witnesses today, and not enough time for all of us to ask
additional questions that we would like to ask. Our next Member
is the gentlewoman from Iowa's Third District, another friend,
Representative Cindy Axne. You are recognized for 5 minutes,
Representative Axne.
Mrs. Axne. Thank you, Chairman Costa, and thank you to our
witnesses for being here today. And, Rep Baird, you and I seem
to always be on the same pathway of questions, so maybe we will
get some more of your answers on some of mine here. But since I
came to Congress, I have been a very strong supporter of
sustainable ag practices for our farmers. We know how important
it is. I know right here in Iowa that our family farmers are
the original conservationists, and their kids really, literally
depend on them doing so. So we know also that consumers are
becoming more increasingly aware and interested in how their
food is being grown, where it is coming from, how sustainable
it is, all of that.
I was recently out in Council Bluffs, Iowa with Secretary
Vilsack, and we were at a producer's shop, as a matter of fact.
The owners told us that they were meeting this demand by
providing information to their consumers on where their beef
comes--from farm to table, and it was so cool to talk to their
kids, who had put together the QR codes where they track every
animal, and then their customers can see, from birth to table,
what that animal has been up to. So they are really looking for
these things, and I think our young farmers and producers are
ready to be at the table with this.
While our family farmers have continually been more
efficient and sustainable over these last few decades, though,
this market trend will provide more opportunities for farmers
who are on the cutting edge of sustainability, and further
incentivize those who want to do more. And as we look towards
this upcoming farm bill that we are talking about, Congress
needs to be investing in more resources towards conservation
programs for research and technical assistance, et cetera, and
we need our farmers to be able to take advantage of this
growing market to help our country reduce its emissions.
So my first question is to you, Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. In
your testimony you referenced numerous research gaps, limited
funding, and other challenges in improving sustainability. In
your view, what is the most pressing research need, and how
would that research help our producers?
Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. Yes, thank you for the question.
Really establishing appropriate baselines for greenhouse gas
emissions in the way that cattle are raised today, in my
opinion, is what is most needed right now. So we have modeled
this for a very long time, of course, using emissions data, but
the actual absolute emissions that we use to factor, right,
create those emission factors, are based on data from--and it
is from past equipment, right? So putting those animals in
respiration chambers, or whole animal chambers, and I am
worried we are not getting accurate baseline emissions from the
types of cattle that we have today.
What that will also allow us to do is begin to--and I am
very excited about this, and was inspired by the previous
question as well, begin to potentially genotype animals that
actually might have less methane emissions it--even on the same
diet, right? So I think there is just such a gap in sort of our
actual knowledge of what these animals are doing in their
natural environments, what animals are performing better, are
the--I have big questions are the efficiency metrics we are
using today, are they the right ones? Is there another
efficiency metric? Is there a nutrient efficiency metric,
right, that we have just missed because we haven't had that
technology, or those resources, at our fingertips.
As this technology catches up, and we are hopeful that even
technology or measuring methane emissions from the oil and gas
industry--could we translate some of that? And we are very
close, I think we are very close to it catching up, and so just
really building that database would be my recommendation, as a
really good starting place.
Mrs. Axne. Well, as somebody who comes from the world of
strategy, baseline numbers are the most important piece to
start with, and if we don't even have that, then we do need to
put some effort towards that. I appreciate you bringing that
up, thank you. Ms. Burroughs, you stated that management-
intensive grazing is the key to the future. Could you expand on
that? What benefits have you seen on your farm? You mentioned
that we needed a level playing field, so what specific
challenges do you think are most important to address for
producers in adopting that practice?
Ms. Burroughs. Thank you for the question. There are three
kind of areas that I will hit. In regards to the NOP making
their final rule on the origin of livestock rule, that is in
reference to grazing animals in the dairy sector. In terms of
grazing beef out on the ranged land, there is lots of research,
and there are many, many holistic programs on management-
intensive grazing. What we found--and when I said earlier in
our testimony, 40 years ago we didn't know what we didn't
know--is that God created a perfect universe, and if we work
with Mother Nature in the cycle of the seasons, and adapting,
like, what was said earlier, the cattle to the environment of
what you have, whether you are in a mountain range or a desert
area, those are all the decisions that need to be made to be
efficient and viable in grazing your animals.
We also graze sheep, and sheep are an animal that our
country has sort of left behind, but sheep are a wonderful
grazer, and we are using them in our orchards. So what we have
found is that, when we integrate grazing into our farming
systems, our orchards, we are finding that that relationship is
completely--has so many benefits. I would love to write more of
a written detail answer to that, as time has been limited, but
I can say that when things are in cycle, and animals' manure
goes into the soil, and is utilized, you are not going to have
problems with nitrate concentration from grain-fed animals that
are in a concentrated form.
So in my view, right now, our whole food system is broken.
We have gone to cheap food, we have gone to food that is
imported. We need to take care of our American farmer/rancher
first. Buy local, buy organically grazed--grown meat. We know
that the CLAs, and all the benefits in the health of the meat
that is on grazing animals is so much more important for health
and fighting cancer. So I would love to write a more detailed
answer than that, but I just think working with Mother Nature
is the relationship of what we all need to be striving to do,
because when we are in sync, then we are able to reduce all
those greenhouse gases, all of the stored carbon in the soil,
and hold water in, and recharge our aquifers. It is very
exciting. I can say that seeing what was in a dead soil, and
what is in a live soil, and having life, and we have planted
rows of hedgerows throughout all of our farms for beneficials,
for all----
The Chairman. Rosie?
Ms. Burroughs. Yes. Okay. I will--in a written testimony.
Thank you.
The Chairman. Well, and we both appreciate Representative
Axne, and Rosie, your enthusiasm. As chairperson of the Soils
Caucus, we need to bring you back. I have never seen such
enthusiasm for soils, and we will continue that in that vein.
Next Member, representative from Iowa, again, the Fourth
Congressional District. The gentleman is very focused on these
issues, Representative Randy Feenstra.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Costa, Ranking Member
Johnson, and thanks for everybody's testimony. It is really
quite amazing to hear everybody, and their thoughts on what we
can do together collaboratively. In Iowa the livestock industry
has a great story to tell when it comes to sustainability.
Across the Iowa industry, farmers are producing more while
using less, and our hog producers are using 75 percent less
land, and 25 percent less water, compared to 6 decades ago.
Dairy farms in the U.S. have the lowest greenhouse gas
emissions of all our global competitors. Cattle ranchers have
reduced emissions per pound of beef by more than 40 percent,
while also producing 60 percent more beef per animal from 1961
to 2018. Through these technologies the livestock industry has
achieved these goals, and it is through technology that we
continue to make improvements into the future.
One technology that has advanced the industry into greater
sustainability is feed additives. Mr. Medeiros and Ms.
Brackett, in your testimonies you shared how animal feed
ingredients have allowed the dairy and beef sectors to reduce
methane emissions. I share your concerns that the regulatory
red tape is preventing timely market availability for these
ingredients. According to a study by Informa Economics, it
takes about 3 to 5 years for a feed ingredient to be reviewed
by the Centers for Veterinary Medicine. Why is it important
that the Food and Drug Administration streamline this review
and approval process, and what legislative proposals do you
encourage Congress to consider related to this issue, Mr.
Medeiros?
Mr. Medeiros. Okay. Well, first of all, we need to separate
the feed additives from the antibiotic category, and so we can
start fast-forwarding what we know so far, and promote
research, and to get this on a fast track. That is probably the
one thing that is really hindering feed additives today. And
then we need to spend more time and investment into that
category, because I think there is a lot more research that
needs to be done in that category where we can understand it. I
mean, Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson touched upon it a little bit.
So FDA needs to really--again, needs to take a look at
that, the protocol on feed additives, so we can pursue that at
a much more rapid rate, and push that forward. So, that is my
opinion on that, and I think it is something that Congress
really needs to take a look at.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes. Ms. Brackett, do you have any thoughts
on that?
Ms. Brackett. Yes. Thank you, Representative, I appreciate
the question. I think it is important to focus on innovation,
having support for research and innovation, as opposed to
regulation. That would be something that we are very much in
favor of. Investing in research that is going to help producers
be more solutions-oriented, I would think would be the
collaborative goal that we are all striving to achieve here,
especially if we are talking about feed additives, having more
research in that arena, supporting innovation, so that we can
be more technologically advanced, and achieve our climate
goals. Absolutely.
Mr. Feenstra. Thanks for those comments. Again, a question
for Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson, I sit on the Science, Space, and
Technology Committee, and I passed an amendment to include an
animal omics database in the Bioeconomy Research and
Development Act (H.R. 4521). This amendment ensures that animal
omics databases are included in research and development
initiatives, along with data access that focuses on animal
biotechnology and genetic modification. How do you see
biotechnology fitting into the overall strategy for meeting
food demands in a growing population, to achieve our
sustainability goals?
Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. Yes, thank you for the question. And
I am certainly not an expert in that area, but I think, when we
think about really achieving sustainability goals, so much of
the progress to date has been made through enhanced
efficiencies, and yes, we have to do more, right? There has to
be more than those enhanced efficiencies, but we also need to
develop technologies and tools to even streamline the
efficiencies, right? And so I think any access to data and
technology to help do more with less, to help our producers
have more appropriate tools that can work on their individual
operations, but still drive to these bigger goals that we have
is where we all need to think about innovating.
And, the beautiful thing about sustainability, and quite
frankly climate, is that any improvements we make, right, help,
right? And they may not help as much as we think--we want them
to, but they still help. So I think those efforts are
warranted.
Mr. Feenstra. I agree, and the reality is our livestock
industry has voluntarily adopted sustainability practices,
which I am so excited about. With that, my time has ended.
Thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman, and we thank, again,
our witnesses. Our next Member is my friend Representative
Bobby Rush from Illinois's First Congressional District, and we
appreciate Congressmember Rush's participation. He represents
the head of one of America's urban areas, but yet understands
the importance of American agriculture, and the role that it
plays, and that will be followed by Representative Barry Moore
from Alabama. But, Bobby, you are next up.
Mr. Rush. I certainly want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. This
has been a very, very informative hearing, and I thank you for
it. I want to take a moment to welcome, if I might, Mr. Meier,
who is here with us today from my hometown of Chicago.
And, Mr. Medeiros, I have a question for you. I am
extremely interested in member cooperatives, and I am looking
forward to ways to expand ag co-ops to urban areas, and I
believe that their structure, and their mission, uniquely
empowers producers in a variety of ways. And I know that this
is not the topic of today's hearing, but I wanted to take the
privilege and opportunity, and hope that you could briefly
discuss some of the best practices that you have witnessed as a
member of the National Milk Producer's Federation's Executive
Committee, and if you could particularly inform me about the
practices that you have seen that could help co-ops expand into
new sections, such as urban ag? Mr. Medeiros, would you
respond?
Mr. Medeiros. Yes. So, little history about myself, I used
to be an independent producer at one time, and learned the
value of a co-op. And, co-ops bring such a tremendous value to
American agriculture. The resources that a co-op can bring to
producers, as far as--and I will speak upon DFA, DFA being the
largest dairy co-op in the United States, and I believe the
fourth largest milk processor in the world. The resources that
co-ops bring to producers--through a co-op we have our farm
service program, we have our innovation programs, and co-ops
bring such a value to agriculture clear across the United
States, whether you are a corn grower, a beef producer, dairy
industry, it is a vital component of producers, and having the
ability to use co-ops to reach out to people, educate people,
and bring resources back to the farmer. And as an independent
producer, you don't get those same resources.
So I think co-ops are probably one of the most valuable
tools in today's agriculture, and hopefully it keeps growing
and expanding, and that way we can touch even the cities, and
be able to touch city farmers, and the city population
understands the value that a co-op can bring to producers, and
all of society, through all the assets, and who we touch in the
industry.
Mr. Rush. Well, I certainly want to actually engage in this
conversation more with you, because, again, I am absolutely
committed to the idea, and the potential, of trying to create a
unity of will, a unity of spirit, and a unity of understanding,
in terms of the whole cooperative sector of our society. So
thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, sir, Representative
Rush. And our next Members, in the order that the staff has
provided me, is Representative Barry Moore from Alabama's
Second Congressional District, then to be followed by
Representative Sanford Bishop, from Georgia's Second. Mr.
Moore, the floor is yours.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And we have heard a lot
of talk about grazing and cattle, but, Mr. Meier, I want to
talk a little bit about the poultry industry. That is the big
thing in our part of the world, and huge in agriculture in
Alabama. You focused a lot of your testimony in terms of
working on measurement. In the National Chicken Council Broiler
Sustainability Report released last year, I am reading that in
just 10 years the industry has decreased land use by 13
percent, carbon emissions by 18 percent, water consumption by
13 percent, and fossil fuel use by 22 percent. Can you expand
on this, and what do you attribute these gains to, please?
Mr. Meier. Thank you, Representative Moore. Yes, the
poultry industry has made incredible strides over the past
decade, and has been a shining light in the agriculture
industry in that space. On the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable
Poultry and Eggs, we are really focused on getting a baseline
measurement, and a broader aspect, and every node of the supply
chain involved in that sustainability conversation. So we have
involved producers, integrators, allied industry, as well as
NGOs, and restaurants in building our framework. The framework
was completed in December, and this year we are going to launch
the tool that we will use, and it will be an online tool. That
way, all of these nodes can input their aspects of
sustainability measurements into that, and we will have a good
baseline across the full supply chain, from producer, all the
way to customer, of what our sustainability looks like in the
U.S. poultry and ag industry.
So, for an example, one of those metrics might look like--
would be energy use. So even if every producer is monitoring
their energy use, and they receive--whether it is an electric
bill, diesel bill, natural gas bill, and so they have a
baseline that they can then put into the system. They will know
where they stand, and what they are measuring. When we generate
all of our data, and we have our final reports that we will
release once we have the tool launched, we will--that producer
will then be able to benchmark where they are amongst other
producers, and the industry itself. Then they can set targets
for themselves and others to continually improve in that space,
and know that they are doing their part to provide a
sustainable future for the poultry and ag industry.
Mr. Moore. And I am sure looking down the road, we hope to
continue these trends. What other efforts do you see, and is
there anything you would like to expand on? And one quick
question too, Ernie, the digesters to create energy? I didn't
know if you have seen much of that in industry. We had some
people testing a few of those in our part of the world, but to
maintain these family farms, the poultry operations actually
are the cash flow. They are the things that allow the farmers
to keep maintaining family farms and stay in business. So, I am
just curious, what efforts do you think we need to expand on,
going forward, in the near future?
Mr. Meier. I think the efforts that we need to expand on in
the future for the family farmers, for the poultry producers,
is to make accessibility to USDA funds and resources that are--
the programs that are out there. I think those are the
opportunities for those family producers and those family farms
that they need the access to, and the technology, and the funds
to be able to access those technologies that you referenced
earlier.
Mr. Moore. Okay. And, thank you, Mr. Meier, I appreciate
that. And, Mr. Chairman, with that, I will yield back.
The Chairman. All right. Thank you, the gentleman from
Alabama, and we always appreciate when you add time to the
Committee's portfolio. That is good. The next gentleman is
another friend, Sanford Bishop, from Georgia's Second
Congressional District. And, for the witnesses testifying here,
we all have very valuable Members of this Subcommittee that
play different roles in the House of Representatives, but my
friend the Representative has the distinction of being one of
the cardinals, and so he chairs the Subcommittee on House
Appropriations that handles the agricultural budget for the
USDA, so he becomes very valuable. He is one of the important
Members that not only focuses on the policy issues of the House
Agriculture Committee, but on the budgetary issues on the House
Appropriations Committee that handles the subcommittee for the
USDA's budget. So he is a key person that we should all be
talking to. Representative Bishop?
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and let me
thank you for this hearing today. The witnesses are
extraordinary, and they have been very enlightening. I have two
questions, and the first one I would like to direct to Ms.
Burroughs.
When I think of sustainability in the livestock sector, I
think of Will Harris of White Oak Pastures in my district down
in Georgia. He has been recognized throughout the State of
Georgia, and the nation, and even globally for his impeccable
stewardship, and he often says that sustainability isn't
enough, agriculture has to be regenerative. Ms. Burroughs, you
characterize your family's farming practices as regenerative.
Can you tell us how that translates to various practices and
systems that are deployed on your farm? White Oak Pastures is
located in Bluffton, Georgia, a very small community. It is the
largest private employer in Clay County. It has 113 people, and
the county itself has only about 2,800 people. But Will Harris
employs 185 people, and he writes $100,000 in paychecks every
Friday. So as an advocate of regenerative agriculture, what are
some of the economic benefits that you have received from
adopting the climate-smart management practices?
And my second question is for the panel at large, and
basically it addresses scalable solutions. The potential
benefits of community-scale meat processing are very broad, and
these types of operations have a smaller environmental
footprint. They are more flexible, and they are able to be
respondent to changing conditions, and keep money in the local
agricultural community. Tell us how Congress can ensure that
investments in local and regional meat processing
infrastructure support the expansion of small, community-scale
processors that will support environmentally and socially
responsible practices?
Ms. Burroughs. Thank you. I so appreciate you mentioning
Will. He is a friend of ours, and we spoke together at Berkeley
several years ago. We also shared the Leopold Award, winning
for our family in 2020. So he is an outstanding person that is
leading our industry in grazing and viability. All I can say is
that, when you--our whole food system, and the way we produce
food is a broken system, in my opinion, and I believe that
regenerative practices are not only the key to our survival as
a planet, and all the people on it with health, but it is also
the way to keep farmers and ranchers on their land so they are
providing the food that we need for this planet, and protecting
our environment.
I am just going to jump over to meat processing, because
that is the number one necessity that we need, to have local,
regional processing plants for beef, poultry, or whatever other
meats that we need. We have very few that are USDA inspected
plants that we can use or take our animals to. So I will let
others answer as well, but thank you for bringing up the
regenerative practices. I listed them in my written testimony,
and I tried to expand on why regenerative is so important, but
all life starts in the soil, and all health starts in the soil.
And, when we are using regenerative practices, we are not only
creating the best nutrient-dense food in either crops or
animals, but we are also doing the best we can for storing
carbon, protecting our environment.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Ms. Burroughs. With that, I will----
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. The scalable solutions is important
to me, because I would like to know what we can do to help
encourage the local and the regional processing infrastructure.
I----
Ms. Burroughs. That is outstanding.
Mr. Bishop.--will be economically beneficial. So, quickly,
for the 40 seconds that are left, if anybody else could comment
on that, I would appreciate it.
Ms. Brackett. Representative, I would be happy to address
your question about meat processing. We definitely have a need
in the cattle industry to increase packing capacity, so very
excited about all of the smaller and mid-size processing
facilities that are coming online. We are concerned that they
will be sustainable, that we will have them in the future, that
we will be able to keep them in business. I would say that--I
would echo what Rosie said. With the lack of inspection, not
having USDA inspected facilities really limits how we are able
to sell our beef, especially across state lines.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you. That means we need to strengthen the
inspection regime. Thank you very much. I think my time has
expired, Mr. Chairman, but I thank you for the hearing, and
thank all of the witnesses. You have been incredible.
The Chairman. Well, I know the Chairman of the Subcommittee
of Appropriations that might be able to help us with dealing
with getting more inspectors, so that is something we ought to
work on, and anytime you want to talk about enthusiasm on
soils, talk to Rosie. Our next Member is the gentleman from
Kansas, Congressional District 1, Representative Tracey Mann.
And then that will be followed by Representative Chellie
Pingree from Maine. And, unless the Chair sees any other
Members of the Subcommittee returning, the Members of the--
those witnesses, who have been so patient and so good today,
the reason you see Members come and go is because we have
overlapping other committees that we are dealing with, so it is
not because they are lacking of attention for your comments or
your testimony, but we are multitasking here, so oftentimes
Members are coming in, and going back to other committees as
well, so you understand how we try to make this system as
efficient as we possibly can. Representative Mann from Kansas,
you are on.
Mr. Mann. Great. Chairman Costa, thanks for recognizing me.
Thanks for the time, and thank you for having this hearing, and
all the panelists, and the testimony you submitted, everything
is really, really appreciated. Also thank you to Ranking Member
Johnson. I agreed with the comments he made during his question
period, and appreciate the back and forth in the conversation
he had with you, Dr. Stackhouse-Lawson. I represent the First
District of Kansas. We call it the Big First. It is the largest
beef producing district in the country by dollar amount. We
have a lot of feedyards, packing plants, and cow/calf
operations. I grew up on a preconditioning feedyard, which is
what our family has always done.
So I have a handful of questions. First, for you, Ms.
Brackett, I agree with you, in your testimony, and the USDA
research that you cited explaining that cattle are not truly
significant contributors to long-term global warming, that
cattle producers actually help reduce other sorts of emissions
through various practices. But, the story that we often hear in
the media paints quite the opposite image. In your opinion,
where is the disconnect, and how do we change the public
discourse? How do we kind of reshape the public's image of
production agriculture and these issues?
Ms. Brackett. Thank you, Representative. I appreciate that
question. I think this disconnect has happened slowly over
several years. As people have left rural areas, and moved to
more urban and suburban areas, there is a loss of historical
knowledge about what goes on in farms and ranches, and really
truly how cattle are actually raised. So that leaves consumers
in this country not having a strong foundation when they may
hear misperceptions in the news. We are letting other people
drive our narrative in this arena, in regards to solving this
problem, considering the society that we are in, and the
distrust that we seem to be facing, I think the solution lies
with having credible third parties talking about what the
cattle industry does, and what our sustainable story really is.
I see those third-party experts, if you will, they could be
chefs, well-known chefs, they could be respected journalists,
scientists, but we need other people out there talking about
what we are doing.
And, to back that up a little farther, the science. I can't
underscore enough the importance of Congressional support for
more scientific research in the sustainability arena, that then
those third-party folks could hopefully go out and share with
the consumers in this country.
Mr. Mann. Yes, I agree. Anyone else want to add to that?
How do we reshape the image of production agriculture around
these issues?
Ms. Burroughs. Thank you. This is Rosie.
Mr. Mann. Yes, Rosie?
Ms. Burroughs. Kim, that is so right on. We need to
educate, we need to tell our story, and we need the research
that documents all the benefits of how animal grazing is
helping save our planet. And I would say I would go so far as
to say is--without regenerative ag practices and animal
grazing, you can look to no future, because if you look at some
of the research and science that people are talking about, we
need to take action, and agriculture is the answer to the
problem.
Mr. Mann. Yes, I think that is right. I think agriculture
is the answer, and in my view, the bad news is the distance
from farm to fork has never been wider. The good news is, with
this device, I could communicate to the entire world in a
millisecond, right? So how do we do a better job telling the
story in a positive light? And I agree with and appreciate the
thought about needing the science, and the third-party
validators to cite the science.
One last question, I know I only have a minute, and that
would be for you, Mr. Meier. You mentioned that the most
successful, sustainable tools are created by those implementing
them and impacted by them. I couldn't agree more. Do you have
any examples of your experience with successful industry-led
initiatives, and why do you think they were successful?
Mr. Meier. So at the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable
Poultry and Eggs, we have just completed our building of the
framework, and that was completed this past December, and so we
are in the process of building an online tool for all of our
members to be able to use and input that data. Once we do that,
we will be able to baseline our sustainability across the U.S.
poultry and ag sectors.
So we base it on three pillars, poultry, planet, and
people, trying to be holistic, and encompassing all aspects,
every node of the supply chain. In that, there are over 100
metrics that we have listed there, and we have also built our
framework in such a way that it allows even those who are just
beginning the sustainability journey to be able to use this
tool in a manner that will help them be better in
sustainability in the future, right? So a small producer may
not have a lot of resources to put against sustainability
initiatives, or even know how to tackle starting that process.
We built our tool, or are building our tool, in a manner that
will allow them to ramp into the sustainability journey. And we
have also built it in a way that large organizations like
McDonald's can, with some resources to put against
sustainability, can use this tool, and have their data
incorporated into that, so we have an end-to-end view of the
sustainability view for the U.S. poultry and ag industries.
Mr. Mann. Great. Thank you. I see my time has expired.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the time.
The Chairman. Well, we thank the gentleman, and we thank
Mr. Meier for your points well taken. I believe the staff has
indicated to me that the last Member, but certainly very
patient, and well spoken, is my friend, the Representative from
Maine, who has been waiting with a great deal of patience for
her allotted time, Representative Pingree, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and the
time I have been able to listen, it is been very beneficial.
Thank you for holding this hearing. And to all of the
witnesses, thank you for your patience with all of our
questions, and really your great testimony. I am particularly
excited that two of our practicing farmers are females, so
great to have both of you on the panel as well.
Let us see, I have so many things to ask, but I will try to
be quick here. One, I won't go into it, but both of the farmers
have mentioned--or two of the farmers have mentioned
slaughterhouse capacity, and that is an issue I have been very
involved in for a long time, so we are hoping to move that
forward, and particularly some of the extra funding we have had
to deal with supply chain issues, so we know how important that
is.
And, Ms. Burroughs, I am going to just start with you.
Thank you for all of your thoughts today. I had the chance to
hear you speak just a little bit on the Real Organic Symposium
last Sunday, and really appreciate your talking about
challenges that organic dairy farmers are having with not being
paid really the cost of the production that they are dealing
with today. And for us in New England, as my colleague from
Connecticut mentioned, with the loss of the Horizon contracts,
we are in a crisis state right now, so we really feel for the
challenges that you are dealing with. And, as to the origin of
livestock, and the other rules, we really--it is shameful how
long it has taken to get these done. They are at OMB now, so we
have our fingers crossed that we will finally be able to
deliver that to farmers.
But I wanted to talk to you about one particular thing you
mentioned in your testimony. You obviously have been doing
amazing things on your farm, you have a lot of data, and I
understand you do a lot to mentor other farmers who are
interested in adopting these practices, and that is so
critically important. So many farmers that we meet say I want
to do more, but I need to talk directly to a farmer about how
they are going on doing that. So I am interesting in how we do
more to provide technical assistance, to get that knowledge in
the hands of farmers, particularly things like management
intensive grazing. So, as we are looking forward to the farm
bill, do you have some recommendations to us about how we could
scale up our efforts, and what you think is most beneficial?
Ms. Burroughs. Thank you so much for the work that you are
doing for our industry, and we so very much need your support.
I think that the best way that we could get help is for more
funding, again, for outreach, education, and research. Farmer
to farmer is the best way to educate and have people be open to
changing what they are doing, and have this paradigm shift of
working toward regenerative practices.
I want to share one quick story, and that is that in our
research study that we were conducting here at our farm over
the last 3 years with the Ecdysis Foundation, we compared
regenerative practices with conventional practices. And when we
gathered the data, after the first year, one of our
conventional farmers kind of stood up, and got really angry,
and said these numbers must be wrong. It is impossible that
these regenerative farms cannot spray any pesticide on the
almonds, and yet have the same yield, and volume, and pest
damage. And after a year of working with the program, the
second year, he has converted one of his farms to regenerative
practices, and today, now, all of his farms are going
regenerative.
So it is about farmer to farmer education, but we need the
support of research like at Chico State University, or the
Ecdysis Society, so that these numbers can show about how we
can be a sponge, and hold water in our systems, and use less
water. They are talking about California--of a 20 percent
reduction of water use, and we are going to so desperately need
these regenerative practices to keep the farmers viable and
working----
Ms. Pingree. Thank you. I have to stop you there because,
you are wonderful, and I could use up all my time, but I want
to just very quickly turn to Mr. Medeiros. Thank you so much
for your presentation today. A 1,600 cow dairy is sort of
unthinkable in the State of Maine, but we know California is a
different place. And you talked a little bit about digesters,
and I know that California has an alternative manure management
program to financially incentivize manure management. I am
trying to work with Mr. Costa's office, I know it is something
he is interested in because, being from California, has so much
experience there, but I am just interested, I have included
some of the things in the California model in a bill I am
working on, and just want to know, how do you see the practices
working out? Are there things that Congress can learn from what
is going on in California that also could be part of the farm
bill? And you will have to be quick, but maybe we will get an
extra 10 seconds for you.
Mr. Medeiros. Okay, real quick. So we have the digester
program and the--program--all sort of manure--I am sorry.
The Chairman. No, I am the Chairman--because of my friend,
the Member who asked the question, and because of the witness
being from my area, will have the time needed to answer the
question properly.
Ms. Pingree. There you go. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Medeiros. Thank you, thank you. Well, anyway, two
different programs, right, and as I spoke earlier, digesters is
not going to fit every program, so the alternative manure
management program brings a great alternative to being able to
handle methane, and how we handle manure. And, through
research, and through funding through that program--and,
actually, in California it has been over-subscribed, and there
are so many producers that want to get involved in the
alternative manure management practice--so we are hoping to see
more funding coming in that direction.
And when we talk about the alternative, it ranges from
manure separation to drip irrigation using manure water. I
mean, we have research done on farms out here on how we were
able to utilize filtration system in moving manure water to
crops, utilizing those nutrients when the plant needs it the
most, and lowering our emissions. Just simply how we handle
manure on the farm, application processes through the manure
management program. So, so many avenues that we have done out
here in California there are, and I am sure you know that
California has led the way when it comes to environmental
issues, so, I mean, we have the most aggressive program out
here. We are about ready to reach our targets by reducing
methane by 40 percent, and it was all these programs--not one
by itself can do it.
And I want Congress to really understand that, that we
talked earlier about consolidation, and the industry. The last
thing we want to do is speed up consolidation through mandates,
right? And the more incentives we have on a voluntary basis for
producers is so valuable to our industry, and the viability of
our industry. So we need to remember that, and how we keep
pushing these programs forward, and trying to achieve the goals
that we need to achieve, how will we fund these programs?
Because the last thing we want to do is accelerate
consolidation because of these programs.
Ms. Pingree. Well, thank you----
The Chairman. Representative----
Ms. Pingree. We will definitely want to look more to the
California experience, so we are anxious to hear more about
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the extra time, and I just
want to say to Mr. Medeiros, I have raised Jersey cows in my
life, and it is rare to hear a Holstein farmer extolling their
virtue, so that made my day.
The Chairman.--Pingree, I will provide you the information
to contact Mr. Medeiros, and you can----
Ms. Pingree. Thank you
The Chairman.--continue that conversation offline. So we
are prepared to wrap up the Subcommittee hearing at this time
with a close by our Ranking Member and myself, but let me first
take the privilege of the chair to give a shameless promo for
the 55th Annual World Expo Ag Show held in Tulare, California
next week for 3 days. Opening ceremonies will provide the
challenges that we face in American agriculture that--which we
have participants from all over the world that come and
participate. Sessions on dairy, water, government regulations
will be held. There are also cooking demonstrations. It is an
incredible show that has over 100,000 people that participate
in 3 days. So for those of you who haven't been to the World Ag
Expo, I--put it on your list if you are interested in
innovating agricultural technologies, and the challenges we
face today.
With that said, a person who is always very innovative, and
using the best technological opportunities to his advantage, is
my good friend Representative Dusty Johnson for his closing
comments.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman for your leadership,
and for our friendship. I won't take long. I just want to note
that so many Members of this Subcommittee have talked to the
panelists about how good they were today, and it is absolutely
true. That is not typical. I suspect we all could listen to you
guys go on a lot longer, so thank you for your knowledge, your
expertise, and your forward-looking love of agriculture. This
is a great day.
And too many out there want to cast aspersions on American
ag producers. They want to tell them to do less. The message we
have heard today, loud and clear, from both sides of the aisle
is that if we care about sustainability, economic
sustainability, environmental sustainability, we need the
innovation and leadership of the American ag producers now more
than ever. And so I am looking forward to what tomorrow brings,
because if it is anything like yesterday, it is going to be
great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Am I on--am I muted, or can you hear me?
Okay. I am good now? Let me begin again. Thanks, again,
Representative Dusty Johnson, Ranking Member of this Committee,
for your closing comments, and always for your participation.
For Members, and for those witnesses who have testified today,
I concur with everyone's reflection that this was a very good
Subcommittee hearing, one that we can build on as this
Subcommittee continues to do its work this year on a host of
important issues affecting livestock and foreign agriculture,
and as we help set the table for next year's reauthorization of
the farm bill.
I think it is important--as I listened to the testimony,
the questions today, a few things stood out to me. Currently it
is difficult to measure actions that are leading to substantive
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. I think that is
important, and I think it is critical that we come up with more
measurable ways to assess progress on the farm, because I think
we are making progress. I think this means that we have to
emphasize more on research and what works, and, as importantly,
what doesn't work.
When we make sure that the research and cutting-edge
practices are available to ranchers, dairy farmers--and farmers
and ranchers I think clearly understand, they certainly do in
California, the effects of climate change. And we have seen it
in my own generation, just different from how things were today
than when my father was farming. And so we need to reinforce
how important it is, because agricultural leaders throughout
the country are taking a lead in reducing emissions of all
kinds. That story is not well told, but we need to do a better
job of it, as was mentioned here in the testimony.
Finally, I think we need to ensure that our producers are
not punished for adapting. I mean, change is constant, and
farmers, ranchers, dairymen and -women who are successful,
especially generational, are those that are best understanding
of the changes, and are best at adapting to change. Those who
don't understand that are the ones so often who are unable to
stay in business. So it is unreasonable to ask producers to
make changes that are financially untenable. We have to
understand that the economics have to work. We must look
forward to market-based solutions, any ways to incentify
sustainable practices. All the witnesses here today talked
about sustainable practices, and how they have tried to make
them economically viable, and some practices that were not
economically viable.
So I look forward to continuing the conversation with all
who have been involved today, with our farmers, ranchers,
dairymen and -women, the fellow Members of Congress, who have
been very attentive today. My colleagues really want to work
together. As I said, this Committee is one of the most
bipartisan committees traditionally, today that we have in
Congress, and we need to have more of this, frankly, in my
view. The divisions aren't good, and they are not helpful
toward reaching common solutions that I think are in the best
interests of our country. So, for my fellow Members of the
Subcommittee, and for the Administration, we can work together
to deal with the challenges to combat climate change, and we
will do so, so I look forward to that continuing effort.
Let me close by saying, as Chairman, under the Rules of the
Committee, the record of today's hearing will remain open for
10 calendar days to receive additional material and
supplemental written responses from the witnesses, so
therefore, the witnesses, if you have additional information
that you want to provide the Subcommittee, you have 10 days to
provide that. And Members will have 10 days to provide any
additional information that they would like to submit for
testimony, or additional questions, questions they might like
to ask the witnesses. So, with that said, the Subcommittee
today is adjourned. Thank you very much.
[Whereupon, at 12:30 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Letter by Hon. Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia; on Behalf of Lotanna Obodozie, Climate Campaign Director;
David Howard, Co-Policy Director, National Young Farmers Coalition

Hon. David Scott,                    Hon. Glenn Thompson,
Chairman,                            Ranking Minority Member,
House Committee on Agriculture,      House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.;

Hon. Jim Costa,                      Hon. Dusty Johnson,
Chairman,                            Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Livestock and        Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture,                 Foreign Agriculture,
House Committee on Agriculture,      House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.

Re: In Regards to the Sustainability in the Livestock Sector:
Environmental Gain and Economic Viability Hearing before
the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Agriculture,
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture

Date: February 3, 2022

The National Young Farmers Coalition (Young Farmers) thanks the
U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Agriculture for holding this
hearing on sustainability in the livestock sector.
Climate change is an increasing and persistent threat to
agriculture, disrupting food production across the country and the rest
of the world. The agricultural sector, however, is uniquely poised to
be able to directly mitigate the disastrous effects of climate change
through practices that sequester carbon in the soil and provide other
ecosystem services to build on-farm climate resilience. Many of these
practices go hand in hand with sustainable livestock management, and
together can have a significant impact in combating climate change. In
examining the sustainability of the livestock sector, we must also
consider the sustainability of the infrastructure and processes,
fairness of practices, and health and dignity of people involved in
getting meat on the table. As the pandemic began and worsened through
the first half of 2020, we saw clear indications of the fragility of
our food supply, and smaller scale livestock producers across the
country faced even greater wait times for processing than they were
already experiencing.\1\ * We thank the Honorable David Scott, Glenn
`GT' Thompson, Jim Costa, and Dusty Johnson for holding this hearing to
discuss the sustainability of the livestock sector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ OECD, Food Supply Chains and COVID-19, Impacts and Policy
Lessons, June, 2, 2020, https://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-
responses/food-supply-chains-and-covid-19-impacts-and-policy-lessons-
71b57aea/.
* Editor's note: Footnotes annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The National Young Farmers Coalition works closely with young
farmers across the country to assist them in building resilience to
climate change through training, building farmer networks across the
U.S., and advocating for policy change at the state and Federal level.
Our campaigns focus on key issues, identified by our members, to
address the major obstacles young farmers face.
In a 2017 national survey of our coalition, 66% of respondents
reported experiencing unpredictable weather and 53% attributed those
changes to climate change.\2\ Furthermore, in a 2020 survey of policy
issues, our members across the country identified addressing climate
change as their number one priority.\3\ Young farmers, particularly
Black, Indigenous and other people of color (BIPOC) farmers are on the
frontlines of experiencing this crisis and at the same time are
carrying knowledge and expertise--often rooted in indigenous
practices--necessary to respond to it effectively.\4\ Our farmers have
experienced increased pest pressure, uncertainty and severe
fluctuations in water supply, and increased rates of disease, with
seemingly no end in sight. Young farmers have lost crops and sustained
damage to their farms due to extreme weather events, have had disrupted
growing seasons, suffered severe economic losses, and have shut down
operations due to droughts and unsafe conditions from uncontrolled
wildfires.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Sophie Ackoff, Andrew Bahrenburg, and Lindsey Lusher Shute,
Building a Future with Farmers II, National Young Farmers Coalition,
November 2017, www.youngfarmers.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/NYFC-
Report-2017.pdf.
\3\ National Young Farmers Coalition, ``2021 Climate Policy
Recommendations,''  May 2021, https://www.youngfarmers.org/2021/05/
2021-climate-recommendations/.
\4\ Springer, Regenerative Food Systems and The Conservation of
Change, November, 9, 2021,

``There is likewise extensive evidence that most pre-colonial
Indigenous environmental practices were, and continue to be,
regenerative in nature (Fisher, et al., 2019; Ellis, et al., 2021).''

https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10460-021-10282-2#ref-
CR25.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Further compounding this issue is the lack of access to affordable,
quality land, as farmland, agriculture, and the climate crisis are
deeply intertwined. Land is the foundation of nourishment and
resiliency and is the number one tool available to farmers in the fight
against climate change. Land that is stewarded plays a critical role in
climate change mitigation and resilience, yet accelerating trends of
farmland loss are occurring disproportionately on soils rated highest
for productivity, versatility, and resiliency.\5\ Additionally, the
dispossession of land from BIPOC individuals and the ongoing
consolidation of land into the hands of fewer and fewer owners makes
this issue all the more difficult for BIPOC farmers. Secure land tenure
is critical to farmers' ability to remain in the field long-term and to
making deep-rooted and long lasting climate interventions. Despite
being heavily affected by climate change, farmers have the
transformative power to sequester carbon by using climate-smart methods
including managed grazing, silvopasture, planting cover crops, and
using no- and reduced-till methods. By incorporating these methods and
others like them, farmers can simultaneously provide healthy food to
their local communities--but they can only do so with access to land
and access to affordable and reliable meat processing services.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Julia Freedgood, Mitch Hunter, Jennifer Dempsey, and Ann
Sorensen, Farms Under Threat: The State of the States, American
Farmland Trust, 2020.
\6\ Holly Rippon-Butler, Land Policy: Toward a More Equitable
Farming Future, National Young Farmers Coalition, 2020, https://
www.youngfarmers.org/land/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/
LandPolicyReport.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Young farmers' values are aligned toward sustainable practices, and
they are innovating at the farm level as they navigate the impacts of
climate change, a global pandemic, and a livestock processing and
packing system that isn't designed for them. They are leading the way
in modeling what a sustainable food and farming future can look like:
working at the community level to innovate around the many challenges
they face. In recent conversations with young farmers--discussing the
Biden Administration's plans to fund the expansion of independent
processing capacity \7\--they have foregrounded the need for direct and
ongoing support for small and very small or mobile processors,
including state and custom exempt facilities. To compete in an
increasingly consolidated system, independent facilities need long-term
support to weather swings in supply and demand. Access to processing at
this scale is critical for young farmers who are not selling into
global or national markets. As one farmer put it, often they ``. . .
are the supply chain (producer, processor, distributor).'' Young
farmers are invested in farming sustainably, in feeding their
communities, and building equitable food and farming systems. Federal
policies at the intersection of livestock production and climate change
must invest in equitable access to high quality farmland and community-
led solutions to processing and distribution challenges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ The White House, Fact Sheet: The Biden-Harris Action Plan for a
Fairer, More Competitive, and More Resilient Meat and Poultry Supply
Chain, January 3, 2022, https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
statements-releases/2022/01/03/fact-sheet-the-biden-harris-action-plan-
for-a-fairer-more-competitive-and-more-resilient-meat-and-poultry-
supply-chain/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Young Farmers would like to thank the Honorable David Scott, Glenn
`GT' Thompson, Jim Costa and Dusty Johnson for convening this hearing
to discuss sustainability in the livestock sector. A sustainable
livestock sector is critical for combating climate change, improving
access to land, and preserving livestock management traditions. We look
forward to working with you to find ways to make sure that young,
beginning, and BIPOC farmers and ranchers are leading the future of
sustainable livestock management.
Sincerely,

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Lotanna Obodozie,                    David Howard,
Climate Campaign Director,           Co-Policy Director.
National Young Farmers Coalition;    National Young Farmers Coalition.

______

Submitted Article by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/01/opinion/climate-sustainability-
agriculture-lobby.html]

2/1/2022

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Editor's note: the video is retained in Committee file.
Opinion
Video Series
Meet the People Getting Paid to Kill Our Planet
American agriculture is ravaging the air, soil and water. But
a powerful lobby has cleverly concealed its damage.

By Kirk Semple, Adam Westbrook and Jonah M. Kessel

Video by Kirk Semple,\1\ Adam Westbrook and Jonah M. Kessel \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.nytimes.com/by/kirk-semple.
\2\ https://www.nytimes.com/by/jonah-m-kessel.

Mr. Semple is a reporter and producer with Opinion Video,
where Mr. Westbrook is a producer and editor, and Mr. Kessel is
the deputy director.
``We're Cooked'' is an Opinion Video series about our broken
food system and the three chances you get to help fix it--and
save the planet--every day.

The global food system is a wonder of technological and logistical
brilliance. It feeds more people than ever, supplying a greater variety
of food more cheaply and faster than ever.
It is also causing irreparable harm to the planet.
The system--a vast web of industries and processes that stretches
from seed to pasture to packaging to supermarket to trash dump--
produces at least \1/3\ of all human-caused greenhouse gases.
Yet somehow these impacts aren't in the forefront of the
conversation about global warming. Indeed, they often aren't in the
conversation at all.
In the Opinion Video above, we explore why. Our focus is American
agriculture, an industry that, while feeding the United States, is also
damaging the environment--contaminating the air and water, exhausting
the soil, destroying wildlife habitats and spurring climate change.
But despite these harms, the sector has largely been spared
environmental regulation. This exception reflects, in part, the special
place that farmers occupy in the American imagination. But the
industry, particularly the big corporations that are increasingly
dominating the sector, are also aided by one of the most effective
lobbies on the planet.
This is the first in a series of three Opinion Videos that we are
publishing this month, each providing an angle on the food system and,
we hope, changing the way you look at food and making you think twice
about what you put on your plate. The second video will examine how a
few powerful companies dominate the chicken industry, trapping farmers
in exploitative relationships and condemning the animals to short,
wretched lives. The third video will propose a dietary modification
that may gross you out--but also might help curb climate change.
For now, pull up a chair at the lobbyists' lunch table. Juicy,
expensive steak is on the menu. If you're a taxpayer in the United
States, try your best to enjoy it. After all, considering agriculture's
enormous public subsidies and the harm the industry is doing to your
land, air and water, it's you who will ultimately be picking up the
tab.
______

Submitted Statement by Geoff Horsfield, Government Affairs Manager,
Environmental Working Group
Unless we reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the livestock
sector, we will not avoid the worst consequences of the climate crisis.
Agriculture is a significant--and growing source--of greenhouse gas
emissions. The Environmental Protection Agency estimates that
agriculture accounts for 10 percent \1\ of greenhouse gas
emissions,
[i]
and the production of meat and dairy products
accounts for most of those emissions.\2\ Livestock generate greenhouse
gas emissions in three ways: nitrous oxide emissions caused by
fertilizing animal feed and their waste; \3\ carbon dioxide emissions
caused by plowing up land to produce animal feed; \4\ and methane
emissions \5\ from farm animals and their waste Nitrous oxide emissions
from agriculture--which are 300 times more powerful \6\ than carbon
dioxide emissions--account for 75 percent \7\ of U.S. nitrous oxide
emissions. Methane emissions from agriculture--which are 80 times \8\
more powerful than carbon dioxide emissions--account for at least 36
percent \9\ of U.S. methane emissions.
[ii]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-
emissions-and-sinks.*
* Editor's note: Footnotes annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
\[i]\ This estimate excludes sources of emissions that may be
counted in other categories, such as fuel and electricity, as well as
fertilizer production, food waste, land conversion, and other
additional sources. See https://earthjustice.org/from-the-experts/2022-
january/farming-for-our-future-climate-change-agriculture.
\2\ https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-11/from-farm-
to-kitchen-the-environmental-impacts-of-u.s.-food-waste_508-
tagged.pdf.
\3\ https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/understanding-global-warming-
potentials.
\4\ https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/
S1462901109000173.
\5\ https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aaq0216.
\6\ https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/overview-greenhouse-
gases#nitrous-oxide.
\7\ https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/overview-greenhouse-
gases#nitrous-oxide.
\8\ https://earth.stanford.edu/news/methane-and-climate-
change#gs.oce0fq.
\9\ https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/overview-greenhouse-
gases#methane.
\[ii]\ Global estimates (https://gml.noaa.gov/webdata/ccgg/trends/
ch4/ch4_mm_gl.txt)  put anthropogenic emissions from agriculture on
par with methane emissions from fossil fuels. These emissions may be
greater than previously estimated by 39 to 90 percent. See Miller, et
al., Anthropogenic emissions of methane in the United States,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, Dec. 2013, 110 (50)
20018-20022; https://www.pnas.org/content/110/50/20018 and see Hayek
and Miller, Underestimates of methane from intensively raised animals
could undermine goals of sustainable development, Environmental
Research Letters, June 2021, available at https://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac02ef.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Livestock production also results in a web of public health impacts
ranging from cancer to air pollution to the contamination of drinking
water supplies. Farm pollution containing animal wastes, pathogens \10\
and excess nutrients can wash off farm fields into drinking water \11\
supplies. High levels of nitrate in drinking water have been linked to
certain cancers,\12\ and the byproducts of chemicals \13\ added to
drinking water to address animal waste and other organic matter in
water supplies have also been linked to cancer. Pathogens in water
contaminated from animal runoff can cause gastrointestinal illness \14\
and death.
[iii]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.ewg.org/news-insights/news-release/ewg-
investigation-manure-overload-threatens-water-minnesotas-farm.
\11\ https://www.ewg.org/tapwater/trouble-in-farm-country.php.
\12\ https://progressreport.cancer.gov/prevention/nitrate.
\13\ https://www.ewg.org/tapwater/reviewed-disinfection-
byproducts.php.
\14\ https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/surveillance/burden/
findings.html.
\[iii]\ A recent EWG and Clean Wisconsin analysis (https://
www.ewg.org/research/double-trouble-wisconsins-land-and-water-are-
inundated-pollution-animal-manure-and-excess) found direct medical
costs for nitrate contamination of Wisconsin's drinking water range
from $23 million to $80 million per year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Air pollution caused by meat production annually leads to more than
12,000 \15\ premature deaths--more than coal-fired power plants. Meat
production increases emissions \16\ of ammonia and particulate matter.
The nutrients in animal waste and the fertilizer used to grow animal
feed also fuel the growth of toxic algae \17\ blooms. In western
states, almost 60 percent \18\ of our freshwater is used to irrigate
animal feed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ https://www.pnas.org/content/118/20/e2013637118.
\16\ https://www.pnas.org/content/118/20/e2013637118.
\17\ https://www.ewg.org/areas-focus/farming-agriculture/toxic-
algae.
\18\ https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/farm-practices-management/
irrigation-water-use/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Voluntary conservation practices are an important part of the
solution to the challenges posed by livestock production, but
incentives alone will not do enough to address greenhouse gas emissions
and other environmental impacts. In the best-case scenario,\19\ in
which all farmers adopt all the best practices, emissions of nitrous
oxide and methane could be reduced.
[iv]
But even in this
highly unlikely scenario, expected increases in demand for animal
protein will offset expected environmental gains.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0959652621013573.
\[iv]\ The Breakthrough Institute (https://thebreakthrough.org/
issues/food/the-clean-cow)  found that existing technology would only
reduce emissions from cattle by 18 percent.
\20\ https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/aab0ac.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Voluntary efforts to reduce emissions have failed so far to make
significant progress, since practices are often abandoned when
conservation contracts expire; \21\ farmers offering to reduce
emissions are frequently turned away \22\ due to lack of funds; and
industry-led initiatives often fail to deliver promised
results.
[v]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ https://www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/95642/eib-
215.pdf.
\22\ https://www.ewg.org/news-insights/news/2021/08/growing-farm-
conservation-backlog-shows-need-congress-spend-smarter.
\[v]\ In 2009, dairy companies reached a voluntary agreement
(https://www.usnews.com/science/articles/2009/12/15/us-counting-on-
cows-to-reduce-emissions)  to reduce methane emissions 25 percent by
2020. Instead, methane emissions increased. Other emissions reduction
pledges are either unenforceable (https://www.reuters.com/business/cop/
investor-group-warns-livestock-industry-needs-do-more-methane-2021-12-
01), vague, or have failed (https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2020-
company-emissions-pledges/).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If, as expected,\23\ global protein demand doubles, and most of
that demand is met by animal proteins, incentives alone will not
suffice to change the trajectory of greenhouse emissions caused by
livestock production. Animal protein production in the U.S. has
increased \24\ by eight percent since 1970 and is expected to increase
\25\ through 2031. Although incentives and current technologies could
temporarily reduce methane emissions from farm animals, expected
increases in demand for animal protein will more than offset those
gains.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5532560/#B2-
foods-06-00053.
\24\ https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Jayson-Lusk-2/
publication/269429898_Role_of_
technology_in_the_global_economic_importance_and_viability_of_animal_pro
tein_production/links/59d23406aca2721f43698bc2/Role-of-technology-in-
the-global-economic-importance-and-viability-of-animal-protein-
production.pdf.
\25\ https://usda.library.cornell.edu/concern/publications/
qn59q396v?locale=en.
\26\ https://thebreakthrough.org/issues/food/the-clean-cow.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
True sustainability in the livestock sector requires confronting,
and recognizing, the hard truth that there cannot be infinite growth.
The more the livestock sector grows, the worse it will be for the
climate, water quality, and public health. We must change how we raise
livestock. But to avoid the worst effects of the climate crisis, we
must also scale up the production of and demand for animal protein
alternatives like plant-based, fermented, and cultivated proteins. The
crops used to produce alternative proteins--such as soybeans, wheat,
peas, mushrooms, lentils, beans, and others--can require less nitrogen
fertilizer,\27\ less land,\28\ and less water.\29\ And they do not
produce animal waste \30\ or methane.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ https://journals.ametsoc.org/configurable/content/
journals$002feint$002f14$002f21$002f2010ei321.1.xml.
\28\ https://ourworldindata.org/land-use-diets.
\29\ https://www.sustain.ucla.edu/food-systems/the-case-for-plant-
based/.
\30\ https://www.wri.org/research/shifting-diets-sustainable-food-
future.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Greenhouse gas emissions per 100 grams of protein

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Greenhouse gas emissions are measured in kilograms of carbon
dioxide equivalents (kgCO
2
eq) per 100 grams of
protein. This means non-CO
2
greenhouse gases are
included and weighted by their relative warming impact.
Source: Poore, J., & Nemecek, T. (2018). Additional
calculations by Our World in Data.
[vi]

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\[vi]\ Poore & Nemechek, Reducing food's environmental impacts
through producers and consumers, Science, available at https://
www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aaq0216.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: Data represents the global average greenhouse gas
emissions of food products based on a large meta-analysis of
food production covering 38,700 commercially viable farms in
119 countries.
https://ourworldindata.org/environmental-impacts-of-food.

Shifting some of the expected demand for animal proteins to
alternative proteins will also help preserve the use of life-saving
antibiotics and reduce foodborne illness. The overuse of life-saving
antibiotics to protect animals in crowded factory farms makes bacteria
more resistant. More than 35,000 Americans die \31\ annually from
antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections. About 80 percent of
antibiotics are used for animal production, and about 70 percent of
these are medically important \32\ for humans. Consuming meat, poultry,
and dairy accounts for nearly \1/2\ \33\ of the deaths and illnesses
caused by foodborne pathogens like E. coli and Salmonella. Produce
irrigated with water contaminated by livestock fecal matter accounts
for much of the remaining death and illness caused by contaminants in
food.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ https://www.cdc.gov/drugresistance/index.html.
\32\ https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4638249/.
\33\ https://www.cdc.gov/foodborneburden/attribution-
image.html#foodborne-illnesses.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Investments in alternatives like plant-based proteins will also
support farmers and create jobs. Plant-based food production already
supports over 55,600 jobs \34\ in the U.S.
[vii]
and could
support 200,000 more jobs \35\ by 2030. Failure to invest in
alternative proteins will cause the U.S. to fall behind global
competitors--as has been the case in the wind \36\ and solar \37\
industries. Unlike the government of the U.S., those of Canada,\38\
Israel,\39\ Denmark,\40\ Sweden,\41\ Singapore,\42\ the
Netherlands,\43\ Qatar,\44\ Australia,\45\ the EU \46\ and the UK are
making significant investments in the development of alternative
proteins. China has already made significant investments to capture
large shares of the global soy protein ingredient industry and is
investing in cultivated agriculture, as well as plant-based companies,
as part of its 5 year agricultural plan.\47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ https://www.plantbasedfoods.org/wp-content/uploads/PBFA-Jobs-
Report-2019.pdf.
\[vii]\ This includes the fact that average salaries for plant-
based foods are more than $12,000 higher than the national average.
\35\ https://s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/
uploads.thebreakthrough.org/Alternative-Protein-Report_v6.pdf.
\36\ https://www.csis.org/east-green-chinas-global-leadership-
renewable-energy.
\37\ https://www.americanmanufacturing.org/blog/the-solar-industry-
provides-a-cautionary-tale-for-americas-clean-energy-future/.
\38\ https://www.pembinavalleyonline.com/ag-news/federal-
government-providing-nearly-100-million-in-financing-to-winnipeg-based-
merit-functional-foods.
\39\ https://www.timesofisrael.com/israel-carving-out-key-role-in-
alternative-protein-market-report-says/.
\40\ https://plantbasednews.org/lifestyle/food/danish-government-
denmark-plant-based-foods/.
\41\ https://vegconomist.com/agriculture/sweden-invests-in-
homegrown-foods-to-improve-self-sufficiency-and-deal-with-vegan-demand/
.
\42\ https://www.eco-business.com/opinion/is-singapore-poised-to-
become-asias-hub-for-alternative-protein/.
\43\ https://vegconomist.com/companies-and-portraits/netherlands-
emerging-as-new-plant-based-industrial-hub-as-upfield-announces-e50m-
investment-for-the-future-of-plant-based-foods/.
\44\ https://agfundernews.com/qatar-plans-cell-cultured-meat-hub-
through-200m-investment-in-eat-just.html.
\45\ https://www.dairyreporter.com/Article/2021/09/09/Australian-
alt-protein-company-gets-government-funding-for-cow-free-dairy-
proteins.
\46\ https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/communication-
annex-farm-fork-green-deal_en.pdf.
\47\ https://vegconomist.com/cultivated/five-year-agricultural-
plan/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our food and farm policies require significant reform if we hope to
avoid the worst consequences of climate change. Due to misplaced
priorities, thousands of farmers are turned away by USDA when they
offer to share the cost of practices proven to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. This is the result of five policy failures: Too much farm
spending flows in the form of farm subsidies to the largest and most
successful farm businesses; \48\ these subsidies favor crop choices and
practices that increase nitrous oxide emissions and encourage farmers
to cultivate environmentally sensitive lands; too little spending flows
to voluntary farm stewardship programs; misplaced priorities within
stewardship programs favor practices with few environmental benefits;
\49\ and there is too much spending in support of animal proteins and
too little spending in support of plant-based and other protein
alternatives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ https://www.ewg.org/interactive-maps/2021-farm-subsidies-
ballooned-under-trump/.
\49\ https://conservation.ewg.org/what-do-conservation-data-tell-
us.php.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
House leaders sought to address these misplaced priorities by
including $27 billion in the Build Back Better Act for conservation
practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions. This investment--the
largest investment in conservation spending since the Dust Bowl--is
historic for both size and commitment to practices that reduce
emissions. But Congress must go further by reforming our subsidy
programs to encourage crop choices and practices that require less
nitrogen fertilizer, by expanding and reforming our conservation
programs to support practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and
by investing in alternatives to animal proteins.
Supporting farmers who offer to share the cost of practices that
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, supporting companies seeking to scale
up alternatives to animal proteins, and supporting consumers shifting
to a diet like the Mediterranean diet or planetary health diet is
essential if we hope to avoid the worst impacts of climate change.\50\
Any delay will require future actions to be even more ambitious--and
drastic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\50\ http://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aba7357.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even if we stopped burning fossil fuels today, greenhouse gas
emissions from food and farming \51\ could make a climate catastrophe
unavoidable. Farmers are already bearing the brunt of the extreme
weather \52\ caused by climate change. But the devastating economic
impacts of the climate crisis are not the only reason for farmers to
act: As emissions from energy and transportation continue to fall,\53\
and emissions from fertilizer and animals grow due to rising protein
demand, agriculture's contribution \54\ to the climate crisis will
steadily increase.
[viii]
By 2050, greenhouse gas emissions
from animals and the production of their feed \55\ could easily account
for \1/3\ of U.S. emissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\51\ http://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.aba7357.
\52\ https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/climate-change-is-
hitting-farmers-hard/.
\53\ https://cfpub.epa.gov/ghgdata/inventoryexplorer/#agriculture/
entiresector/allgas/category/all.
\54\ https://cfpub.epa.gov/ghgdata/inventoryexplorer/#agriculture/
entiresector/allgas/category/all.
\[viii]\ Total methane emissions have decreased 18 percent since
1990, methane emissions from agriculture have increased by 16 percent.
\55\ https://www.fao.org/3/i3437e/i3437e.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Submitted on behalf of the Environmental Working Group,

Geoff Horsfield,
Government Affairs Manager.
______

Submitted Statement by Julie Anna Potts, President and Chief Executive
Officer North American Meat Institute
On behalf of the North American Meat Institute (NAMI or the Meat
Institute) based in Washington, D.C., and its members, thank you for
the opportunity to submit this testimony.
The Meat Institute is the United States' oldest and largest trade
association representing packers and processors of beef, pork, lamb,
veal, turkey, and processed meat products. NAMI members include over
350 meat packing and processing companies, the majority of which have
fewer than 100 employees, and account for over 95 percent of the United
States' output of meat and 70 percent of turkey production.
In July 2021, NAMI and 11 other organizations representing farmers
and companies who produce the vast majority of America's meat, poultry,
and dairy products, as well as animal feed and ingredients, unveiled
the Protein PACT for the People, Animals, and Climate of Tomorrow. The
Protein PACT is the first joint initiative of its kind designed to
verify progress toward global sustainable development goals across all
animal protein sectors to ensure consumers can trust that meat aligns
with their sustainability expectations. In addition, the Meat Institute
is a member of the U.S. Roundtable for Sustainable Beef (USRSB),
partnering with beef producers and others in the supply chain to
advance beef sustainability through overarching and sector specific
metrics and goals, and USRSB is a Protein PACT partner, joining our
effort to share the progress being made in the beef sector.
Through Protein PACT, Meat Institute members have developed robust
metrics for continuous improvement and have publicly committed to
sustain healthy animals, thriving workers and communities, safe food,
balanced diets, and the environment.
Measuring Impact
To measure impact and achieve the ambitious targets set by the Meat
Institute's members, a task force of NAMI subject matter experts
developed 100 metrics across the five Protein PACT focus areas to
measure and improve sustainability in meat packing and processing.
These metrics have been endorsed by the Meat Institute's Board of
Directors and will apply to our diverse membership, who employ more
than 800,000 people and make thousands of different products. The
metrics have been vetted extensively with sustainability experts and
partners across the supply chain.
To encourage full participation by companies of all sizes, the Meat
Institute has established a broad range of measurable indicators within
each focus area. These indicators allow companies to demonstrate
continuous improvement at every stage of their sustainability efforts,
transparently demonstrating compliance and measuring progress in
setting, tracking and delivering on ambitious public commitments.
Our benchmarks are designed to complement and strengthen efforts by
farmers and livestock producers, and also bridge to actions in grocery
stores, restaurants and homes--all of which are needed to truly achieve
our common goals for the people, animals and climate of tomorrow.
Efficiency Drives Sustainability
A key component of sustainability is achieving higher productivity
through more efficient use of resources. Stated differently, efficiency
is sustainability. The meat industry has dramatically increased
efficiency over the last 60 years.
Productivity in Sustainable Beef Production

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Today, we produce more than twice as much beef with roughly the
same number of cattle as in 1959, and 18 percent more beef than when
the U.S. cattle herd hit its largest size in 1975. Farmers and ranchers
produce beef using 33% less land, 12% less water, and with a 16%
smaller carbon footprint in 2007 compared to 1977.\1\ That is an
astounding sustainability success story.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Neumeier and Mitloehner doi:10.2527/af.2013-0022. *
Editor's note: footnotes annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The U.S. meat industry cannot continue to build on this remarkable
sustainable productivity growth and meet consumer expectations if the
government restricts interactions between packers and producers. For
example, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) has announced plans
to propose new rules under the Packers and Stockyards Act to regulate
the interactions between packers and producers. By design, the proposed
rules will discourage the use of alternative marketing arrangements
(AMAs)--the very tools that have improved efficiency, productivity, and
risk management over the past 2 decades and allowed the sector to meet
consumer expectations for increased beef quality.
As multiple agricultural economists \2\ and cattle producers \3\
have explained, AMAs increase market efficiency by transmitting market
signals about consumers' preferences to producers. The remarkable
improvement in beef quality demonstrates this.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See the following: The U.S. Beef Supply Chain: Issues and
Challenges, Proceedings of a Workshop on Cattle Markets, Agriculture
and Food Policy Center, Texas A&M University, 2021, cattle.pdf
(tamu.edu); Anderson, et al., Univ. of Arkansas, 2022, https://cpb-us-
e1.wpmucdn.com/wordpressua.uark.edu/dist/6/907/files/2022/01/CPDTA-
analysis-01.18.
22.pdf;  Koontz, S., Costs and Benefits of Mandatory Negotiated Cash
Participation in Fed Cattle Markets, 2022; Glynn Tonsor, Ph.D.,
Professor, Department of Agricultural Economics, Kansas State
University, testimony before the Senate Agriculture Committee, June 23,
2021, https://www.agriculture.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/
Testimony_Tonsor%2006.23.211.pdf.
\3\ Gardiner, Congressional testimony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. Beef Quality Grade vs. Type of Cattle Sale

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

In his testimony before this Subcommittee, Dr. Ja[y]son Lusk
stated:

[S]trengthening of consumer demand for beef over the past
several decades has occurred over a period in which there was
increased use of formula pricing that rewarded quality
improvements. Eroding the ability of consumers, retailers, and
packers to incentivize quality through formulas and vertical
coordination may have detrimental impacts on demand.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Jayson Lusk, Ph.D., Distinguished Professor and Head,
Department of Economics, Perdue University, testimony before the House
Agriculture Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture, July
28, 2021, https://docs.house.gov/meetings/AG/AG29/20210728/113973/HHRG-
117-AG29-Wstate-LuskJ-20210728.pdf.

Today, consumers demand increased environmental sustainability, and
AMAs are essential to continued innovation and improved efficiency. In
a 2021 online survey of more than 1,000 consumers, 72 percent of
consumers said ``sustainability was a very or somewhat important
purchase consideration,'' and 68 percent said they were ``willing to
pay more for sustainable products.'' \5\ As Dr. Stephen Koontz of
Colorado State University has written, ``. . . thinking about future
marketing environments, the value of AMA use will be larger.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.meatpoultry.com/articles/26103-research-focuses-on-
consumers-willingness-to-pay-up-for-sustainable-products.
\6\ Koontz, Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Meat Institute urges USDA to avoid unintended negative
consequences from the forthcoming Packers and Stockyards proposals that
will negatively affect efficiency and sustainability in the cattle and
meat sectors. Government intervention could jeopardize the gains made
to date as well as the industry's ability to provide the products
customers demand in the future.
The North American Meat Institute is prepared to discuss these
issues and work with the Committee on the issues facing the industry.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide this testimony.
