- 21ST CENTURY FOOD SYSTEMS: CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENT AGRICULTURE'S ROLE IN PROTECTING DOMESTIC FOOD SUPPLY CHAINS AND INFRASTRUCTURE

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

21ST CENTURY FOOD SYSTEMS: CONTROLLED
ENVIRONMENT AGRICULTURE'S ROLE IN
PROTECTING DOMESTIC FOOD SUPPLY
CHAINS AND INFRASTRUCTURE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 29, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-15

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-136 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Chairman

JIM COSTA, California                GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania,
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts     Ranking Minority Member
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina, Vice  ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
Chair                                Arkansas
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York            DOUG LaMALFA, California
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine               RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
Northern Mariana Islands             TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         DON BACON, Nebraska
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois               DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York       JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              CHRIS JACOBS, New York
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
RO KHANNA, California                MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida              TRACEY MANN, Kansas
J. LUIS CORREA, California           RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
JOSH HARDER, California              BARRY MOORE, Alabama
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   KAT CAMMACK, Florida
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California            JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia

______

Anne Simmons, Staff Director

Parish Braden, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California;
joint submitted statement on behalf of Matt Barnard, Co-Founder
and Executive Chairman, Plenty, Unlimited......................    49
Schrier, Hon. Kim, a Representative in Congress from Washington,
prepared statement.............................................     3
Scott, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from Georgia,
opening statement..............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     2
Joint submitted statement on behalf of Matt Barnard, Co-
Founder and Executive Chairman, Plenty, Unlimited..........    49
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
Pennsylvania, opening statement................................     2

Witnesses

Giscombe, Karim, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, PLANT-AG,
West Palm Beach, FL............................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     6
Verbakel, Edward, Chief Executive Officer, VB Greenhouse
Projects; Founder, Atrium Agri Group, Naaldwijk, South Holland,
NL.............................................................     8
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Gadouas, Aaron Z., Managing Director, B.C. Ziegler and Company,
Chicago, IL....................................................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    12
Submitted question...........................................    53
Kelley, Jason E., General Manager, Global Strategic Partners and
Blockchain for Global Business Services, IBM, Austin, TX.......    14
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Safrance, Kevin, Executive Vice Chairman, Mastronardi Produce
Limited, Mastronardi Produce--USA, Inc., Livonia, MI...........    19
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Submitted questions..........................................    53

Submitted Material

Rosenberg, David, Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
AeroFarms, submitted letter....................................    50
Webb, Jonathan, Founder and Chief Executive Officer, AppHarvest,
submitted letter...............................................    51
Bowery Farming Inc., submitted statement.........................    52

21ST CENTURY FOOD SYSTEMS: CONTROLLED ENVIRONMENT AGRICULTURE'S ROLE IN
PROTECTING DOMESTIC FOOD SUPPLY CHAINS AND INFRASTRUCTURE

----------

THURSDAY, JULY 29, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in Room
1300, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. David Scott of
Georgia [Chairman of the Committee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives David Scott of Georgia,
Costa, McGovern, Adams, Spanberger, Hayes, Delgado, Pingree,
Kuster, Carbajal, Khanna, Correa, Craig, Harder, Axne, Schrier,
Panetta, Thompson, Austin Scott of Georgia, DesJarlais,
LaMalfa, Allen, Rouzer, Kelly, Bacon, Johnson, Baird, Jacobs,
Balderson, Mann, Feenstra, Miller, Moore, Cammack, Fischbach,
and Letlow.
Staff present: Josh Lobert, Ashley Smith, Ricki Schroeder,
Patricia Straughn, Jennifer Tiller, and Dana Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SCOTT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM GEORGIA

The Chairman. Good morning. The Committee will come to
order. I want to welcome everyone, and thank you for joining us
today for this important and much-needed hearing entitled, 21st
Century Food Systems: Controlled Environment Agriculture's Role
in Protecting Domestic Food Supply Chains and Infrastructure.
After opening brief remarks, Members will receive testimony
from our witnesses today, and then the hearing will be open for
questions. Members will be recognized in order of seniority,
alternating between Majority and Minority Members, and in order
of arrival for those Members who have joined us after the
hearing was called to order. And when you are recognized, you
will be asked to please unmute your microphone, and each person
will have 5 minutes to ask your question or make a comment. And
if you are not speaking, I ask that you remain muted in order
to minimize any background noise.
In order to get to as many questions as possible, the timer
will stay consistently visible on your screen. This is a
vitally important meeting. It comes at a time also, ladies and
gentlemen, that we will have possible votes at 12:30. It is now
10:00. That gives us 2\1/2\ hours, and then it will end. We are
going to have a long series of these votes, so I am just asking
everybody--we have a lot of people, a lot of interests, and we
want to get everybody in, in time. And I want to start myself
by giving a very brief opening statement.
Ladies and gentlemen, this is so important. The future of
our food supply is at stake, and today's hearing comes at a
very pivotal moment in our nation's history, the future of our
nation's food security, and we have a panel of very
distinguished witnesses who specialize in innovative ways to
make sure that we keep our nation's food secure. And what we
are talking about comes under a new category, controlled
environment agriculture, using cutting edge technologies.
[The prepared statement of Mr. David Scott follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Good morning, and welcome to all of the Members and witnesses we
have here today.
Today's hearing is one that comes at a pivotal moment in our
nation's history and is one that I am sure will provide critical
insight on an important segment of our food supply system.
Recently, Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack made an excellent
point--he said, ``In the pandemic, we found that our food system and
our food supply system, while it is incredibly efficient, is not
resilient.''.
That exact point is something I hope we can cover today. I want to
examine how we can better balance efficiency and resiliency and ensure
that our food supply system is as abundant, affordable, and safe as
possible.
Today's panel of witnesses are experts and entrepreneurs in an
exciting area of agriculture that this Committee has not spent a lot of
time discussing. These witnesses specialize in controlled environment
agriculture, and I look forward to them educating the Committee about
their industry.
While a global pandemic certainly magnified our food supply chain
issues, one of the issues we can cover today is how to ensure a supply
of fresh fruits and vegetables from all sources. Controlled environment
agriculture has the ability to fill in gaps where there are food
deserts, reduce emissions from transportation of produce, and very
importantly, limit our reliance on imports to fill our needs for fresh
produce.
We have an opportunity today to be on the cutting edge of
technologies and the ability to provide affordable food to more
households that need it--something I hope we can all agree on.

The Chairman. And so I definitely want to welcome all of
you here, and with that I will turn it over to the Ranking
Member for his opening statement.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GLENN THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. Good
morning, and thank you to our witnesses for making the time to
be with us today. I am eager to learn more about your
contributions to this sector of our agriculture industry. As I
have said before, I hope our Committee will move to hold
hearings that explore the issues facing production agriculture,
provide opportunities for oversight of the 2018 Farm Bill, and
receive updates from officials in the Administration, including
Secretary Vilsack. A hearing to review the state of the rural
economy and our agriculture industry is long overdue, and I
appreciate the Chairman's commitment to hold this hearing with
the Secretary following the August work period.
Thanks to innovation in agricultural technologies, American
farmers, and ranchers, and foresters are not only conserving
resources, but they are doing it while producing more food,
feed, and fiber. Productivity relative to resource use for
agriculture is up 287 percent in the United States since the
1940s, while total farm inputs remain mostly unchanged, the
most efficient and productive agriculture in the world. Our
specialty crop producers have also been able to adopt
innovative technologies over time to increase yields, while
decreasing inputs. Examples of these innovations can include
hydroponics, aquaponics, aeroponics, and other greenhouse
production methods. While hydroponics, and these other methods
of production in a controlled environment, are not new
concepts, there is an increased interest in utilizing these
methods to supplement traditional production agriculture to
ensure Americans have year-round access to domestic fresh
fruits and vegetables, and to decrease our dependency on
foreign countries to supply those same products.
The diverse panel of experts before us represent all
segments of our hydroponic and other controlled environment
methods of production, and I think this hearing presents an
opportunity to learn more about their work, contributions to
agriculture, and where we go to from here. As I said earlier, I
believe these innovative production methods are meant to
supplement production agriculture, not supplant. It takes all
sectors of our agriculture industry working together to ensure
that the United States can continue to have the safest, most
abundant, and most affordable food and fiber supply in the
history of the world, and controlled environment agriculture is
a piece of that larger puzzle.
I would like to thank our witnesses once again for being
here with us, and I look forward to hearing your testimony.
And, Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member, and, without
objection, I would like to insert into the record this
statement brought to me by our distinguished colleague,
Representative Barbara Lee of California. Thank you.
[The statement referred to is located on p. 49.]
The Chairman. With that, I now would like to welcome the
distinguishing panel that we have. Before I get to that, the
Chair would also request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so witnesses may begin their
testimony, and to assure that we have ample time for all of our
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schrier follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Kim Schrier, a Representative in Congress
from Washington
Thank you, Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Thompson, for putting
together this hearing on such an exciting and innovative sector of
agriculture.
I recently had the opportunity to tour DeGoede Farms in my district
and saw their Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA) operation.
DeGoede Farms is a greenhouse urban farming company that grows
nutritious food, year-round, using greenhouse hydroponic farming
systems in the Puyallup Valley in Washington State. Since 2016, they
have been growing butter lettuce organically and hydroponically and
they will soon be building a new 40,000 Square Foot greenhouse and
expanding to more herbs and leafy greens.
I was particularly excited to learn about the ways DeGoede's
operation is working to farm sustainably. Hydroponic technology reduces
their consumption dramatically. DeGoede Farms was able to increase
their production of herbs and lettuce while using ten times less water
and eight times less land than with traditional farming methods. The
reduction in land usage is crucial in areas like Sumner, where the
amount of traditional farmland is declining due to a boom in
population. It is also vital in areas where zoning is a significant
constraint on the development of CEA. While this is generally a local
jurisdictional issue, I recently heard from Washington State University
about the need for adaptive use zoning to convert old industrial and
manufacturing spaces for highly efficient, sustainable CEA production.
I also wanted to highlight three issues that DeGoede farms raised
as being necessary for the development of the CEA industry and that I
want to work with my colleagues to address:

(1)  Access to labor.

(2)  Access to low interest loans via USDA rural development and FSA
programs.

(3)  Better support in food safety programs through extension-
education specifically focused on supporting CEA.

Finally, I want to take the opportunity to quickly highlight the
innovative work being done at Washington State University to promote
CEA in urban and peri-urban areas of Washington. WSU is working with
new and beginning farmers and ranchers to lower barriers to entry into
both CEA and traditional agriculture, developing urban and peri-urban
agriculture networks, and conducting valuable research and extension
throughout Washington state.

The Chairman. Now I am very delighted to introduce our
witnesses. We are very delighted to have you here, our very
distinguished panelists.
Our first witness today is Mr. Karim Giscombe. Mr. Giscombe
is the CEO and founder of PLANT-AG, located in West
Philadelph--excuse me, West Palm Beach, Florida. He also serves
as Chair of PLANT-AG--Plant for Tomorrow, and has extensive
experience working in the investment banking industry,
previously for Bank of America, and as a former Director for
Merrill Lynch. Welcome to you, Mr. Giscombe.
Our next witness is Mr. Aaron Gadouas. Mr. Gadouas is the
Managing Director of BC Ziegler and Company Investment Bank
located in Chicago, Illinois, and has worked for 30 years in
public and corporate finance, extensively in green and
renewable projects. Welcome.
Our third witness today is Mr. Edward Verbakel. Mr.
Verbakel is the CEO of VB Group, and co-founder of Atrium Agri
Group, both located in the Netherlands. He has almost 30 years
of experience designing and building controlled environment
agriculture facilities in countries around the world.
Our fourth witness today is Mr. Jason Kelley. Mr. Kelley
serves as Managing Partner to IBM Strategic Partners in Austin,
Texas. He manages a global team at IBM that is responsible for
over 750 client engagements around blockchain. In addition to
serving in corporate America, he has served our country as a
very brave U.S. Army Airborne Ranger. Thank you.
Our fifth, and final, witness today is Mr. Kevin Safrance.
Mr. Safrance is the Executive Vice Chairman of Mastronardi, a
fourth-generation family operated business in greenhouse
productions located in Livonia, Michigan. Mr. Safrance has over
2 decades of experience in the fresh produce industry, and I am
so pleased to have such a distinguished international group on
this panel to deal with this urgent issue. There is nothing
more important than maintaining our food security. As we all
know, we can do without just about everything else, but we
cannot do without food. So thank you all for your
participation.
The timer will be visible on the screen, as I said, and it
will count down to zero. And I know there are so many Members
that want to get on, and we are going to move through this as
quickly as we can. So let us start first with you, Mr.
Giscombe. You are recognized for 5 minutes. Please begin when
you are ready.

STATEMENT OF KARIM GISCOMBE, FOUNDER AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, PLANT-AG, WEST PALM BEACH, FL

Mr. Giscombe. Good morning, Mr. Chairman. I would like to
thank the Committee for the opportunity to address you here
today. My name is Karim Giscombe. I am the Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of Plant Agricultural Systems. Today I speak
on behalf of the people, which you as a Committee, and the
broader Administration, serve, the American people. People who
represent multiple generations and races, and who share a
common thread, the believe that we can be our best, achieve the
most, and expect the best, here in America. I also speak on
behalf of a broader ecosystem of industry participants serving
the fresh produce supply chain, who collectively cover not only
all the roles from seed to plate here in America, but do so all
over the world, and can provide valuable context and insight to
the delivery of a 21st century food system.
However, today those very things are at risk as COVID-19
and adverse weather instances, such as the droughts being
experienced in the Colorado Basin, continue to force our
collective appreciation of the fragility of the essential
services which enable the people, who then enable the economy.
I am here because my children, just as every child in America,
deserves fresh, nutritious, contaminant-free fruits and
vegetables they can trust. I am here because no parent should
have to come face to face with their child's mortality,
especially not from the simple act of eating a salad, the way
Lucas Parker's parents have had to. I am here because it is
critical that you, our trusted lawmakers, fully appreciate the
threat that is facing our way of life, the clear and present
danger to our agricultural system, and act to protect our
domestic food supply chains and infrastructure while stewarding
our collective environmental impact.
I am here because we can no longer ignore the obvious, no
more than we can go back to simpler times, and we do not have
time to over-think this situation. If we want to ensure no
other country such as China, or Russia, or Mexico, or even
Canada, can control our fresh produce supply, it is absolutely
necessary to decrease our reliance on these imports, which
currently top some 53 percent of consumption, and swiftly and
with intention, increase the scale of controlled environment
agriculture production in America.
Sometimes looking back is necessary as to see far enough
ahead to understand what the choices made today mean for
tomorrow. This country has never forgotten the value of our
independence as we grill hot dogs and hamburgers every July 4,
and I ask everyone here, and watching, to think and tell me
what you see when you hear the word hamburger. Truth is, that
image does not need to be verbalized because we all know
exactly what it looks like. Two of the ingredients synonymous
with that image, lettuce and tomatoes, are statistically the
most commonly consumed and purchased products in America, and
more broadly the world. Today, sourcing them has become more
and more challenging across the globe. The USDA just issued
guidance this week regarding increasing food prices, and that
is in line with global trends. Later this year, when lettuce
prices skyrocket because of the California droughts, it is the
American consumer, who you represent, that will be the ones
impacted, again. This is but one of the reasons we are having
and must continue this conversation.
This conversation is about choice. First, the right of
every person who eats a sandwich, salad, taco, wrap, slice of
pizza, bowl of cereal with fruit in it, or who drinks a
smoothie, at home, or from a food service retailer in this
country, to trust their choice of product and to trust their
choice of outlet or restaurant to be fresh, nutritious, and
safe. The actions of the FDA, through the recent Food Safety
Modernization Act (111-353), are to date the best steps towards
enabling the trust of the consumer, but it is, and will only
be, as effective as the infrastructure in place to support the
mandates outlined in the New Era of Smarter Food Safety
Blueprint. This is about the choice you, as lawmakers, must
make to understand and acknowledge the role of the underdog in
this story, controlled environment agriculture, as not only a
necessary contributor, but the most viable solution if the
American people want to trust their food again. This is about
the choice to build the infrastructure necessary to enable
American producers to have a viable platform to grow and expand
their businesses and be competitive in an open market where the
consumer speaks with their dollar as they do with their vote.
So let us go back to where I started. This is about the
people, the people you serve, everybody. Members of the
Committee, you need look no further than the hard-working
franchisees of Subway, the largest food service retailer in the
world, with more than 30,000 locations, and listen to their
highly publicized complaints about the corporation and the lack
of quality and transparency of fresh lettuce they are forced to
serve their consumers. How much longer before the other
sandwich retailers encounter the same?
In closing, I respectfully ask the Committee to consider
the following. With what you now know, the urgency to protect
our fresh produce supply chain should be beyond question, and
your first choice is whether the American consumer will pay for
it with their tax dollars, or enable the----
[The prepared statement of Mr. Giscombe follows:]

Prepared Statement of Karim Giscombe, Founder and Chief Executive
Officer, PLANT-AG, West Palm Beach, FL
Today, I speak on behalf of the people, which you as a Committee,
and the broader Administration serve; the American people, people who
represent multiple generations and races, and who share a common
thread--the belief that we can be our best, achieve the most, and
expect the best, here, in America. I also speak on behalf of a broader
Ecosystem of industry participants serving the fresh produce supply
chain, who collectively cover not only all the key roles from seed-to-
plate, here in America, but do so all over the world, and can provide
valuable context and insight to the delivery of a 21st Century Food
System.
However, today, those very things are at risk as COVID-19 and
adverse weather instances such as the droughts being experienced in the
Colorado basin, continue to force our collective appreciation of the
fragility of the essential services which enable the people who then
enable the economy. I am here because my children, just as every child
in America deserves fresh, nutritious, contaminate-free fruits and
vegetables they can trust. I am here because no parent should have to
come face-to-face with their child's mortality, especially not from the
simple act of eating a salad the way Lucas Parker's parents have had
to. I am here because it is critical that you, our trusted lawmakers,
fully appreciate the threat facing our way of life, the clear and
present danger to our agricultural system, and act to protect our
domestic food supply chains and infrastructure while stewarding our
collective environmental impact.
I am here because we can no longer ignore the obvious, no more than
we can go back to simpler times, and we do not have time to over-think
this situation. If we want to ensure no other country such as China, or
Russia, or Mexico, or even Canada, can control our fresh produce
supply, it is absolutely necessary to decrease our reliance on these
imports which currently top some 53% of consumption, and swiftly and
with intention, increase the scale of Controlled Environment
Agriculture production in America.
Sometimes looking back is necessary as to see far enough ahead to
understand what the choices made today, mean for tomorrow. This country
has never forgotten the value of our independence as we grill hotdogs
and hamburgers every July 4th, and I ask everyone here, and watching,
to tell me what you see when you hear the word hamburger. Truth is,
that image does not need to be verbalized, because we all know exactly
what it looks like.
Two of the ingredients synonymous with that image, lettuce and
tomatoes, are statistically the most commonly consumed and purchased
products in America, and more broadly, the world. Today, sourcing them
has become more and more challenging across the globe. The USDA just
issued guidance this week regarding increasing food prices, and that is
in-line with global trends. Later this year, when lettuce prices
skyrocket because of the California droughts, it's the American
consumer who you represent that will be the ones impacted, again. This
is but one of the reasons we are having and must continue this
conversation.
This conversation is about choice. First, the right of every person
who eats a sandwich, salad, taco, wrap, slice of pizza, or a bowl of
cereal with fruit in it, or who drinks a smoothie, at home, or from a
foodservice retailer in this country, to trust their choice of product
and to trust their choice of outlet or restaurant to be fresh,
nutritious and safe. The actions of the FDA through the recent Food
Safety Modernization Act (FSMA) are to-date, the best steps toward
enabling this trust for the consumer, but it is and will only be as
effective as the infrastructure in place to support its mandates as
outlined in the New Era of Food Saf[et]y Blueprint. This is about the
choice you, as lawmakers, must make to understand and acknowledge the
role of the underdog in this story, Controlled Environment Agriculture,
as not only a necessary contributor, but the most viable solution if
the American people want to trust their food again.
This is about the choice to build the infrastructure necessary to
enable American producers to have a viable platform to grow and expand
their businesses and be competitive in an open market where the
consumer speaks with their dollar as they do with their vote.
So let's go back to where I started today, this is about people;
the people you serve; every body.
Members of the Committee, you need look no further than the hard
working franchisees of Subway, the largest foodservice retailer in the
world, with more than 30,000 locations, and listen to their highly
publicized complaints against the corporation regarding the lack of
quality and consistency of the ``fresh'' lettuce they are forced to
serve their consumers. How much longer before other sandwich retailers
encounter the same.
In closing, I respectfully ask this Committee to consider the
following:

1.  With what you now know, the urgency to protect our fresh produce
supply chain should be beyond question, and your first
choice is whether the American consumer will pay for it
with their tax dollars or to enable the financial
institutions representing private capital to utilize their
experience supporting essential infrastructure to do their
jobs within the socially responsible framework being
presented here.

2.  To reaffirm your commitment to protecting the American people and
supporting the development of American industry.

3.  And last, to realize that we cannot be afraid of new technology
or the small-minded perceptions of those who do not wish to
embrace progress, but must look at what is known as a
baseline on which to innovate. Given the challenges we in
America and the rest of the world now see as existential,
and the benefit of being able to remember a time when
people would have asked for faster horses instead of cars,
and the fact that today major global conglomerates like GM
and Mercedes are following in the stead of the once unknown
upstarts like Tesla and making the shift to all-electric
act in favor of progress.

Because this generation and the ones that follow are depending on
you to do so.

The Chairman. I am sorry, your time has expired. We are
going to be on a quick gavel today. Our Members are very
anxious to get their questions in, and so much more could be
added at question time. Thank you. And next we have Mr.
Verbakel. And if I am mispronouncing any of the names, please
forgive me, but I trust you, I am trying. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF EDWARD VERBAKEL, CHIEF EXECUTIVE
OFFICER, VB GREENHOUSE PROJECTS; FOUNDER, ATRIUM AGRI GROUP,
NAALDWIJK, SOUTH HOLLAND, NL

Mr. Verbakel. Thank you very much for this introduction.
First of all, I feel honored to be present here today, although
from a distance. I would have liked to be there, but I am
somewhat limited to be there in person. I am from the
Netherlands. The Netherlands is known for agriculture since a
very long time. We have to be specialized in trade because of
our favorable climate and our scarcity of land, so what our
industry has been doing over the past decades is focus on
optimalization of everything that can be related to growing of
fresh produce.
I am second-generation in our company. My father founded it
in 1966. He was one of the very first entrepreneurs in the U.S.
market to start with greenhouse technology, in 1971 on Long
Island, New York, and ever since we have been exploring your
country, and been active in over 25 states, and what we see all
the time is there is an immense production of agricultural
produce, but the climate change is limiting you in providing an
even supply of fresh food, and at the same time the consumer
wants that fresh produce every day.
So what we have been doing is focusing on what plants to
serve best, what do they need to optimize growth, and we have
been able to replicate some of the climate challenges that we
have. If there is a shortage of light, we can add light. If
there is a shortage of humidity or cooling, we can add that
within a controlled environment. Those are all high
technological solutions by which we can produce fresh food 365
days, year-round.
At the same time, we are also active in other continents,
and what we see is a very striking comparison between
countries, is that other countries, with all respect, are a
little bit more progressed in applying these controlled
agricultural environments than compared to the U.S. So there
are many opportunities to continue and focus more on controlled
environment agriculture solutions within the continental United
States, and limit the import of produce coming from the north
or from the south where possible.
If we compare this to countries like China and Russia, we
see that there is a high element of dedication to import
technology and become more self-sustainable. We can do the same
here on the U.S. side as well, but we need a bit more support
also from government levels. And that is not only in effect
making this possible in terms of financing, but also in terms
of permitting, making available that--all of the local
authorities involved are supporting those ideas.
I think that there are many opportunities in the U.S.
market to continue to feed the world, more specifically within
the U.S. We are coming from a tiny little country. You have
almost 17 times more inhabitants within the United States
compared to our country, but at the same time our greenhouse
surface, per capita, is much higher, and we see the same in
other areas in the world.
So I would like to close this by asking you to be more in
support of controlled environment agriculture, and help the
U.S. population to have access to safe and healthy food, and
cope with all of the challenges that we have both in climate,
reduce transport distance, make food available local--for local
in a sustainable way by focusing more on the use of energy, the
use of water--fresh water, where greenhouses, for instance,
have 15 times less water consumption than compared to open
field production, and I think there are many opportunities that
lie ahead of us, so I would like to ask you to make this--
forward, and do this together. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Verbakel follows:]

Prepared Statement of Edward Verbakel, Chief Executive Officer, VB
Greenhouse Projects; Founder, Atrium Agri Group, Naaldwijk, South
Holland, NL
Good morning to you all, and thank you for having me. My name is
Edward Verbakel and I am CEO of VB Greenhouse Projects out of The
Netherlands, and I am also one of the founders of the Atrium Agri
Group, which is a multi-scope Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
provider, of Controlled Environment Agriculture (CEA) developments. The
group is comprised of some of the leading companies in the CEA services
space. Regrettably I cannot attend in-person today, but thanks to
technology, I can still participate in this historic moment. I refer to
this convening as historic, because with almost 30 years of experience
designing and building CEA facilities in countries all around the
world, this is the first time I have witnessed government and private
sectors coming together in a proactive manner to coordinate efforts to
develop this type of infrastructure. My father was one of the very
first from our country to realize Dutch greenhouse technology right
here in the USA, since 1971 on Long Island, NY. For me it is an honor
to provide you with relevant information. For this I commend you all.
What is more common, is state-driven projects in countries much like my
own where necessity demanded a solution, and in other instances where
farmers looking to innovate, became early adopters because of the
contrasting benefits to their conventional practices. In either
scenario, what is constant is the role my firm and those like us have,
and continue to play in providing the development and construction
expertise for all types of projects in all climatic conditions. We can
provide the best climate for growth.
I have had the good fortune to see first hand the impact of this
type of modern agriculture on countries and their economies. As we now
find ourselves, a planet acutely focused on resource management and
climate adaptation, I am certain that what I will share with you today
will resonate and that the initiative taken thus far to advance this
very important conversation, will culminate in your collective
understanding and impetus to act to enable all participants in the
fresh produce supply chain to work cooperatively to deliver a 21st
Century Food System capable of meeting the demands of today, and
tomorrow. I would be remiss not to speak to the skeptics towards the
CEA segment, and say that the facts speak for themselves in all areas
of consideration, namely Viability, Productivity and Sustainability.

1.  Viability--the idea that CEA is a nascent industry segment is
inaccurate. Producers all over the world have for many
years (dating back to the 1970s) utilized varying levels of
greenhouse structures to protect and deliver high-risk
crops and delicate horticultural products. As with all
industries, technology has enabled innovation and growth in
all areas of greenhouse production. Additionally, the true
benefit has come from the collective growth in widely
varying geographies that have allowed for deeper
understanding of the environment(s) and how to adapt
structures and even products to optimize across all
processes.

2.  Productivity--when compared with other forms of conventional
agriculture, what you will see is clear out-performance in
all areas by CEA. These areas include, energy saving, water
consumption, crop loss and yield per meter (or Square Foot,
which is your unit of measure). And this is before taking
into account the removal of seasonality which limits
traditional production cycles annually.

3.  Sustainability--in this area, I like to start with the least
acknowledged fact about greenhouses, which is that they are
in fact reusable structures, and thus allow for
transferability, and an elongated useful life. Very few
industries can claim circularity of raw materials at such
scale. If we then look at resource utilization, the
highlight for many reasons is water use, which on average
can be upwards of 50-60 percent less than conventional
agriculture practices. Another key consideration is the use
of renewable energy which then allows for even greater
carbon offsets in relation to the use of artificial light.

I would like focus your attention to what I believe to be a key
component of this conversation, which is the fact that CEA as a sector
largely exists, and has grown exponentially over the past 2 decades in
response to adversity related to agricultural production, and the
necessity to develop new ways of meeting the demands of food systems
supporting a global population that is already twice what it was at the
dawn of the industrial revolution, and growing, fast.
We have entered into a new era of food production driven by
developments in technology. This is particularly true in CEA. Whether
be the engineering and introduction of new materials or the advances in
climate management, crop monitoring or energy production, each have
played a key role in making CEA production more accessible to supply
chains and ultimately the consumers who they serve.
Levels of automation of operating processes have also risen greatly
in some production types such as lettuce, where in many instances there
is little to no human interaction with the actual product, ensuring
even greater levels of food safety than ever before. This is of
particular relevance to the broader fresh produce supply chain that is
most susceptible to risks than other areas.
More so, it has become clear that the countries with the largest
economies have or are fully embracing CEA as a core delivery mechanism
to support their food systems.
Those of us that have been around long enough, like to think of
this industry as currently coming of age. Seeing new entrants to the
market on multiple fronts, is exciting and at the same time sobering,
because it is clear that there is still a long way to go, and in
reality, which you will hear or have heard from my colleagues, there is
a lot that is still missing, which inevitably limits the true potential
of this type of infrastructure. One such area is that of capital. There
is no escaping the significant capital expenditure necessary to develop
CEA facilities, but this is in fact true of all infrastructure. As
stated earlier, the value of CEA is realized at scale and subsequently
where projects have experienced the greatest success is where the
capital has been made available to not only build facilities, but build
them with the focus on integrity and sustainability. No industry is
devoid of a spectrum of costs, and what is germane to all is that the
long (or intermediate) term benefits often outweigh the short term
costs when properly evaluated. These costs are not merely hard costs
for the physical infrastructure, but both hard and soft costs of the
supporting infrastructure, be it digital or human.
In closing, I would offer to this Committee one last attestation,
which is that the factors driving the growth of Controlled Environment
Agriculture have been consistent and the global outlook for future
development is higher than it has ever been. Thank you again for the
opportunity today.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Verbakel. And now we
will turn to, for 5 minutes, Mr. Gadouas.

STATEMENT OF AARON Z. GADOUAS, MANAGING DIRECTOR, B.C. ZIEGLER
AND COMPANY, CHICAGO, IL

Mr. Gadouas. Thank you for inviting me to participate in
the discussion today. I appreciate the opportunity to provide a
perspective on how capital is being deployed to develop
controlled environment agriculture facilities in food system
infrastructure. I would like to address three topics this
morning; first, provide an overview based on what we are seeing
in the marketplace of food system infrastructure, how it is
being financed today. Second, summarize the limitations that
private investors face in deploying capital towards this asset
class; and third, suggest a path forward to unlock additional
sources of capital based on our experience of what has worked
in the past, and our knowledge on how these investments can be
structured.
It is clear that innovations in technology and processes
are transforming food production and supply chain
infrastructure. What was essentially a land-centered platform
has diversified into controlled environment agriculture. A
confluence of recent technology and demand for food safety and
sustainable production has put us at an inflection point, where
scalable food systems require large capital expenditures that
ideally are financed just the way any industrial project is,
namely, with a combination of equity and debt. What we are
seeing today, however, is a significant flow of private and
public equity capital being allocated to ag tech and controlled
environment facilities. Private equity sources typically fund
100 percent of the capital expenditures of an indoor facility.
Equity as a sole source of capital is an exceedingly
expensive plan of finance for large scale projects. It is true
that there are many traditional economic developed tools out
there, but they are not sufficient to finance the scale of the
production and facilities that are necessary. The heavy lifting
is almost entirely done by equity. Private equity can't do it
by itself to provide all the capital that is needed, nor can
the public equity markets, particularly SPACs, which you have
seen a lot of, Special Purpose Acquisition Corps. They have
become subject to regulatory scrutiny, that will likely curtail
their use in the future.
The financial institutions and capital markets clearly
envision the promise of modernizing our food system
infrastructure. In addition to food safety and accountability,
the production of food on an environmentally sustainable basis
is directly in alignment with integrating ESG values, that is
environmental, social, and corporate governance values, into
their investment portfolios. Investors want to participate in a
systematic way. Why, then, are institutional investors,
particularly fixed-income investors, staying on the sidelines?
The reason for this is investors perceive the food system as a
loosely defined jumble of food-related businesses.
Institutional investors have difficulty organizing a credit
framework because the food system is not currently viewed as an
asset class.
Industry participants and government can play a role to
better define and empower the food system sector. The
development of the clean energy and waste-to-energy is a good
analogy for this. 15 years ago this sector was viewed as
fragmented, poorly defined, and risky. Today investments in
renewables are considered an established asset class. The same
can be done here for ag infrastructure. Designating controlled
environment agriculture as critical infrastructure is a good
place to start with this.
We can also identify a subset of investors within the fixed
income capital markets that would be perfectly suited to be the
lead investor in this new asset class. Certain mutual funds,
managed accounts, and insurance companies that invest in high
yield tax exempt bonds possess in-house expertise that can
commit their capital to non-governmental projects that qualify
for tax-exempt financing under the Tax Code. Perhaps more
importantly, many tax-exempt investment funds have specific
mandates to support projects that have social impact, that are
consistent with ESG values, or finance facilities that are
deemed to be publicly beneficial. This group of investors has
access to deep pockets of capital, and will commit their
attention.
Here is an example. Credible investment candidates in the
renewable space that are often too small to be of interest to
corporate bond investors can be purchased by tax-exempt funds.
Here is another very common example. An otherwise well-
structured deal, with limited operating history, as a project
that would be viewed as a risky startup by corporate bond
investors could be purchased and evaluated by a tax-exempt
fund. This tax-exempt marketplace serves as an economic
development tool that is unique to the U.S. capital markets,
and provides a source of debt financing where other
alternatives may not exist.
Amidst the ideas and plans of innovators, industry
participants, government, at the end of the day it is the
financing that makes it all happen. We can accelerate the
development of food system infrastructure in this country by
establishing a platform to attract and unlock capital in this
sector----
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gadouas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Aaron Z. Gadouas, Managing Director, B.C. Ziegler
and Company, Chicago, IL
Thank you for inviting me to participate in the discussion today. I
appreciate the opportunity to provide a perspective on how capital is
being deployed to develop controlled environment agriculture facilities
and food system infrastructure.
I am the co-head of our firm's General Municipal and Structured
Finance practice. Ziegler is an investment firm with an established
reputation for financing projects in renewable energy, solid waste and
wastewater treatment, and infrastructure. We serve public and private
clients, and we have decades of experience and expertise in financing
projects with debt securities including tax-exempt bonds. Over the past
5 years we have witnessed tremendous growth in our business to provide
private capital for ``green'' and environmentally sustainable projects
such as waste-to-clean energy, recycling, and--most recently--food
system facilities.
I will address three topics this morning. First, provide an
overview, based on what we are seeing in the marketplace, of how food
system infrastructure is being financed today; second, summarize the
limitations and challenges that private investors face in deploying
capital towards this asset class; and third, suggest a path forward to
unlock additional sources of capital based on our experience of what
has worked successfully in the past and our knowledge of how such
investments can be optimally structured.
It is clear that innovations in technology and processes are
transforming food production and supply chain infrastructure. What was
essentially a land centered platform has diversified into controlled
environment agriculture. A confluence of recent technology and demand
for food safety and sustainable production has put us at an inflection
point where scalable food systems require large capital expenditures
that ideally are financed the same way as other industrial projects--
namely, with a combination of equity and debt. What we are seeing today
is a significant flow of private and public equity being allocated to
ag tech and controlled environment facilities. Private equity sources
typically fund one hundred percent of the capital expenditures of an
indoor facility. One of the largest indoor producers of leafy green
vegetables recently announced a merger with a Special Purpose
Acquisition Corp--a ``SPAC''--which is a transaction that involves the
sale of shares in the public equity markets. At this time there are
virtually no sources of capital other than equity that are teed-up and
willing to move into food system infrastructure.
Equity as the sole source of capital is an exceedingly expensive
plan of finance for large scale projects. It is true there are a
handful of traditional economic development tools utilized by local
public and private authorities that support food system projects. They
include tax increment financing, revolving loan programs, small
manufacturing industrial development bonds and tax incentives. They
have financed food arcades and farmer's markets, retail outlets, farm
loan programs, and some food processing and cold storage businesses.
But none of these tools are adequate to finance large scale food
infrastructure projects. The heavy lifting is almost entirely done by
equity. Private equity by itself cannot provide all the capital that is
needed to build out all of the critical food infrastructure and
essential services that will be needed. The same is true with the
public equity markets, and SPACs in particular, as they have become
subject to regulatory scrutiny that will likely curtail the formation
of new SPAC entities, going forward.
Financial institutions and the capital markets clearly envision the
promise of modernizing our food system infrastructure. In addition to
food safety and accountability, the production of food on an
environmentally sustainable basis is directly in alignment with
integrating ESG values (environmental, social and corporate governance
values) into their investment portfolios. They want to participate in a
systematic way. Why, then, are institutional investors--particularly
fixed income debt investors--staying on the sidelines?
The reason for this is investors perceive the food system as a
loosely defined jumble of food-related businesses. Institutional
investors have difficulty organizing a credit framework because the
food system is not currently viewed as an asset class. Industry
participants and government can play a role to better define and
empower the food system sector. The development of the clean energy and
waste-to-energy sector is a good analogy. Fifteen years ago, this
sector was viewed as fragmented, poorly defined, and risky. Today,
investments in ``renewables'' are considered an established asset
class. The same can be done for food infrastructure.
Designating Controlled Environment Agriculture as critical
infrastructure is a good place to start. We can also identity a subset
of investors within the fixed income capital markets that would be
perfectly suited to be the lead investors in this new asset class.
Certain mutual funds, managed accounts and insurance companies that
invest in high yield tax-exempt bonds possess in-house expertise to
evaluate and ultimately commit capital to non-governmental projects
that qualify for tax-exempt financing under the tax code. Perhaps more
importantly, many tax-exempt investment funds have specific mandates to
support projects that have social impact, are consistent with ESG
values, or finance facilities that are deemed to be publicly
beneficial. This group of investors has access to deep pockets of
capital and will commit their attention and money to projects that may
not attract the attention of other bond investors. Here is an example:
creditable investment candidates in the renewables space that are often
too small to be of interest to corporate bond investors may be
purchased by tax-exempt funds if the project qualifies for tax-exempt
financing. Here is another common example: an otherwise well-structured
deal with limited operating history that is viewed as a risky start-up
by a corporate debt investor may be evaluated as a project financing by
a tax-exempt fund. The tax-exempt marketplace serves as an economic
development tool that is unique to the U.S. capital markets and
provides a source of debt financing where other alternatives may not
exist.
The United States Code designates a number of private activities as
``Exempt Facilities'' that qualify for tax-exempt financing. Such
activities include solid waste recovery, small manufacturing
facilities, multifamily housing, certain forms of mass transit, among
others. Including Controlled Environment Agriculture as an Exempt
Facility would define and formalize a new asset class, incentivize
private capital deployment into a desired essential service and
critical infrastructure, and diversity and expand the pool of
affordable capital to project sponsors. It would also target the most
obvious natural buyers of food system project finance debt--tax-exempt
bond investors.
Exempt Facility bonds have been acknowledged as an economic
development tool in the United States for decades. Bond financing of
qualified projects under the United States Code involves no financial
outlay by any governmental or public body, no additional tax burden of
any kind, and does not create an administrative burden on public
resources or time. It is also noteworthy to point out that the
standards will be high. Qualifying projects that are ultimately
underwritten and purchased by debt investors are likely to share these
characteristics: they may include a public-private partnership
component; the project sponsors will incur financial risk, so that
their interests will be aligned with investors and other stakeholders;
the projects will have fully documented contractual support with
creditworthy suppliers and customers; the production process and
specifications of the physical plant will be thoroughly vetted by
qualified third-parties; the business model will be validated by
independent industry experts; and best practices for initial and
continuing disclosure will be implemented. We have seen time and again
the success of tax-exempt financing as an economic development tool. It
can be utilized to develop a modern food system infrastructure as well.
Amidst the ideas and plans of innovators, industry participants and
government, at the end of the day it is the financing that makes it all
happen. We can accelerate the development of food system infrastructure
in this country by establishing a platform to attract and unlock
capital suited to this sector by designating it as a critical asset
class and enabling participation by sector-aligned investors to take a
leading role.
Thank you for your interest and attention. I look forward to a
continuing dialogue.

The Chairman. Thank you. You were right on time. And now we
will hear from Mr. Kelley. Mr. Kelley, you are recognized for 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF JASON E. KELLEY, GENERAL MANAGER,
GLOBAL STRATEGIC PARTNERS AND BLOCKCHAIN FOR GLOBAL BUSINESS
SERVICES, IBM, AUSTIN, TX

Mr. Kelley. Thank you, Chairman Scott, and Ranking Member
Thompson. I am IBM's General Manager for Global Strategic
Partners and Blockchain. I manage teams around the world
responsible for more than 1,000 blockchain client engagements,
with large companies like Dole and Walmart, and small farms,
such as those that Representatives Pingree, LaMalfa, and
Hartzler are familiar with. Like a number of you
Representatives, I am also a veteran, having had the privilege
of serving our country as a U.S. Army Airborne Ranger. It is a
pleasure today to testify on blockchain, and its potential to
vastly reduce the cost and complexity of food safety, whilst
adding trust and security. Blockchain can enable transparency,
shared visibility, accountable monitoring of production and
reclamation, with more effective food safety and sustainability
practices. My testimony will further explain blockchain and
share more about its value.
Blockchain is a secure, cloud-based technology. It is a
shared, immutable ledger for recording transactions and
tracking assets transparently among a trusted invited network.
Each permissioned participant has an exact copy of the ledger.
All information a member wants to share: the who, the what,
when, and where, even the condition of a transaction, such as
temperature of a food shipment is recorded as a data block on
the ledger, which is propagated throughout the network. Each
block is connected to the blocks before and after it, forming a
chain of data blocks, if you will, that track an asset from its
source to its consumption. Each block is linked together with
encryption, securely preventing any alteration without
detection and permission. With this, all permissioned
participants, such as a supply chain, have trusted, up to date,
transparent information.
Blockchain, however, is not a panacea. Instead, it can
provide substantial improvements over the status quo, enabling
greater trust and security, better efficiencies and resiliency,
as well as improved sustainability. Today's partial digital and
paper documentation across an increasingly complex network of
food suppliers, distributors, and retailers makes
accountability slow, security questionable, and threats
increased. As a result, food recalls cost about $30 million per
incident, and compromises all those things that we like to have
with consumer trust.
Blockchain provides immediate, shared, and completely
transparent information to the specific person who is
permissioned to see it. Simply put, it promotes trust. If a
food safety issue is reported--if any issue is reported, those
using blockchain would immediately know who is impacted, and
the potential actions they could take. This can improve
efficiencies and resiliency. According to the UN, 1.4 billion
tons of perishable food is wasted each year due to
inefficiencies. That is \1/3\ of all processed food. Blockchain
could eliminate time wasted in audits and reconciliations since
participants know the origin, real time location, and status of
their food products. Further, integrating artificial
intelligence with blockchain provides retailers with insights
to proactively remove products before an issue even occurs, and
predict inventory needs, flattening the demand spikes and
lulls. Enabling a blockchain that tracks product loss, waste,
and expiration dates could save over $150 billion annually in
food waste.
As I close with sustainability, blockchain can enable
sustainability practices to help reduce the ecological
footprint and food supply challenges that we have day to day.
Farmers, greenhouses, and producers could easily share audits,
certificates, and documentation validating their sustainable
and ethical practices. Distributors, transporters, and
retailers could be better informed to make sustainable choices.
With blockchain and AI, they can get suggestions on the most
sustainable shipping methods, routes, and local sourcing
opportunities. So, with blockchain, a trusted way to share
data--which it is--consumers can confidently know the origin of
their food, and how green and clean it just may be.
Traceability, security, and sustainability go hand in hand.
Blockchain can enable that, and even more. So thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member Thompson, and the Committee for this
time I have had to speak with you today. I welcome your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Kelley follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jason E. Kelley, General Manager, Global
Strategic Partners and Blockchain for Global Business Services, IBM,
Austin, TX
Introduction
Good morning, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and
distinguished Members of the Committee. Thank you very much for the
opportunity to testify before the Committee on this important topic.
My name is Jason Kelley, and I am IBM's General Manger for Global
Strategic Partners and Blockchain for Global Business Services, and in
addition to serving in corporate America, I've also had the great
privilege and honor to serve my country as a U.S. Army Airborne Ranger.
Today, I have the pleasure of managing a global team at IBM that is
responsible for over 750 client engagements around blockchain. These
transformative projects include supply chain, financial services,
government, healthcare, travel and transportation, insurance, chemicals
and petroleum, and more.
Within the food industry, IBM uses blockchain technologies to
reimagine data transparency with a new level of digital interactions in
the food supply chain ecosystem. Our partners today include not only
household names like Dole and Walmart, but also small farms, like the
ones in California where the majority of our leafy greens originate.
These food suppliers share common goals: deliver fresher, safer food to
consumers and ensure unsafe food is quickly identifiable and traceable.
We are also pleased to work with others that share our vision for
transforming food safety through responsible technology. PLANT-AG, who
is also testifying here today, is one of those clients.
The challenges that have risen during this pandemic greatly
heighten the need to enhance America's ability to adopt a more
collaborative digital, traceable, and safer food system. That is why I
appreciate the Committee's desire to explore blockchain technology--
especially its applications beyond cryptocurrency and financial
technology--because blockchain has the potential to vastly reduce the
cost and complexity of food safety. With blockchain, we can enable open
transparency for tracking the movement of food, monitoring the
processes of production and reclamation, and administering the
enforcement of effective food safety and sustainability practices.
Today, I come before you to share those experiences and how the
right digital infrastructure can enable a more resilient, sustainable,
and safer food supply chain. My testimony will cover what blockchain is
and what it is not; its key benefits, including greater trust and
security, better efficiencies and resiliency, and improved
sustainability; and, examples of it in use today.
What is blockchain?
Businesses--and government--run on data. The faster it's received
and the more accurate it is, the better. Enter blockchain, a secure
cloud-based technology that is ideal for securely delivering data when
multiple entities need it, and where and how they need it most.
Blockchain provides immediate, shared, and completely transparent
information to the specific, trusted person who is permissioned to see
it.
IBM defines blockchain as a shared, immutable ledger for recording
transactions and tracking assets with transparency, which builds trust.
Tracking assets is inclusive of the assets themselves, as well as the
ability to have transparency in securely tracking orders, payments,
accounts, produce, and the associated data across industries,
geographies, and more.
Each member invited to be part of the blockchain network has an
exact copy of the ledger. Any information of a transaction that a
member wants to share--the who, what, where, when, how much, and even
the condition of a transaction, such as the temperature of a food
shipment--is recorded as a ``data block'' on the ledger, which is
propagated throughout the network.
Each block is connected to the ones before and after it. These
blocks form a chain of data that can track an asset as it moves from
place to place or ownership changes hands. The blocks confirm the exact
time and sequence of transactions, and the blocks link securely
together to prevent any block from being altered or being inserted
between two existing blocks.
Importantly, no participant can change or tamper with a transaction
after it's been recorded to the shared ledger. If a transaction record
includes an error, a new transaction must be added to reverse the
error, and both transactions are then visible.
Therefore, all permissioned participants in an interaction have a
trusted, up-to-date ledger that reflects the most recent transactions
and these transactions, once entered, cannot be changed.
Blockchain's power to transform is that it enables co-development
of a shared copy of the truth. What a group can achieve together far
exceeds what any individual member can achieve by themselves.
Furthermore, to speed this sharing of information, a set of rules--
called a smart contract--can be stored on the blockchain and executed
automatically.
Smart contracts are simply programs stored on a blockchain that run
when predetermined conditions are met. They typically are used to
automate the execution of an agreement so that all participants can be
immediately certain of the outcome, without any intermediary's
involvement or time loss. They can also automate a workflow, triggering
the next action when conditions are met.
Blockchain is neither bitcoin nor a panacea
While most people who have heard of blockchain associate it with
the cryptocurrency bitcoin, that use case is not what I'm talking about
today. While bitcoin does run on blockchain technologies, it is
important to understand that not all blockchain technologies are the
same. For example, bitcoin operates with a network of pseudonymous
participants, where shielding one's identity is the outcome.
The blockchain I am discussing is one built on open standards
technology that is designed to be used as a trusted network to handle
interactions between known parties. By way of comparison, the Internet
uses a protocol (TCP/IP) to direct network traffic, which provides part
of the backbone necessary to allow users to access the application
layer (websites and platforms). Similarly, blockchains serve as the
backbone protocol of new peer-to-peer network arrangements that allow
for a wide range of uses, from cryptocurrency-based transactions, like
those made possible by bitcoin, to supply chain management and
verification.
While blockchain is not a panacea for all the challenges presented
by food trust and safety issues, a digital infrastructure based on
blockchain protocols can provide substantial improvements in value over
the status quo. It can provide a trusted capability for transparency
and timely sharing of secure data.
Furthermore, the sharing of trusted, secure data with provenance
from multiple stakeholders that blockchain enables can also be
critically helpful to accelerate trustworthy artificial intelligence
(AI) applications. Blockchain's immutable, transparent digital record
offers greater insight into the framework behind the AI, reducing
possible distrust and mystery that some ascribe to the technology. It
also creates greater trust in the development of AI as the data used to
train the AI models can be decentralized, verified, and transparent.
Accordingly, integrating AI on a digital infrastructure built on
blockchain can help unlock further value over the current status quo.
Blockchain benefits--greater trust and security, better efficiencies
and resiliency, and improved sustainability
That value and the use case I am discussing today is how blockchain
could help advance end-to-end food traceability and, ultimately,
transparency to drive consumer protection and trust. It can do this by
enabling:

1.  Greater trust and security

2.  Better efficiencies and resiliency

3.  Improved sustainability
Greater trust and security
An ecosystem of trust is critical for all participants in the food
supply chain, from source to consumption. This includes a very
expansive and collaborative value chain of farmers to distributors, to
logistic partners, to retailers, to the family sitting down at their
table to eat. For example, food recalls are an immense safety problem
and a threat to profitability. Last year, Food Safety magazine counted
337 food safety recalls in the U.S.\1\ Companies surveyed put costs at
up to USD 30 million per incident,\2\ stemming from direct costs, plus
such indirect costs as penalties, lawsuits, lost sales, and brand
damage. In addition to the societal and business impact, huge stocks of
food are wasted and consumer trust is crushed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Food Safety Magazine: A Look Back at 2019 Food Recalls--https:/
/www.food-safety.com/articles/6487-a-look-back-at-2019-food-recalls.
\2\ SF&WB: Evaluating the real costs of a food product recall--
https://www.snackandbakery.com/articles/92105-evaluating-the-real-
costs-of-a-food-product-recall.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tracing food across the supply chain takes days, if not weeks, as
companies struggle to find and manage a mix of digital and paper-based
food data documentation across a complex and growing network of
suppliers and distributors.
With a digitized food system infrastructure, network participants
could have access to tools and data to improve food safety and become
proactive contributors to bettering the food system as a whole.
Further, with permissioned blockchain, the members of this members-only
network can rest assured that they are receiving accurate and timely
data and that their confidential blockchain records will be shared only
with network members that have specifically been granted access. And,
consensus on data accuracy is required from all network members, and
all validated transactions are immutable because they are recorded
permanently. No one, not even a system administrator, can delete a
transaction or make an edit without their action and identity being
known.
This means that if a food safety issue is reported, it would
immediately identify who is impacted and who should take action. One
example would be our work with PLANT-AG, where our blockchain platform
could capture and share seed and farming level data for fresh produce
with PLANT-AG's instrumented greenhouse facilities to enable better
visibility and trust.
Better efficiencies and resiliency
Inefficiency in the food system is a pervasive problem worldwide,
made more apparent by the COVID-19 crisis, which has stressed the
global supply chain.\3\ With so many participants, there are endless
opportunities to lose efficiency and profits. Inefficiencies negatively
affect consumer pricing, the carbon footprint, food waste, and expected
freshness. According to the United Nations, 1.4 billion tons of
perishable food is wasted each year due to inefficiencies found with
the food supply chain.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ BCG Henderson Institute: Tackling the 1.6-Billion-Ton Food Loss
and Waste Crisis--https://www.bcg.com/publications/2018/tackling-1.6-
billion-ton-food-loss-and-waste-crisis.
\4\ Supply Chain Digital: Billions of tons of food wasted in global
supply chain--https://supplychaindigital.com/logistics-1/billions-tons-
food-wasted-global-supply-chain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With a distributed ledger that is shared among members of a
network, time-wasting record reconciliations are eliminated. While one
unexpected event could cause a cascading array of supply chain
disruptions, blockchain can mitigate this through ``smart contracts.''
As shared earlier, a smart contract can be automatically triggered when
pre-defined business conditions are met. This gives near real-time
visibility into operations and the ability to take action earlier
should there be an exception.
Using blockchain, all food system participants could know the
provenance, real-time location, and status of their food products.
Further, integrating AI on the blockchain, retailers could receive
recommendations on what products to recall from store shelves because
of expiration and maintain inventory visibility during demand spikes,
for example by automating re-ordering when certain demand thresholds
are met. Armed with better data on a blockchain, companies could also
use AI to develop more accurate supply and demand forecasting models,
localize the sourcing of ingredients and restructure contracts.
Enabling a blockchain system that tracks product loss, waste, and
expiration dates could save $150 billion annually in food waste.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ IBM: 7 Benefits of IBM Food Trust--https://www.ibm.com/
blockchain/resources/7-benefits-ibm-food-trust/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Improved sustainability
Across the globe, consumers are demanding to know more about their
food--where it came from, the effect of its production methods on the
environment, and how workers and animals were treated in the process.
In fact, 54 percent of consumers say it's at least somewhat important
that the food they buy is produced in an environmentally sustainable
way.\6\ Sustainability is no longer a bonus; it's imperative for both
the consumers who demand it and for future business models.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Food Insight: Interest in Sustainability, Plant-Based Diets
Among Trends in IFIC Foundation's 2019 Food & Health Survey--https://
foodinsight.org/interest-in-sustainability-plant-based-diets-among-
trends-in-ific-foundation-2019-food-and-health-survey/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A digital food supply chain powered by blockchain enables new
levels of trust and transparency across the food ecosystem, increasing
awareness of sustainability opportunities and practices during each
step of the food chain. For example, farmers, producers, and other food
actors can automatically digitize and easily share audits,
certificates, and other records, proving that they utilize and promote
sustainable and ethical practices. And, distributors, transporters, and
retailers can be better informed to make sustainable choices. Using AI
on the blockchain, applications can suggest the most sustainable or
cost-effective shipping method and recommend local or alternative
sourcing.
Furthermore, the cost of unsustainable food practices creates
unnecessary investment and expenditures. ``True Cost Accounting'' sheds
light on the price of unsustainable food practices. Unsustainable
sourcing and biodiversity loss, due to unsustainable production
methods, result in hidden costs. Research shows that consumers
unknowingly pay twice as much for their food due to such costs. With
the global population expected to boom from seven to ten billion by
2056, companies are looking for ways to decrease their ecological
footprints and blockchain can help.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ IBM Focus on Sustainability--https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/
R8VDMJ4Y.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blockchain at work--examples of improved supply chains
In 2017, IBM built digitalized supply chains or ``food trust'' for
our clients based on blockchain technologies. This experience has shown
that when using blockchain, we can track Walmart's leafy greens,
Nestle's Gerber-branded sweet potato, apple and pumpkin baby foods, and
more. We can trace these foods to their origins in seconds versus
traditional methods that can take a week or longer. This trust now
includes more than 100 growers, producers, and sellers, including
grocery giants Walmart and Albertsons.
Look at the seafood supply chain--it's rippled with inaccuracies.
According to research by the environmental advocacy group Oceana,\8\ as
many as one in five of the fish samples tested were mislabeled.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ National Geographic: What is seafood fraud?--https://
www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/2019/03/study-finds-seafood-
mislabeled-illegal/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Blockchain is helping to bring order and transparency to one of the
world's most complex supply chains--as close to 80 percent of the
seafood Americans eat is either imported out-right, or it has been
exported and re-imported for processing. Working with Hampton Bays, New
York-based Manna Fish Farms, IBM is building a traceability network for
sustainably-raised aquacultured fish and shellfish on blockchain.
Furthermore, this digital platform could help reward the fisherman,
sustainable aquaculture farms, and their trusted networks for their
efforts. Before blockchain, there was no way to prove that you got your
catch onto ice a little faster than your peers, or that you used more
sustainable methods. Now, there is.
Blockchain can help advance end-to-end food traceability and,
ultimately, transparency to drive consumer loyalty, protection and
trust.
Conclusion
Let me close with my appreciation again to this Committee for
exploring how digital infrastructure can accelerate improvements in our
food supply chain. I have also spoken to leaders at the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and support their efforts to find and implement
tangible strategies to modernize the food industry. The U.S. Department
of Agriculture is also making positive strides, including a blockchain
traceability ``farm to store'' pilot with Walmart and IBM.
We applaud all of these conversations and many others we are having
with farmers, fishers, distributors, transporters, retailers,
regulators, and other stakeholders in the food supply network. We are
happy to support these conversations as we believe blockchain is a
game-changer for food safety.
Again, thank you for the opportunity to discuss such an important
topic.

The Chairman. Thank you. Thank you very much. And now Mr.
Safrance, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN SAFRANCE, EXECUTIVE VICE
CHAIRMAN, MASTRONARDI PRODUCE LIMITED, MASTRONARDI PRODUCE--
USA, INC., LIVONIA, MI

Mr. Safrance. Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Scott and
Ranking Member Thompson, for holding a hearing to discuss this
extremely important topic of controlled environment
agriculture, or CEA, and for inviting Mastronardi Produce to
appear before you and share our perspective story.
Mastronardi Produce is a fourth-generation family operated
business devoted to providing high quality fresh fruits and
vegetables to people across North America and beyond. As a
pioneer and industry leader in greenhouse farming, Mastronardi
prides itself on producing consistently flavorful produce in an
environmentally and worker-friendly manner. We are the largest
CEA farming and distribution operation in North America. Our
direct workforce represents approximately 4,000 jobs across the
U.S. We have farms in five states--Michigan, New York, Maine,
Ohio, Colorado--and cooled distribution facilities in another
five states--Pennsylvania, Michigan, Texas, Florida, and
California. You have called this hearing today to examine the
contribution CEA farming can make to protect domestic food
supply chains and infrastructure. We believe CEA farming is the
key to sustainably and efficiently strengthening America's food
supply chain and would like to offer several key thoughts on
this.
First, because of the unique way in which a range of fruits
and vegetables can be grown indoors, CEA farming enables more
produce to be grown closer to stores and retailers that serve
American consumers. Increasing domestic CEA farming would
significantly help to address the problem of relying on more
and more imports to feed America. Currently more than \1/2\ of
all fruits and nearly \1/3\ of all vegetables are imported to
the U.S., including 61 percent of all tomatoes. To balance this
trend, the U.S. must embrace CEA, which is widely used in
Europe, Canada, and Mexico, to meet growing consumer demand.
Much of the rest of the world is far ahead of us in achieving
domestic food security through CEA acreage, as there is
approximately 520,000 acres of CEA in Europe, 50,000 in Mexico,
compared to only 6,000 in the United States.
Second, CEA farming permits the grower to control and
monitor virtually all of the elements of the environment, from
the nutrients that plants receive to advanced computer systems,
with hundreds of thousands of data points to control and adjust
humidity, temperature, light, climate, and other environmental
factors. Environmental sustainability is at the forefront of
many conversations these days, and it is always a primary
consideration of CEA farmers. CEA greenhouses use ten times
less water and require ten times less land than conventional
farms. They also significantly reduce the produce sector's
carbon footprint since they can be built in specific areas to
shorten distances from greenhouses to customers. They use
integrated pest management systems to minimize the use of
pesticides and have pioneered a traceback food safety system to
reduce food-borne illnesses.
Third, the primary barrier to sustaining and expanding CEA
operations in America is that we, like many other firms, lack a
stable workforce to help us with operations and harvesting.
Despite our farms being climate controlled, and the day-to-day
work being done without being subject to harsh elements, CEA
farms, again, similar to many other farms, struggle to attract
and maintain a stable workforce, despite our efforts to eagerly
seek out and hire qualified domestic workers. Whenever we are
unable to find those qualified workers, we are forced to turn
to contractors or the H-2A Program. The program, however, has
grown cumbersome and unreliable for this modern and sustainable
type of farming, that, frankly, wasn't contemplated when the H-
2A Program was first developed. In fact, during the pandemic,
we grew more food than we were able to even harvest with our
current workforce, which meant we were forced to throw food
away, rather than harvest it and sell it or donate it.
The U.S. has an opportunity to meet growing consumer demand
with expanded U.S. production of fresh produce, and Mastronardi
is proud to add its name to a long list of businesses and
organizations asking Congress to act on the issue of
agricultural labor, which will in turn help our domestic food
supply chain. We urge Committee Members to continue to work
with your counterparts in the Senate to pass the Farm Workforce
Modernization Act (H.R. 1603), but also to address the unique
needs of our segment of the industry as part of that reform
legislation. This will unleash a new era in American
agriculture, one that grows far more of our produce
domestically on environmentally controlled farms that provide
lower cost, higher quality, and, most importantly, reliable
produce that American consumers demand to live healthier lives.
I want to thank this Committee for the chance to discuss
our business, and the remarkable opportunities controlled
environmental agriculture presents to the United States. CEA
farms and the fruits and vegetables they produce will allow us
to meet the challenge of feeding a growing population with
healthier foods.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Safrance follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kevin Safrance, Executive Vice Chairman,
Mastronardi Produce Limited, Mastronardi Produce--USA, Inc., Livonia,
MI
Good morning. Thank you, Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Thompson
for holding a hearing to discuss this extremely important topic, and
for inviting Mastronardi Produce to appear before you and share our
perspective and story. My name is Kevin Safrance. You may be familiar
with our company's main fresh fruit and vegetable brand, Sunset and
sub-brands, Campari
'
, Wild Wonders
'
, Flavor
Bombs
'
, One Sweet
'
, WOW
TM
berries, and
others, found on the largest retailer shelves throughout the U.S. These
and many other fruit and vegetable varieties are grown right here in
America in sustainable, state-of-the-art, highly efficient indoor
farms, using modern farming technology many now refer to as Controlled
Environment Agriculture, or CEA.
Along with my brother-in-law our Chief Executive Officer and
President, Paul Mastronardi, the Mastronardi family has the honor of
appearing before this Committee today to discuss the benefits of
Controlled Environment Agriculture. As became painfully clear over the
past year and a half, the United States has a fragile domestic food
supply chain and infrastructure that require investment, not just to
carry us through challenges but to take care of Americans in good times
and bad. Currently, more than half of all fruits are imported to the
United States and nearly \1/3\ of all vegetables are imported. This,
while American farms--especially highly efficient CEA farms--have the
ability and desire to increase America's food supply from farming done
right here in our country. In fact, during the pandemic and at other
times, we grow more food than we are able to harvest with our current
workforce, which means that we are forced to throw food away rather
than harvest and sell or donate it. We believe CEA farming is the key
to quickly, sustainably, and efficiently strengthening America's food
supply chain. We simply need more workers to help us get the job done.
With an enhanced workforce, we are confident we can make a rapid and
significant contribution to the strength of the nation's food supply.
Mastronardi Produce is a fourth-generation family operated business
devoted to providing high-quality fresh fruits and vegetables to people
across North America and beyond. As a pioneer and industry leader in
greenhouse farming, Mastronardi prides itself on producing consistently
flavorful tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, berries, and leafy greens in an
environmentally and worker-friendly manner. Our direct workforce
represents approximately 4,000 jobs across the United States making
Mastronardi the largest CEA farming and distribution operation in North
America. This includes farms in Coldwater, Michigan; Oneida, New York;
Madison, Maine; Wapakoneta, Ohio; and Brush, Colorado. Mastronardi is
also proud to have approximately 1 million square feet of cooled
distribution facilities throughout the country located in Jonestown,
Pennsylvania; Livonia, Michigan; Laredo, Texas; Lakeland, Florida; and
Castroville, California.
Our geographic footprint allows us to reach American consumers
within hours of our farms and distribution facilities. Mastronardi
serves the top retailers and major food service companies in the United
States. This supply chain provides consumers with a consistent and
reliable supply of flavorful, nutritious produce.
In the 1920's, Paul's great grandfather, Armando Mastronardi
established Mastronardi's farming roots when he moved to North America
and purchased a field farm. It was Paul's grandfather--Umberto--who
traveled to the Netherlands and witnessed first-hand the benefits of
growing produce in a protected greenhouse environment. This led to
Umberto constructing the first commercial greenhouse in North America.
Umberto's son--Don--unexpectedly took over the Mastronardi business at
age 25 and expanded its distribution operations into Detroit, Michigan
in the early 1970's. Paul, grew up in the business learning how to make
boxes and harvest fruit from an early age. Paul soon realized that
consumers sought after more readily available flavorful tomatoes, which
greenhouse farming methods provide. Mastronardi's innovative
realization led to the first greenhouse grown grape tomato. We pride
ourselves on innovation in all aspects of the business, including
industry leading advancements in top-seal packaging that reduced
plastic use more than 20%, and increase use of sustainable compostable
packaging.
You've called this hearing today to examine the contribution CEA
farming can make to Protecting Domestic Food Supply Chains and
Infrastructure. We would like to offer several key thoughts on this.
First, because of the unique way in which a wide range of fruits
and vegetables can be grown indoors, CEA farming enables significant
amounts of fresh fruits and vegetables to be grown closer to the stores
and retailers that serve American consumers. This is vitally important
considering the transportation and shipping issues experienced by many
during the pandemic, as well as the damaging effects of climate change
and inclement weather. Security of the domestic food supply can only be
accomplished with a significant expansion of CEA farms in the United
States. Much of the rest of the world is far ahead of the U.S. in
achieving domestic food security through CEA acreage. There are
approximately 520,000 acres of CEA in Europe and 50,000 in Mexico, but
only 6,000 in the U.S. most of which does not contain updated advanced
technology. As we see a drastic imbalance of CEA produce acreage, we
also find the U.S. relying more and more on imports to meet the present
and increasing consumer demand for fresh fruits and vegetables. Nearly
\2/3\ of fresh fruits and \1/3\ of vegetables are imported into and
consumed annually in the U.S.
1-2
For certain categories of
vegetables, like tomatoes, more than 60% are imported. To balance this
trend, the U.S. must embrace CEA, which is widely used in Europe,
Canada, and Mexico, to meet growing consumer demand.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://migration.ucdavis.edu/rmn/blog/post/?id=2498 (tomatoes
61%).
\2\ https://migration.ucdavis.edu/rmn/blog/post/?id=2569.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, CEA farming permits the grower to control and monitor
virtually all of the elements of the environment, from the nutrients
the plants receive to advanced computer systems with hundreds of
thousands of data points to control and adjust, humidity, temperature,
light, climate and other environment factors. Storm and irrigation
water are collected, used, and then recycled resulting in a fraction of
use compared to traditional farming. This means food production can
continue even when nature might like to stop it.
Further, we use an integrated pest management system to minimize
the use of pesticides. For example, we use ladybugs and other insects
to control harmful pests, and we bring in bees to the greenhouse for
pollination.
We also pioneered a traceback food safety system enabling us to
identify the date, specific crop location, and team member who
physically harvested the produce.
Environmental sustainability is at the forefront of many
conversations these days, and it is always on the forefront of our
minds as CEA farmers. Government agencies, companies, and non-
governmental organizations need to embrace more efficient,
environmentally sustainable systems predicated on technology. CEA is
paving the way for the U.S. to maintain domestic food security in a
climate conscience manner. CEA greenhouses use ten times less water and
require ten times less land than conventional farms, and significantly
reduces the carbon footprint as a result of shorter distances from
greenhouses to customer. That means CEA farms don't just help us to
secure the nation's food supply; they also help us to sustain the
nation's water supply and land supply and care for our planet. At a
time when many in our country are sadly facing water shortages on top
of the nation's supply chain problems related to food, these additional
benefits of sustainable CEA farming cannot be underscored enough.
As I mentioned earlier, however, the primary barrier to meeting the
need here in America is that we, like many other farmers, lack a stable
workforce to help us with the harvest.
Today's modern CEA farms are incredibly efficient. One greenhouse
worker can harvest the equivalent to 37 traditional field farmworkers.
Despite our farms being climate controlled and the day-to-day work
being done without being subject to the harsh elements, CEA farms
struggle to attract and maintain a stable workforce. We eagerly seek
out and hire qualified domestic workers. Whenever we are unable to find
those qualified workers, we are forced to turn to contractors or the H-
2A program. The program, however, has grown cumbersome and unreliable
for this modern and sustainable type of farming that frankly wasn't
contemplated when the H-2A program was first developed. For example,
CEA farming requires facility cleanout, sanitation, and crop
preparation processes that did not exist in 1986 when the H-2A program
was created. A 50 tomato plant--which you can find any day on our
farms during harvest--was not contemplated by the authors 35 years ago.
These innovations beckon us to modernize and update the system, not
just so we can partner with more H-2A workers, but so we can fix the
domestic food supply chain and feed Americans with food grown right
here in America.
The U.S. has an opportunity to meet growing consumer demand with
expanded U.S. production of fresh produce, but only if the labor
situation is addressed. Mastronardi is proud to add its name to a long
list of businesses and organizations asking Congress to act on the
issue of agricultural labor. We urge Committee Members to continue to
work with their counterparts in the Senate to pass the Farm Workforce
Modernization Act, but to address the unique needs of our segment of
the industry as part of that reform legislation. By updating the rules
that allow us to responsibly use the H-2A program, we will be able to
unleash a new era in American agriculture. One that grows far more of
our produce domestically, on environmentally controlled farms that
provide lower cost, higher quality produce that American consumers
demand to live healthier lives.
In closing, I want to thank this Committee for the chance to
discuss our business and the remarkable opportunities Controlled
Environment Agriculture present to the United States. CEA farms and the
fruits and vegetables they produce will allow us to meet the challenge
of feeding a growing population with healthier foods. Mr. Chairman,
this concludes my opening testimony.
I look forward to answering any questions you might have.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, and I appreciate all of
the just simply outstanding testimonies that each of you have
given. Now we will go to questions with Members, and I will ask
a couple, then I will turn it over to the Ranking Member, we
will go to Members.
First of all, let me ask Mr. Giscombe, what is PLANT-AG?
How does it work?
Mr. Giscombe. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. PLANT-AG, as we like
to call it----
The Chairman. You might want to move your microphone closer
to your voice.
Mr. Giscombe. Can you hear me okay?
The Chairman. Yes, now we can hear you.
Mr. Giscombe. Sorry about that.
I was saying PLANT-AG is a distributed network production
system based on the simple principle of bringing the production
facilities for controlled environment agriculture near--more
close to the population dense centers, metropolitan statistical
areas. Because of this technology, as Mr. Safrance said
earlier, we are now able to do significantly more with
significantly less land space. By simply moving from further
away, which is what the traditional distribution networks look
like, to being in closer proximity to where people who are
consuming this on a day-to-day basis are, we stand to not only
increase production, limit the amount of natural resource
depletion, and most importantly, increase the level of quality
of that produce that is coming to the consumer.
The Chairman. And so would it be a good understanding of
what PLANT-AG does that you are able to help us with food
security by using technology, and the latest scientific
processes, to be able to grow food inside, without the natural
light, or rain?
Mr. Giscombe. Yes, Mr. Chairman. The beauty of controlled
environment agriculture is that you are eliminating a lot of
that variability. In fact, I would say statistically you reduce
about 96 percent of the risk of the contaminants from the
airborne pathogens and bacteria. You are also no longer
susceptible to any kind of weather conditions, no more than we
sitting in this room today are susceptible to the humidity
outside in D.C.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Now, Mr. Gadouas, in
your testimony you mentioned something that I want you to
explain a little further. We were talking about financial, and
equity, and then you made this statement describing this
financial situation in ag. You called it a loosely defined
jungle. What do you mean by that? Please turn your microphone
on.
Mr. Gadouas. Is that better? Yes, here we go.
The Chairman. Yes. May--come a little closer. We want to
really hear what you have to say here. Go ahead.
Mr. Gadouas. What investors are really looking for is an
asset class which has some institutional meaning, and right now
the food system is not really widely known amongst
institutional, particularly fixed-income investors. There is a
combination of food production. There is food distribution.
There is social-type programs out there which provide food to
the needy. There is food research. All of this right now,
because it is so littly known with portfolio managers,
insurance company managers, pension funds, and so forth, it has
been very, very difficult educating them.
So the point here is that by designating an asset class,
particularly something which has an industrial capacity to it,
something which is a capital expenditure, something that can be
financed, as intangible, that would be doing the same thing
that we did 15 years ago, with the analogy of renewable energy.
It was just as little known, just as little defined, but by
having examples where there are multiple sources of capital to
provide that kind of funding for large capital expenditures,
that will solidify in an investor's mind what a new asset class
is called food infrastructure.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And now, Ranking Member,
I will turn to you for your questions.
Mr. Thompson. Well, Mr. Chairman, Thank you very much.
Thanks for this hearing. One of my most recent visits--well,
actually, it was probably in 2020, now that I think about it,
at this point, to a farm operation, farm market, was Yarnick's
in Indiana County. They are traditional agricultural
production, but they are able to supplement it and extend their
season using hydroponics, and also having a controlled climate
right in the middle of that production agriculture. It was
pretty impressive, actually, very impressive. So I appreciate
all of our witnesses here today.
Mr. Safrance, as we know, through adopting new practices
and innovative technologies, our farmers, ranchers, and
producers have made it possible to have the safest, most
abundant, most affordable food and fiber supply in the history
of the world. And while there is always room for improvement,
and that with agriculture, I think we all agree American
agriculture is science, technology, and innovation, always has
been. Kind of rude and crude and rudimentary at first, but very
sophisticated today. I strongly disagree with those who say the
only way to fix our food system is to completely start over.
Mr. Safrance, as the Executive Vice Chairman of one of the
companies really leading greenhouse growing in North America,
what are your thoughts on that statement?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, I don't believe the supply chain is
broken at all. I feel that we should focus on what we are not
doing correctly and celebrate what we are doing correctly. I
think the biggest problem we have in our supply chain right now
is availability of product. Currently, in our industry we are
importing a lot from different countries, and if there are
border issues, or other issues in other countries, then these
products don't show up on time, and that creates empty store
shelves.
I can tell you, from our experience, we have five
distribution centers across the United States. If we have the
product in our building, we can get an order in the morning, we
can ship it out that afternoon, and have it delivered the next
day almost 100 percent of the time.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. As I was listening to testimony, I
heard a few witnesses mention how getting access to capital is
one of the biggest limiting factors of entry into controlled
environment agriculture. I think access to capital, obviously,
is a big issue across all aspects of the food supply chain,
certainly for those young and new and beginning farmers we know
it is a big issue as well. So getting access to credit and
capital is not just an issue in a controlled environment
agriculture industry, but it is something that producers
experience across the entire agriculture industry. Mastronardi
Produce has been involved in the greenhouse growing industry
for four generations now. Mr. Safrance, how has Mastronardi
been able to gain access to the capital needed to build not
just the greenhouses, but the distribution facilities across
the United States without the use of exempt facility bonds,
like our other witnesses were calling for today?
Mr. Safrance. Yes. In our history, everything we have done
has been just traditional bank financing and/or equity off our
balance sheet.
Mr. Thompson. Very good. I think, just because we are on a
tight timeframe, Mr. Chairman, I am going to yield back the
balance of my time.
The Chairman. Very good.
Mr. Thompson. Keep it efficient.
The Chairman. Thank you. I appreciate that, Ranking Member.
You are a good man. Now we will recognize Mr. McGovern of
Massachusetts for 5 minutes.
Mr. McGovern. Well thank you, and thank you to all of our
witnesses, and Chairman Scott. Sometimes, talk about supply
chains and efficiencies quickly become jargony, and I worry
people may lose the forest for the trees. I appreciate that our
witnesses for today did a great job explaining what may be a
new topic for some people, in that vein I would like to take a
minute to kind of center the conversation.
We are talking about building a resilient food system. That
means strengthening local food systems, expanding opportunity
for farmers, ensuring justice for farmworkers, and guaranteeing
access to nutritious food essentially as a human right. And I
think it is really important that we take a holistic approach
to food security so that we can fulfill the goal of trying to
end hunger in this country once and for all. In fact, and my
colleagues maybe are tired of me talking about this, but I have
been pressing this Administration, the Biden Administration, to
convene a White House Conference on Food, Nutrition, Health,
and Hunger, because we need to tie everything together. It is
not just one thing, it is a whole bunch of things.
And, Mr. Giscombe, I appreciate that you put things in
perspective in your testimony. You said that you were here
because your children, just as every child in America, deserves
fresh, nutritious, contaminant-free fruits and vegetables that
they can trust, and I couldn't agree more. I would like to ask
you to expand on this a little bit. How can CEAs help end
hunger in America? And, one of the most important things about
food security is realizing that any hunger is not just about
quantity, it is about quality as well. And the second question
would be, can you elaborate on how CEAs could expand access to
fresh food?
Mr. Giscombe. Thank you, Congressman. First and foremost, I
would say CEA cannot end hunger in America. What CEA can do, as
you so appropriately stated, is supplement the other elements
of agricultural production in the United States of America to
better equip the overall supply chain to be more efficient and
effective in the delivery of fresh, high quality, contaminant-
free, and nutritious products.
One of the key things about controlled environment
agriculture is the last comment I just made. By moving indoors,
you eliminate the majority of the risk to airborne pathogens
and bacteria, which are the leading causes of food-borne
illness in America. Every year--actually, going back to 2011,
there has been more than six million cases of outbreaks--I am
sorry, of contaminations and illnesses caused from that, and it
is devastating. So when you think about--if we have the
opportunity to simply leverage this specific kind of platform
as a part of the broader collective of agricultural production,
that is the first step, in our belief, to moving towards being
able to address hunger. Did I answer your question,
Congressman?
Mr. McGovern. Yes, thank you. Yes, I know, and I know we
are on a tight schedule here, so I want to be very quick, but
we talk a lot about food insecurity, but we also have to add
that there is nutrition insecurity as well, and as we battle
issues like food insecurity and hunger, we also have to pay
close attention to the importance of nutrition as well. But, I
appreciate the perspectives that all of you have presented here
today, and this is an important hearing. Yes, Mr. Giscombe?
Mr. Giscombe. I just wanted to add one more thing. Going
back to nutrition, it is probably not commonly known that when
a fresh produce item travels more than 4,500 miles, it loses
upwards of 50 percent of its nutritional value. So when you
think about it, if what we are focused on is delivering higher
quality, more nutritious products, one of the first steps has
to be to limit the distance that item has to travel to get to
its consumption.
Mr. McGovern. I think that is a good point. Somebody, one
time, explained to me that a tomato coming from the West Coast
to Massachusetts, where I live, and with all the shipping, and
the refrigeration, and all the stuff that it went through, I
felt bad for the tomato that was in the grocery store. But in
any event, I think that is a very good point, and I thank you.
I yield back my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much, Chairman of our Rules
Committee, Mr. McGovern. Thank you, and you are right, you have
been a longtime champion of fighting hunger, now I will
recognize Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I
appreciate you having this Committee hearing. I do think it is
good that we are talking about the number of miles that a
tomato, or any other fresh fruit or vegetable travels before it
is actually able to make it to the shelves of our local grocery
store. I want to ask, if I could, Mr. Safrance, you have
greenhouse operations in Canada, the U.S., and Mexico, if I
understand your testimony correctly. Is that accurate?
Mr. Safrance. We own greenhouses in Canada and the United
States, and a small partnership in Mexico, and we have growers
that work for us in all three countries on a supply basis.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. And you have greenhouses
that are as large as 4 acres, is that correct?
Mr. Safrance. Yes. We have some that are much larger than
that.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Really? So how large would
your largest greenhouse be if you don't mind?
Mr. Safrance. In a single facility, 64 acres.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Sixty-four acres? And that is
one greenhouse, or is that multiple greenhouses on 64 acres?
Mr. Safrance. That would be one facility composed of two
ranges of 32 acres.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Wow. That is a big greenhouse.
Mr. Safrance. Yes. Yes, it is large.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. So where I come from in south
Georgia, most of my fruit and vegetable growers, they have
greenhouses, and they grow out the plant, but then you take
this plant, which is, as you know, would be significantly
smaller than one tomato, and you transplant it then into the
fields. If I understand your operation, though, you are
actually growing the whole plant, and the vegetable, out in
your greenhouses, is that correct?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. So do you do any
transplanting, or is all of yours totally internal to the
greenhouses?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, no, everything we do is indoors.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. Well, my kids love your
Sugar Bombs--is it Sugar Bombs?
Mr. Safrance. Yes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Yes. And my wife makes me buy
them when I go to the grocery store too, so I eat them too, so
you have great products.
Mr. Safrance. Thank you.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I guess my concern is, when we
talk about the fact that we are importing, if you will, 61
percent of the tomatoes that are eaten in this country. What is
your wage rate in Mexico versus your wage rate in the United
States?
Mr. Safrance. Yes. I don't operate the greenhouses in
Mexico, so I am not 100 percent sure. I believe the wage rate
in Mexico is probably around $14 or $15 a day. Our greenhouses
in the United States pay roughly a base wage of $13 to $15 an
hour, and with the piece rate, many people are achieving more
than $20 an hour.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. All right. So you are $14 to
$15 a day in Mexico?
Mr. Safrance. I mean, that would be an average of all the
growers in Mexico, I would say.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay. And so this is something
that I think, when we talk about the sustainability, and the
food supply chain, why are 61 percent of the tomatoes that we
consume in the United States actually transported thousands of
miles to make it to the grocery store? And one of the things
that concerns me, that our growers are fighting in the U.S., is
that $15 an hour wage in Mexico versus, as you said, most
people that are working in the fields make a good bit more than
that because they are paid by production, and so there is a
reason that they come to America to work. And they work very
hard. I have worked in the butterbean fields myself when I was
a younger man, and I didn't make $15 an hour back then. It was
whatever the minimum wage was at the time. But the wage
disparity between the U.S. and Mexico, to me, seems to be one
of the reasons why our produce has to travel so far to make it
to the shelves. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Safrance. No, I don't agree with that, actually. I
think a lot of it has to do with growing seasons and proper
growing climates.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Okay.
Mr. Safrance. Some of the areas in Mexico have the best
areas of climate to grow, much like California, year round.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I am almost out of time. I
apologize for interrupting you, I really do. So I am in south
Georgia, so my growing season is effectively the same as
portions of Mexico, and--Mr. Chairman, my time has expired, but
I appreciate the hearing. I am concerned about the U.S.
producers, and what they have to compete with coming from
foreign countries, and the lower costs of operations in foreign
countries.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Scott. And now I recognize the
gentleman from California, Mr. Costa, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for your
leadership, and for this hearing today. I think focusing on
protecting America's domestic food supply chain, as you and I
discussed before, is a national security issue, and therefore
it is critical that the House Agriculture Committee indicate
how we need to focus on innovation as we move forward. The
sustainability of our domestic food supply is critical, and I,
for one, believe that we should take an all of the above
approach, and I appreciate the testimony of our witnesses here
today.
Let me make a note, the Chinese Government, and our last
colleague talking about remaining competitive, they spend $3
billion a year on innovation to modernize their agriculture. We
have $3 million, $3 billion for China, we do $3 million for our
support within the USDA. That is not being competitive. Put
simply, America is not keeping up on research and development,
our capacity for these investments that are absolutely
necessary, and we are neglecting, as a result, our food
security.
President Lincoln, in 1862, July 2, signed the Morrill Act
to create land-grant universities. That was infrastructure.
That was boldness. That was vision. In California we are
utilizing some of this cutting-edge technology on innovative
agriculture using our research universities, but also the
private-sector. I want to highlight Plenty, a company in
California, which I visited their vertical agricultural
investments. Plenty, so named because they want to produce
additional food supply to America. Plenty, meaning plenty more
food for America. I would like unanimous consent, Mr. Chairman,
to submit their testimony here for the record.
[The statement referred to is located on p. 49.]
The Chairman. Unanimous consent granted.
Mr. Costa. Thank you. In highlighting this effort, I want
to note that they have developed a pilot project effort that I
witnessed last year, and this year they are building a very
large project in Compton, California. And their plan is, like
other of our witnesses here today testified, to create these
kinds of vertical growth facilities in major cities in America
that will provide jobs, and provide additional high-quality
food that--because you control the environment, and I farm
some, and farming is risky. And, there are some factors you
just can't control out on the farm, and that is the weather.
But the ability to grow these products in a controlled
environment I think is critical, and that is really what
controlled environment agriculture stands for, CEA, controlled
environment agriculture. And so these technologies are critical
for the future sustainability of putting food on America's
dinner table every night, and that is the goal.
Now I have a couple of quick questions, because this
effort--and I urge all my colleagues to view in your area where
vertical growth agriculture is taking place under controlled
environment agriculture circumstances, because I think there
are public-private partnerships that are critical. Mr. Gadouas,
you talked about exempt facility infrastructure to help fund
significant capital expenditures. We are talking about market
tax credits. Where do we help provide the financing to
encourage more of this effort?
Mr. Gadouas. Well, to your point, Congressman Costa, there
is so much that is needed. There is so much infrastructure. It
is critical to the country, and it is going to be distributed
all over the country. In order to make that happen, we need to
diversify as much capital as--available as possible. And in
addition to tax credits, tax increment financing, and some of
the other economic development tools that are out there--and
they are out there, but the truth is, and we have seen this, is
they are all for relatively small projects. They simply do not
address the type of scale of the capital expenditures that are
going to be necessary here.
So in looking at what has been successful in the past, we
think that an obvious source of capital, because so many
investors are just natural buyers, naturally aligned with this
type of infrastructure, a new classification of exempt facility
bonds would go very, very far in diversifying that kind of
capital that is----
Mr. Costa. My time is almost expired here, but, Mr.
Chairman, I think in our next hearing we need to look at more
tools to try to help provide financing in these public-private
partnerships, and our universities throughout the country.
The Chairman. Certainly, Mr. Costa. Thank you. The
gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, you are recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses. We are talking about something here today that is
growing in interest in our country. Controlled environment
agriculture is important not only because it diversifies
production methods for existing farmers, but it also serves as
a testing ground for many new technologies before traditional
farmers actually incorporate them.
We need to understand the limitations of this industry as
well. Food security is a national security issue, and our
primary responsibility must be always to ensure that our
country's food supply remains secure. I believe that these
production methods we are discussing today do have a role in
the potential of allowing more of our food to be produced
domestically.
In my district I toured, in October 2020, the Better Fresh
Farms located in Metter, Georgia. These CEA farms are built
inside of mobile containers, and so are able to be relocated
easily. The ability these farms have to bring fresh produce
right to a population center is an inventive method by which we
might eradicate many of the food deserts throughout America.
Before I begin my questioning, I would like to draw
attention to an important matter that Mr. Safrance made in his
opening statement. He stated that the primary barrier his farms
face is the lack of a stable workforce, and this is exactly the
number one issue that farmers tell me they face as well. This
Congress I introduced a bill that would move administration of
H-2A programs from the Department of Labor to the USDA. The
Department of Labor is fundamentally cross purpose with the H-
2A Program. That Department is also out of touch with the
particular needs of the ag industry, much of which arise from
timing sensitivities due to planting and harvesting schedules,
as well as the weather. And I hope that the Agriculture
Committee will hold a hearing this Congress where we can look
at my bill in greater detail and can have expert witnesses
testify on how we can improve our H-2A program.
Mr. Safrance, in your testimony you brought attention to
the fact that nearly \2/3\ of fresh fruits and vegetables are
imported into and consumed annually in the U.S. You explained
how Mastronardi Produce is able to remain competitive in this
market. How are you able to do that?
Mr. Safrance. From a labor perspective?
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Safrance. Well, when it comes to controlled environment
agriculture, they are much more efficient from a labor
perspective. We have a lot of automation, and also different
things in the greenhouse where it is very ergonomic, and there
is a lot of different pieces in there that can help us get the
labor done at a faster rate than in a field, without having to
bend over, and things like that. So that is how we try to stay
competitive, but at the end of the day, we just really struggle
with the actual numbers of people that we get in the
greenhouses, and it has been a problem ever since we have been
doing business here in the United States, which is many, many
years. And that is the largest problem we have today, is just
getting enough people.
Mr. Allen. I have about a minute and 30 seconds left, and I
would like to ask all of our witnesses, what is your biggest
challenge in controlled environment agriculture production?
What are the biggest challenges that industry face? And I will
start, could each of our witnesses comment on that very
quickly. Any challenges?
Mr. Safrance. No, I would just say our number one issue is
quantity of labor. We try to hire and endorse all the American
workers we can, and at the end of the day we just can't get
enough people. We physically go out and promote, radio ads, all
kinds of things, and just physically don't get the amount of
interest that we would like.
Mr. Verbakel. For us at the moment there is a backlog in
transportation, availability for trucks to get the containers
out of port, so the material delivery from port to building
site is a big challenge, but I think this will be solved within
a year, and will not be the long-term challenges. We are
looking for more collaborations within the U.S. market to be
also domestically a supplier, together with more greenhouse and
manufacturer in the United States.
Mr. Allen. All right. Well, I am out of time. I will
mention that I did visit Vertical Harvest in Jackson Hole,
Wyoming, and they did something very creative. They used people
with disabilities to harvest, and these folks were full of
energy, and were amazing workers. And so maybe we can----
The Chairman. Mr. Allen, your time has expired.
Mr. Allen. Yes, sir.
The Chairman. Thank you. And now I recognize the gentlelady
from North Carolina, Ms. Adams, the Vice Chair of the
Agriculture Committee.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Thompson, for hosting the hearing today. To our witnesses,
thank you very much for your testimony. In my district in
Mecklenburg County in North Carolina, nearly 15 percent of the
population lives in what the USDA considers a food desert.
Often found in low-income communities, these residents don't
have access to a full service grocery store or nutritious food,
and experts suggest that living in a food desert may put people
at an increased risk of obesity, diabetes, and other weight-
related conditions, which is why I am particularly interested
to hear how applying controlled environment practices to urban
agriculture could aid efforts to achieve food security, and
improve access to healthy foods in food deserts across the
country. Already urban agricultural technologies are increasing
the availability of food, which is especially important in
communities with limited access to affordable fresh produce
like my community.
Mr. Giscombe, as I mentioned earlier, in my district 15
percent of the population lives in a food desert, so can you
address how controlled environment systems help communities
located in food deserts, and how can these systems mitigate
food insecurity?
Mr. Giscombe. Congresswoman, thank you, great question, and
I appreciate it. As I said before, one of the biggest
challenges is the location and proximity of where our
agricultural production is today. What that leads to is
significant costs in transporting the items that are produced
to their area of consumption. Controlled environment
agriculture has the ability to be located, whether it be in the
metropolitan city areas, like we spoke about with our
colleagues at Plenty, or Bowery Farms, or any of the others
that are practicing vertical agriculture. But what you will see
is there are no greenhouses that you can put in the middle of a
city center, right? Real estate is extremely expensive,
extremely valuable, and we are trying to address things such as
employment, housing, which is a critical issue. So when you
think about what is the best and most efficient use of real
estate for agricultural production, and making that proximate
to where the consumption is, there has to be some middle
ground.
So by being within, let us say 6, 8, even a 10 hour radius
of a metropolitan statistical area, you can eliminate up to 30
worth of logistical cost per item, which means that the
retailers, the distributors who are subsequently delivering
that produce to your retail outlet, and your food service
outlets, now have a benefit. Their margins become larger. And,
at the end of the day, economics is what drives businesses.
Ms. Adams. Okay.
Mr. Giscombe. I would submit that if you are able to bring
the cost of agricultural production within a certain level, you
are going to also be able to pass that on, and ensure that
greater quality food gets to the people that you are speaking
about.
Ms. Adams. Okay. So would the food produced in these
controlled environments be as nutritious as the food grown in a
field, and could there be micronutrient deficiencies in some
crops?
Mr. Giscombe. That is a phenomenal question, and I will say
this very matter-of-factly. It is absolutely as nutritious, and
we can argue whether or not it is more nutritious. When you
grow inside a greenhouse, or in a vertical farm, there is no
use of pesticides or herbicides. That is number one. Because
you are able to control every element of nutrient that that
item is receiving, whether it be lettuce, whether it be
tomatoes like we have displayed here today, or cucumbers, they
are all in higher quality. So by the time they got to--and
again, as I said, traveling a shorter distance--that preserve
the nutritional quality.
Ms. Adams. Okay. So let me move on. Thank you so much. Mr.
Verbakel, in your testimony you mentioned that there is no
escaping the significant capital expenditures necessary to
develop a controlled environment facility, so what are the
potential infrastructure, resource, and energy costs associated
with these CEA facilities, and how do they compare with
traditional production agriculture systems?
Mr. Verbakel. Initially the capital investment costs are,
of course, much higher compared to open field farming, but in
the long run, the greenhouses can also serve as an asset. So,
from an investment perspective, that is much more interesting
than just investing in the pure land. And, to your point, from
where you are from, one of our clients, Little Leaf Farms, from
Devens, Massachusetts, is going to invest in Burnsville, North
Carolina, where they will realize a 20 acre complete controlled
environment agriculture for lettuce production. I see we are
running out of time, and I want to give the word back to you.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Well, great. Well, thanks very much, and I
am going to yield my 6 minutes back, Mr. Chairman, my 6
seconds, excuse me. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Now I recognize Mr.
Balderson from the great State of Ohio, 5 minutes. Is he on?
Mr. Balderson? You may want to unmute. If not, we will go to
Ms. Moore of--or Mr. Moore of Alabama. Is Mr. Baird. Wait, what
is that. All right. Mrs. Cammack from Florida.
Mrs. Cammack. There we go. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, thank
you, Ranking Member Thompson, and thank you to our witnesses
here today. The examples that we are hearing about today really
speak volumes of the innovation and the growth in hydroponics
and controlled environment agriculture that are really just the
tip of the iceberg--I put a pun in there--of a long legacy of
American agriculture innovation, which for decades has improved
yields, conserved resources, preserved our environment, and
helped feed the world. No doubt about it, American farmers feed
not just our communities, our states, our country, but the
world.
I am especially proud of PLANT-AG, there has been
discussion about what it is and the exciting potential that it
has brought to north Florida, bringing new jobs and economic
development to the region. It is no secret that fruit and
vegetable growers in my home State of Florida and elsewhere are
hurting right now. The few tomato growers left in my home State
of Florida are under tremendous pressure from the unfair
dumping of cheap Mexican tomatoes on our markets. I hear from
witnesses and my colleagues alike that innovation is key to the
future survival of American agriculture, and so I will just
jump right in.
And this will be a question, really, for the entire panel.
How can controlled environment agriculture--because I have
heard a few facts and statistics today, how can it reduce our
reliance on foreign imports, and preserve domestic production?
And if you could keep it to the facts, because I know there has
been a few that have been thrown out? I really want to make
sure that I capture that for myself and my team, and I will
start on this end over here.
Mr. Giscombe. Thank you, Congresswoman. First and foremost,
we need to increase the amount of controlled environment
agriculture production. If we do that, by whatever means
necessary, whether we continue to look at it from a perspective
as it is traditional, or we actually make the move forward and
consider it infrastructure, and invest in that infrastructure,
we will by default decrease the amount that we are importing.
It is just simple math. By increasing the amount of acres under
glass in America, which pales in comparison to that of Europe--
and contrasting, Europe is significantly smaller than the
United States is. And that is not just a country, it is the--it
is Europe.
Mrs. Cammack. Do you----
Mr. Giscombe. So all we have to do----
Mrs. Cammack. Do you have a percentage of the difference
between what is produced in Europe, as opposed to the United
States?
Mr. Giscombe. Europe has over 500,000 acres under glass.
Mrs. Cammack. Okay.
Mr. Giscombe. The United States has significantly less than
10,000. Our colleagues, our Canadian colleagues at Mastronardi,
have 6,000 themselves.
Mrs. Cammack. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Gadouas. I will address it from a cost of capital
perspective.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you.
Mr. Gadouas. The more capital is out there, and the less
expensive it is, is only going to make these facilities more
competitive, and that is really what it comes down to. That
will--it all comes down to price, and where demand is going to
come from. The other point I want to make is the more data
points you have with public capital, with bond financing, and
the way that disclosure is done, best practices, that is for
everyone to see, and the more of those publicly available data
points we have, the more and more competitive our capital is
going to be.
Mrs. Cammack. Absolutely. Thank you. Mr. Kelley?
Mr. Kelley. Congresswoman Cammack, you grew up on a cattle
ranch, I believe, right?
Mrs. Cammack. Yes, I did.
Mr. Kelley. So you, and I am sure the rest of the
Committee, can appreciate what is the good of good food with
bad data? You have to have good data. And if you can control
the variables, so control the amount of data, therefore it
stands to reason that you are able to control the output, and
have good data about that produce, or outcome that you are
producing. So, therefore, that should increase the value.
Therefore, that could distinguish that product amongst all
products by controlling that data.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent. Thank you, Mr. Kelley.
Mr. Safrance. I will go back to what Mr. Giscombe was
saying about not having enough CEA greenhouses for controlled
environment agriculture in the United States. The United States
is significantly under-indexed compared to the rest of the
world. I read a study a while back that said, if I have this
correctly, and I believe I do, that there were--in Europe there
were 700 acres per million population. In the United States, it
is only about 16 acres per million population, so very under-
indexed, and I believe that is what is driving the imports.
I think with a large expansion of CEA over the next decade
that we can change that, and I think the biggest driver to
doing that is not capital. I think that there are a lot of
people that want to get involved, but I do believe that it has
to do with proper labor supply. Because otherwise, putting that
much capital in a place without the people, I should say, is
just way too big of a risk for anyone.
Mrs. Cammack. Thank you. And I do have--I am running short
on time. I do have a question, I can enter it for the record,
and this would be to my friend here, Karim, about the role of
the University of Florida, and the educational exchanges that
you are working in partnership and concert with. And with that
my time has expired, but thank you to the witnesses for being
here today for this very important issue.
The Chairman. And now we will recognize Mr. Carbajal from
California, 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I am
honored to have one of my youngest constituents with me today,
by the name of Elijah, joining me and asking this question. So,
with that, let me just start. Thank you to all the witnesses
that have joined us today. The first question is for Mr.
Kelley.
Food security should be treated as national security, and
that is why this Committee works to give individuals and
families access to sufficient, safe, and nutritious food.
Supporting the innovation and integration of controlled
environmental agriculture is a tool we can use to protect
domestic food supply chains and infrastructure, but it also has
a substantial dependence on new technology, which could have
unforeseen risks. Mr. Kelley, what can be done to prepare for
cyberattacks on our food systems?
Mr. Kelley. Congressman, thanks for the question. I think
it is a very thoughtful question, and it--we have seen very
recently the outcomes of cyberattacks, and those cyberattacks
have been on a very fragile--and I will echo what Mr. Safrance
said, fragile, but not broken, supply chain, I believe is what
was stated. But that supply chain can be augmented, can be
better supported, with greater technology, and with the ability
to have greater visibility across that supply chain from source
to consumption.
And so, Congressman, when we think about the way that we
deal with data in that supply chain right now, it is very
siloed. And if we think about from production to consumption,
each one of the passing of that product is just a handshake
going from one step to the next. If we could implement
technology that allows us to bring down those barriers, and
share that data in a secure and very visible way, with
transparency, such as I mentioned with blockchain, we can then
understand who might be trying to tamper with that supply chain
that we currently have. Not broken, but ready to be augmented
with greater technology.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Kelley. My next question is
for all the witnesses. This Committee will eventually begin
consideration of provisions that will become the next farm
bill. This is a slow and deliberate process that does not seem
to match your industry's sense of urgency. What steps can this
Committee take in between farm bills to ensure that we are
maintaining pace with these advanced technologies and
production practices, and what existing USDA programs can be
utilized to support controlled environmental agriculture?
Mr. Giscombe. I am sorry, Congressman, I didn't realize you
were asking the question of me. First and foremost, what the
United States Department of Agriculture can do is I think the
conversation that we are having here with the Committee. There
is an ominous need, as Mr. Kelley said earlier, to incorporate
data management into our supply chain. We have the opportunity
to do it, but also, going back to what Mr. Gadouas said, as
well as Mr. Safrance, right, there are two sides to that coin.
One is we need the capital to be able to make the investment in
technology and innovation, right?
Going to the other side of it, with regards to labor, yes,
that is a reality. It is not cheap. Economics drive all
innovation, so by increasing the access to that capital, we
will by default create the opportunity for all participants,
not just in controlled environment agriculture, but agriculture
broadly, to be able to leverage that. And a great example of
that is Walmart, right? They are not a producer. Walmart made
the investments because they had the access to that capital,
but we are all aware they are the largest retailer in the
world, so it is kind of a no-brainer. As such, what about the
other participants in the supply chain that don't have the
ability to do that because their capital is spread so thinly
across their operations? We have to--the USDA, the Committee
here, has to look at it from a very fundamental perspective.
What are the economics of innovation? That is how we then
leverage things like blockchain to be able to create this
platform.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much. I know I said to all the
witnesses, but I seem to have run out of time. With that, I
will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And now the gentleman
from Ohio, Mr. Balderson. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Balderson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Appreciate the
time. My question is for Mr. Safrance. Thank you for your
testimony. Appreciate that. My question is--the COVID-19
pandemic drastically changed many aspects of farming across the
nation, as well as the way agricultural produce was delivered
to consumers. As the only witness here today with commercial
experience producing fruits and vegetables through hydroponics,
what are the biggest challenges you face during the course of a
yield cycle?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, so in the course of a yield cycle, I
mean, there is, every day is a challenge. The biggest
challenge, as I said earlier, is the labor, and having enough
people, because if the plants get far behind on crop work, then
the quality suffers, and the yield suffers, and then a
greenhouse would become unviable. And so the biggest issue we
have on a day to day basis, without question, is dealing with
the labor.
The Chairman. Is he muted?
Mr. Balderson. There I go again. I apologize, Mr. Chairman.
Sorry, Mr. Safrance. Are there any crossover benefits that
controlled environmental agriculture, or CEA, can learn from
traditional agriculture?
Mr. Safrance. I think the processes are similar, but
different at the same time. I think they can learn from each
other, and I think that there is plenty of space for them to
coexist. But from a crossover benefit, I mean, if you look at
growing an outdoor tomato crop and an indoor tomato crop, I
mean, the premises are the same, but you have a lot more tools
at your disposal indoors, obviously, and I believe that that is
why we can get better yields and bring the cost down and be
competitive by growing indoors.
Mr. Balderson. Okay. Thank you very much for your question.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my remaining time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And now I recognize the
gentlelady from Virginia, Ms. Spanberger.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and to
our witnesses, thank you so much for your fantastic testimony
today. I know many of my colleagues and I have been in a mix of
in here and virtual, so I have really appreciated all of your
answers, and your opening comments. I am excited to have the
opportunity to discuss the positive impact of controlled
environment agriculture on our domestic food supply, and across
my district I have had the opportunity to visit several farms
that implement controlled agriculture technology, including
Bright Farms in Culpepper, Virginia. And in Goochland, Virginia
we have a new indoor growing facility opening soon that will
utilize innovative technology and sustainable practices,
including recirculation systems that use 95 percent less water
than traditional growing methods.
I am encouraged by some of the recent growth in the
controlled environment agriculture across my district, and
certainly across the country, and over the last year the COVID-
19 pandemic really has laid bare some of the challenges and
fragility that we see in our food supply chain. I am hopeful
that controlled environment agriculture can help increase
supply chain resiliency, and decrease dependence on foreign
growers, improve food safety and trust, and mitigate some
concerns, like weather disruptions and drought. I am
appreciative of you all being here today, and I am going to run
through a couple questions.
Mr. Safrance, I would like to begin with you. You mentioned
that many of the controlled environment agriculture facilities
present in the U.S. contain outdated technology. Could you
describe, briefly, some of the examples of outdated technology,
and the better technology that is available to be leveraged?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, absolutely. Going back over the years,
and we will call it the last 30 years, say, there has been a
massive difference in technology in these greenhouses. Going
back about 30 years ago and beyond, they were short, A-frame
type greenhouses, single-pane glass, where crops were growing
in dirt, and usually heated with steam. And as time moved on,
we got into the 1980s, and a lot of people went to what is
called a double poly, or two layers of plastic, where they blow
air in between the plastic layers for more insulation.
And then, soon thereafter, they got into hot water heating
systems, and then soon thereafter that we got into what is
called a gutter system, where we raise the crops up off the
ground, and we use the gutters to recycle all the extra water.
The water will go back to our irrigation rooms, and go through
a cloth filter, much like you would see a coffee filter in a
percolator. And then after that it will go through a UV
sterilization system. So basically we take the water back with
the leftover nutrients in it, we make the water completely
sterile, and then we add more nutrients to it, and send it back
into the greenhouse.
So in the newer greenhouses, like you were just saying
about 95 percent less water, that is exactly what we do. And
the only water that actually leaves these greenhouses, or
should leave, is in the weight of the fruit, or the respiration
of the leaves through the air.
Ms. Spanberger. Fantastic. Now, that--I was furiously
taking notes because that was a tremendous answer. I really
appreciate that.
Mr. Safrance. Thank you.
Ms. Spanberger. And so, Mr. Gadouas, and I apologize that I
am directly positioned, oh, I can see you. I am sorry, sir. How
successful do you see current investments in controlled
environment agriculture? So are people seeing this as a good
place to invest? Certainly the technology is evolving, as Mr.
Safrance just walked us through.
Mr. Gadouas. Certainly, from the information that we have,
and a lot of the information is still private more than public.
But from an equity perspective, there have been successes.
There have also been some tweaks, because it is an evolving
asset class, and I think I mentioned earlier today that we are
indeed at an inflection point. So the more information we have,
the more and more targeted and effective investments we are
going to have. But, generally speaking, as far as emerging
asset classes go, it has been tremendously successful, and it
is at a point where more and more people want to participate.
It is certainly a lot of press.
Ms. Spanberger. Yes.
Mr. Gadouas. The question is, can we unlock the other half
of the capital that is available in this country to
participate?
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much. And, in my limited
time, Mr. Verbakel, I was wondering, could you speak briefly to
some of the barriers that exist for development here in the
United States, for those looking to invest in the United States
in controlled environment agriculture development?
Mr. Verbakel. Well, the most important one, but that is
something we cannot change today, is the weather. When it is
too cold--when there is frost in the ground in the northern
part of the U.S., we are limited to continue our construction
work. But, over the past 2 or 3 years we have been forced
with--or we have been confronted with some limitations to
import our agricultural components. We consider a greenhouse an
unassembled system which is not physically possible to ship. If
you compare it to the surface that Mr. Safrance compared it to,
a 60 acre greenhouse cannot be shipped on one boat, and in one
batch.
And we have been confronted with your port authorities,
that they consider the greenhouse in loose components just
steel or glass, and then we are confronted with quite high
import duties. So one solution there could be to find
collaboration with local sources, but they are somewhat
limited. The greenhouses require quite a large light
transmission. I see that we are running out of time, so I will
give the word back to you. Apologies for the time.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you, sir. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And now I would
recognize the gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Baird, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member. We
appreciate the opportunity to participate in this hearing
today. Really appreciate the witnesses being here, and your
expertise. So my first question goes to Mr. Safrance. Your
comments have been extremely interesting to me, and so one
thing I would like to reflect on is your comments about storm
and irrigation water, and using that in CEA farming. As we all
know, regulatory conversations, especially surrounding water,
have been on the rise. So could you elaborate on how different
environmental regulations impact your business and the CEA?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, absolutely. If you compare what we do
to, say, field farming, it is completely different. In most
cases field farms can spray as many pesticides as they want on
the crop. As it rains, it goes into the soil, gets into the
water stream. In our world, we are not allowed to do anything
like that. We collect rainwater off the roof for irrigation. We
store it in lined basis so it can't soak into the ground, and
we use the rainwater for irrigation. All of the nutrients and
everything, like I said, are recycled, so we are really 100
percent zero anything leaves the greenhouse that shouldn't be
leaving the greenhouse.
But when you compare that to a field scenario, my office
back home, there is an apple orchard next to it, and about
every week there is a tractor go by spraying white chemicals on
the fruit, and, I mean, that all ends up in the watershed and
whatnot. So much more strict for us, much more sustainable,
much bigger investment, but we feel it is worth it.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. If I may ask one more question, given
the challenges that we saw during the pandemic, and the
shortages at the retail level for certain products, can you
talk about your distribution system just a little bit, and how
you were able to service major retailers during that period, as
well as how you are able to deliver to major stores fresh
quality products just in a matter of hours?
Mr. Safrance. Yes. So, for us, it is very just in time,
high sense of urgency. We have distribution centers, especially
east of the Mississippi, that are pretty much close--within 400
miles of each other, or of either end, so everything is pretty
much within a 1 day drive or less. Today a truck can drive
roughly 10 hours under its current log system. So our products
come in the building this evening, so to speak. We would get
orders today and tomorrow morning for tomorrow's orders. We
would fill the orders, and ship the trucks, and have them
delivered the next day.
The biggest problems we had during the pandemic was having
enough people to show up for work. There were some people that
were concerned. Obviously, we are essential. We did all the
proper things, including creating a shield program for COVID
issues, but there were still a lot of concerned citizens, and a
lot of people didn't show up, so that was a big challenge. But
at the end of the day we still delivered all of our orders, and
provided--the products are in the building when we need them.
We had no problem delivering them.
Mr. Baird. Thank you. Mr. Kelley, first off, I want to
thank you for your service. An Army Airborne Ranger, I assume
you spent some time at Fort Benning, Georgia, as I did, so
thank you for that.
Mr. Kelley. Congressman Baird, thank you, because you are a
very highly decorated veteran from the Vietnam War, so you
paved the path for us brother and sisters in arms that came
after you.
Mr. Baird. I never figured out why you would jump out of a
good flying airplane, but anyway. I commend you for your
service, and thank you.
Mr. Kelley. Amen.
Mr. Baird. But anyway, you mentioned something about
working with Walmart in a farm to store pilot program with
USDA. I am not sure how much you can elaborate on that, but any
thoughts you could give on that pilot program?
Mr. Kelley. Thank you for the question, and--Congressman
Baird. I would say when we think about what was done with
Walmart, you talked about the supply chain, and I will stick
with the same thought, as--the data, and what is in the supply
chain. Very quickly, what we did with Walmart, and also was--
work with the USDA was the thought that it takes so long to,
when there is a food-borne illness recognized, to actually
remedy it. Using technology such as blockchain, what used to
take Walmart, and their use of this technology a full week to
find a problem, that means a whole week of throwing away food,
they were able to do it in 2.2 seconds. Find the source, remedy
it, and move forward: 1 week to 2.2 seconds.
Mr. Baird. Perfect. Thank you.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. And we all, on this
Committee, certainly congratulate you, and appreciate your
great service, jumping out of that airplane. Takes a lot of
nerve in and of itself. Congratulations. Thanks for having you.
And now the Chair will recognize the gentlelady from
Connecticut, Mrs. Hayes, 5 minutes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My district in
Connecticut is leading the way in innovative urban agriculture
that makes our food supply chain more resilient, brings new and
beginning farmers into the agriculture industry, and provides
fresh local foods in areas that have historically lacked access
to them. Among the other benefits discussed here today,
controlled environment agriculture seems to provide an
opportunity to address lack of access to healthy food, local
products, and for underserved communities, communities that
have been deemed food deserts or food swamps.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates that 54.4
million Americans live in these low-income areas, and have poor
access to healthy foods. For city residents, that means that a
person can live more than \1/2\ mile from the nearest
supermarket, and when you add in the fact that many of these
people are walking with groceries, or riding public
transportation, that distance becomes even farther. So my
question today is for Mr. Verbakel. Can you address how
strengthening local food systems through controlled environment
agriculture can improve access to healthy foods? And does the
lower cost of produce from controlled environment operations
translate into lower costs and healthy foods for consumers?
Mr. Verbakel. Thank you for your questions. I can say yes
to both of your questions. I think they are--the last question
is clearly something that is from a 365 day perspective, and
the fixed cost that an operation carries can benefit into a
lower price per pound, or per square foot, which makes the
operation more competitive, opposed to similar operations,
either from the outside, or from a much longer distance. At the
same time, providing in labor a place is something that some
areas appreciate. A greenhouse is a very nice area to work,
especially in the winter times. In Connecticut, it can be very
cold, so--from--working in an enclosed environment with good
conditions, as Mr. Safrance stated, is something that is also
much appreciated by the workers. I want to be careful with the
time, so I will give the word back to you.
Mrs. Hayes. No, you are absolutely right. My district in
Connecticut has more greenhouses--actually, it is the largest
industry in my district, greenhouse growers, so thank you for
that. As I discussed here before, UConn--my district is home to
UConn Extension, which teaches students each year how to
successfully become urban farmers, with controlled environment
agriculture and other methods. Some projects conducted by the
program were the funding of the USDA NIFA Beginning Farmers and
Ranchers Programs. We have waiting lists for all of these
programs in my state.
In your testimony, Mr. Safrance, you discussed labor
shortages across the food and agriculture sectors over the past
year. Aside from the updates to the H-2A Program that you
discussed, are there other ways to incentivize domestic workers
to seek opportunities in these types of facilities? And how do
you encourage specialized education experience in controlled
agriculture environments?
Mr. Safrance. Yes. So definitely there is more we can do. I
think something you touched on that is very important is what I
would call the skilled labor side of the industry. When it
comes to labor management, crop management, crop care,
supervisors, growers, assistant growers, integrated pest
management specialists, there are a lot of really good jobs in
each greenhouse, and the industry is extremely short on skilled
people in those parts of the greenhouse. So to put together an
industry-wide, or a university, or college-type program for
this would be an excellent idea to start to cultivate the next
people in these jobs. They are all really well-paying jobs, and
it is great industry to be in. It is basically recession-proof,
so I would highly encourage as many programs as we could to
train the next greenhouse operators for sure. And when I say
greenhouse, I mean CEA.
Mrs. Hayes. Yes, absolutely. I appreciate that. My other
committee is the Committee on Education and Labor, and as we
discuss higher education, I try to always remind my colleagues
that that has to include career and technical training, vo-ag
programs, any means for people to access economic
opportunities, and that is not always a 4 year college degree.
So I am really pushing to expand programs like the UConn
Extension, and vo-ag training programs in my own district, so
thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back, under time.
The Chairman. Yes, thank you very much. Thank you very
much, Mrs. Hayes. And now I recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Rouzer, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that very
much, and I appreciate you holding this hearing today. Very
interesting subject matter. When it comes to greenhouses, I
worked on our family farm during the summers, and the prospect
of a 64 acre greenhouse just kind of blows my mind. I am used
to the smaller version, where you were growing tobacco plants
that were transplanted to the field. Same with sweet potato
plants as well.
I have to ask, what kind of investment is that, a 64 acre
greenhouse, and was that all at once, or was that over a long
period of time, or if you could talk about that a little bit? I
am just curious what kind of investment that is.
Mr. Safrance. Yes, sure. That specific one was at one time
it was the largest greenhouse ever built in one consecutive
build in the United States, so it is at the high end of the
spectrum. The investment for a facility like this, depending on
the technology, for a vine crop--and when I say vine I mean
tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, things like that--are probably
$1.5 to $2 million per acre. If you get into a fully automated
leafy green facility, it could be upwards of $5 million an
acre. They are very expensive.
Mr. Rouzer. Wow. It strikes me that it would be a very
natural environment to produce organically. Is that correct or
incorrect, or how much more effort does it take to produce
organically?
Mr. Safrance. Yes. Essentially the differences for CEA
organics versus conventional are basically down to the grow
media you grow in and the fertilizer you use. We technically
try to never--almost never spray any kind of pesticides or
anything like that anyway, and we all use IPM pest management,
so it just really comes down to growing in different media and
organic fertilizer.
Mr. Rouzer. How much more does it cost, if anything, to
produce organically?
Mr. Safrance. It costs considerably more. The media is more
expensive, it is much more labor to apply the fertilizers. The
fertilizers are much more expensive. But when it comes to cost
per pound, it is much higher because you get considerably less
yield, so it drives the cost per pound up considerably.
Mr. Rouzer. Got you.
Mr. Safrance. And I would say that the average is almost--
probably 30 or 35 percent more.
Mr. Rouzer. How much of yours is organic that is produced?
Mr. Safrance. In the United States we don't do any.
Mr. Rouzer. None? Okay.
Mr. Safrance. Not currently, no.
Mr. Rouzer. I assume the answer to this is no, but is there
anything that cannot be produced in a greenhouse, it is just a
matter of the economies-of-scale, et cetera?
Mr. Safrance. Well, I mean, technically we could probably
grow orange trees in a greenhouse. I don't know if anyone has
tried. But, I mean, they would grow fine, I just don't know
that you would ever get your return on your investment doing
something like that.
Mr. Rouzer. Right.
Mr. Safrance. The majors are leafy greens, tomatoes,
peppers, cucumbers, and then--now we are getting into berries
indoors. We are doing a bunch of strawberries.
Mr. Rouzer. Got you. It is a very intriguing subject there,
yes, because weather is one of the key variables in every
growing season for every farmer out there. One day they could
have a great crop, the weather has been super, and then a
hurricane comes through, for example--in my district it happens
all the time--and ruins everything. And, of course--then on the
produce side, one state does well, the other state doesn't do
well from a weather perspective, and you know how that dictates
the price, et cetera, so it is a very interesting subject area.
Mr. Kelley, you mentioned in your testimony, with regard to
the Food and Drug Administration, their efforts to implement
tangible strategies to modernize the food industry. I am just
curious to get more detail on that.
Mr. Kelley. When we think about how we measure the success
of the food industry, it is really are we getting food that is
high quality where it should be when it should be there, right?
And so when we think about those metrics and those measures, it
is based on accuracy. And if we bring it down to what we know
about accuracy, it is trust. Trust as consumers, all of us. It
is easy to ask all of us, raise your hand if you eat food, back
to the Chairman's point at the beginning of our session here.
And the work that was done with the USDA, along with some
retailers, such as Walmart, was based on looking at those
measures, and them saying, look, how can we make sure that
those measures of food safety, food quality, and the supply
chain that surrounds all of that, how do we pull down some of
those barriers that currently allow that data to sit in silos,
and how do we do it with trust? And that is what we did with
them. As IBM used to say, look, let us implement some
technologies, augment it. Intelligence, some people call it
artificial intelligence, but how do we do that with blockchain
and make it safe?
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Now
I recognize for 5 minutes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Panetta.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate
that, and obviously thanks to all of the witnesses that are
here talking about a very important issue. As many of my
colleagues know, and maybe some of you know who are testifying
today, I represent the Central Coast of California. And as many
of my colleagues know, and maybe some of you know, it is known
as the Salad Bowl of the World. It is known that not just
because I say that, it is known with that appellation because
we grow over 100 different specialty crops there in the Salinas
Valley, San Juan Valley, and the Pajaro Valley on the Central
Coast.
Now, many, if not all, of these crops are grown outside. We
have the acres of land, we have the nutritious soil, but we
also have the people, with the highest principles, that
prioritize, and are very progressive when it comes to the food
safety of the products. For example, most of the leafy green
producers in my district belong to the Leafy Green Marketing
Agreement, which actually holds its members to a more rigorous
food safety standard than the FDA. Now, the LGMA is
representing 90 percent of the leafy greens grown in the United
States, and when it comes to those LGMA products, there is 100
percent traceback to the farm and date of harvest.
Even with that level of certainty, however, the growers
that I represent continue to ensure an even stronger, safer,
and more transparent food system. And that includes their close
work, and yes even scrutiny, by the FDA. It also includes their
work over the years now with their Congress Members and their
Senators to secure strong language in our appropriations bills
on food traceability and traceback, and partnerships under the
Food Safety Modernization Act.
Now, most recently we were able to secure language in the
Fiscal Year 2022 House Approps bill that provides an increase
of $9.5 million to facilitate traceability and enhance outbreak
response. It is language like that in that bill which
encourages the FDA to work in closer partnership with existing
government food safety programs in the specialty crop industry,
and also allows them to share and coordinate information and
data with industry partners, and state and local governments,
so that they can better coordinate before, during, and
sometimes, yes, as we know unfortunately, after an outbreak
occurs.
Now, my language that I got in that bill also directs the
FDA to capture point of sale details, such as the lot number
and product identifier throughout the supply chain. It also
ensures that those details are maintained from the point of
origination through the retail food or food service
establishment. Now, I believe that we can continue to advance
our food safety technology. We are going to get better. But, to
do that, we must work closely with the specialty crop growers
so that we can continue to build on the industry's decades of
work and leading role in addressing food safety issues.
Now, Mr. Kelley, you and IBM have talked--you, in
representing IBM, have done an amazing job, and you have talked
a lot about it today, but I also want to basically talk about
your work not just with the small leafy green farms in
California, because you understand firsthand that these types
of operations that are committed, absolutely committed, to
delivering fresh, safe, nutritious food to consumers. And you
know that these types of producers, they are willing to do what
is necessary so that their products are identifiable and
traceable, should any issues arise. You also know, though that
we have some work to do when it comes to speeding up our
traceability and traceback effort. So I know you have hit on it
a little bit, but talk to me, as we look to the future, the
need, and the need to further develop our capacity to trace our
food products more efficiently. What can blockchain technology
do to continue to support these ongoing efforts? If you could,
Mr. Kelley?
Mr. Kelley. Thank you, Congressman. When we think about
what you have laid out there, which I thought you did very
well, with regards to talking about the source all the way to
consumption, and you included point of sale, so there is a
retailer in there, what has to happen is when we look at going
forward, we know that safe food is a team sport, and in order
for it to be a team sport there has to be this sharing, trusted
sharing, of information. And that trusted sharing has to be
something that pulls down the barriers that we currently have
with regards to the accuracy of the data, the speed at which we
can share that data.
As I called out, Walmart set a very high bar when they went
from 1 week to just a couple seconds.
Mr. Panetta. Great. Thank you. My time is up. Thanks to all
of you. Thanks to all the witnesses. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
The Chairman. Very good. Thank you very much. And now I
will recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. LaMalfa.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate it. I
will just dive right in here for Mr. Safrance on the labor
issue. Several of us on this Committee have been working really
hard on that, I see my friend Mr. Panetta nodding. We have put
together pretty good legislation, I wonder if you have heard of
it, the Farm Workforce Modernization Act.
Mr. Safrance. What is that, sorry, I didn't hear the end of
that.
Mr. LaMalfa. The bill we passed out of the House twice,
actually, the Farm Workforce Modernization Act.
Mr. Safrance. Yes. I am sorry, I didn't get the question,
though.
Mr. LaMalfa. Have you heard of that yet, that we passed out
of the House?
Mr. Safrance. Yes, I have heard that. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. LaMalfa. Good, right on. All right. Because obviously
ag labor has been an issue for quite some time, having a known
size and legal workforce has become a very important issue.
There is a lot of other outside politics. It is actually a
tremendous effort, a tremendous bipartisan effort, to get that
bill through the House, and it is waiting over in the Senate
for action. But talk to us a little bit about, we've got
everybody from the American Farm Bureau Federation to people in
the labor industry side all trying to find a way on this thing.
Tell us about what your struggles are with the greenhouses for
staffing, and keeping a workforce together, and do you think
what you have seen of our bill, or just in general, that see
some kind of hope for a farm workforce that will be----
Mr. Safrance. Yes. The biggest issue we have is getting
enough local labor. It has always been a challenge for us, and
I have talked to many other people in the farming space in the
United States, including field farms, and everybody kind of
seems to have the same sentiment. The biggest problem we have,
and I think CEA will have, is when the--I guess the legislation
was made in the 1980s for H-2A labor, they didn't contemplate
greenhouses, and they have this provision that it needs to be
seasonal, and greenhouses and CEA are actually seasonal, to a
certain aspect. But, when we get finished with our crop, we
have to literally take the entire crop out of the greenhouse,
take all the media that it grows in out, sterilize the
greenhouse, re-plant it.
I mean, the equivalent would be an apple farmer shows a
season by saying, hey, we need to put in some trees, we need to
pick the apples, and then we are done for the season. While
ours, if we were the apple company, would say, now we have to
take all the trees out, we need to remove all the soil, bring
all new soil back in, plant all new trees. So it is a seasonal
issue, but it just looks differently than what normal people
are thinking about in terms of field agriculture. So I think
that we need to have a look at that for CEA, that it kind of,
in some way, shape, or form, understands how our seasons work,
compared to, and that they are not the same as a field-type
scenario.
Mr. LaMalfa. So, yes, you have a lot more infrastructure,
obviously, with the greenhouses. Our bill tried to pay close
attention to seasonality, as well as the needs of some of our
year-round ag issues, such as dairy, like that. So if you have
more suggestions on how that could look moving along, I would
certainly want that to be part of the discussion. What else do
you think Congress can be doing? You brought that issue up.
What other frustrations or issues do you think Congress should
be addressing on that to make this go farther?
Mr. Safrance. Well, I mean, I don't know that it pertains
to the bill, but I think it is frustrating that we apply for H-
2A, and occasionally sometimes we get it, sometimes we don't,
but there is never a proper reason why, and it is very
inconsistent. So I think we need to address the consistency of
it so that people that want to invest in these expensive
facilities can be assured that they are going to have the labor
to operate them properly. Otherwise, nobody will ever continue
to build these, because they won't be able to make money.
Mr. LaMalfa. That makes sense. So we were fighting for more
flexibility on that program as well. So let me shift gears a
little bit to Mr. Kelley over there at IBM. Can you follow up a
little bit more on the food traceability? I mean, that is very
amazing technology, to be able to track as closely as you can.
Can you emphasize a little bit more on if there is a question
about food quality or food safety on a recall-type situation,
or what, I guess, recalls become pretty wide when they have an
issue with some kind of a meat product or a vegetable product.
Do you see this as helping to narrow the amount of product that
would have to be removed from the shelves? Because they talk,
like, in pretty broad amounts of product in tonnage, or
packaging, or what have you. But what do you see the potential
is for this traceability, maybe of narrowing the amount of food
they have to take off the shelf, and it goes to waste?
Mr. Kelley. So I think I may have to yield my answer based
on the time.
Mr. LaMalfa. Okay. Sure.
Mr. Kelley. With regards to food going to waste on the
shelf, Congressman, what I think you are calling out is the
ability to have increased data about the time that those SKUs,
and--when we talk about numbers of SKUs, some of that--now,
when we first started, it was some 6,000 SKUs. Now we are able
to manage some 75,000 SKUs in a blockchain network that says
look, let us look at all of that.
And if you can understand that very complex network of not
just one ingredient--I mean, as we sit here, it is not just one
tomato, but it is a tomato, and a sausage, and a grain product
in a pizza, so now you are talking about when does that go bad?
And if we could manage those timings of when something is
really just ready to go bad before it does, and being able to
then also move it from a shelf, perhaps to the food desert that
was mentioned early by the Congresswoman, that is what we are
talking about with timely data that is available and shared,
and timely action that can be taken with that data. So when we
start thinking about what we can do, that is what we are
talking about, Congressman.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thanks so much.
The Chairman. And thank you very much. And thank you, Mr.
LaMalfa, and our entire Committee. But before we adjourn today,
I want to invite our distinguished Ranking Member to share his
closing remarks. Ranking Member Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much, and thank
you to all of our witnesses for really contributing to a great
discussion in this hearing. American agriculture is, once again
and it always has been, science, technology, and innovation.
And as I said before, early on those first farmers were just
trying to survive a winter. It was probably pretty crude and
rudimentary. Today it is very sophisticated. One of the
statistics I shared in my opening statement just rings true,
the fact that our productivity of American agriculture has
increased 287 percent since the 1940s, and today's hearing
showcased a great example of this. So I really want to thank
our witnesses.
I want to build off what our mutual friend from California,
Mr. Costa, talked about, the importance of innovation
investments.
The Chairman. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. And I couldn't agree with him more. That is
what we do with the farm bill. That is what we do in this
Committee. We continue that tradition of American agriculture,
increasing the productivity, and continuing to develop, in
terms of the science, and technology, and innovation. And that
is good for everything. Not just nutrition, not just the rural
economy, it is the environment. You know, that is the positive
outcomes we get. So in that spirit, I would just like to close
my remarks that, I just want to recognize, in terms of
investments and innovation, this Committee's unified work to
invest $43.2 billion in rural broadband, which is needed for
our continued innovation?
And I would like to certainly encourage all of the Members
of our Committee to join the Chairman and I in calling on
leadership to put what we passed unanimously, which was a great
reflection of innovation and technology, on the House floor,
the Broadband Internet Connections for Rural America Act (H.R.
4374). Rural America needs this, and I always say that without
a robust rural economy, all people, including those in the
cities, are going to wake up in the cold, dark and hungry. And
so I will just--I guess I won't say anything more. I will just
yield back. Thank you, Chairman.
The Chairman. Well thank you so much, and you are
absolutely right. And I know the attending physician told me to
keep my mask on. Tell him I did for the entire meeting. But
because you brought up our bill, folks, if we do not get rural
broadband, connection to the internet, much of what you are
talking about, controlled environment, how can we accomplish
any of this indoor farming if our farmers, if our agriculture
producers, are not connected to the internet?
And, Ranking Member, you are absolutely right. If there are
those of you under the sound of my voice, please call your
Members of Congress, call the leadership, call the White House,
call everybody. This Committee has passed a very good bill to
finally bring rural broadband to our rural areas. We passed it
bipartisan. Every single Republican and Democrat came together.
It is the only bill, as we are moving for the infrastructure,
that the Congress has to address this.
So in order for us to make this hearing meaningful, in
order for us to be able to have controlled environment
agriculture, which you all stand for, using cutting edge
technology, we can't do it unless our rural communities--that
is where farming is. That is what our pioneers, the shoulders
we stand on in 1936--when our rural communities did not have
electricity, they called on us. It was agriculture. It was our
Agriculture Committee back then joining forces with our United
States Department of Agriculture that brought electricity to
rural America.
This is the foundation we are building on. But yet our bill
sits in the House and does not have a vote. And we are asking,
we are pleading, with the bipartisanship of this Congress to
please pass our bill. Because this is the only way we are going
to be able to make real the advocacy, the programs, the
promises, to fulfill our true destiny, to make food available
and secure for the American people for generations and
centuries to come. We have to move it indoors. Climate--and not
only that, there is just so much land. Everything is there on
the table, but we have to get rural broadband into our rural
communities. Thank you for your partnership on that and thank
you for giving me the opportunity to back you up. And if you
see the attending physician, please tell him that I did put my
mask back on at the end, but I had to say it. Thank you.
And so I want to thank Mr. Giscombe, PLANT-AG, thank you.
Mr. Gadouas, Mr. Verbakel, Mr. Kelley, and Mr. Safrance, thank
you all for this brilliant, and intensive, and very good
testimony. And we are going to build on this foundation. This
is why we have the hearings. And we will pull this in, and
there--then we are coming back so we can give you the
legislative help that you need to complete your task of
bringing controlled environment agriculture into real time and
real life for our great nation. With that, our hearing is
adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 12:10 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Joint Submitted Statement by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in
Congress from Georgia; Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress
from California; on behalf of Matt Barnard, Co-Founder and Executive
Chairman, Plenty, Unlimited
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee:

Thank you for the opportunity to participate in such an important
discussion. My name is Matt Barnard. My cofounder Nate Storey and I
started a company called Plenty in 2014 with one simple mission: to
improve the lives of Plants, People, and our Planet. We are united
behind this mission to nourish plants, people and planet to vitality
with a low water, carbon and land footprint and to convert agriculture
from an extractive industry to a generative one that underpins societal
prosperity.
Today, our technology-rich vertical farm in South San Francisco
produces a range of pesticide-free leafy greens for customers across
the Bay Area, and we are currently building a facility in Compton, Los
Angeles that will be capable of servicing grocers across California.
Our plan is for the wave of farms that follow Compton to produce not
just leafy greens, but also strawberries and tomatoes--bringing to
market the groundbreaking work in which we have invested at our Plenty
Plant Science, Flavor and Sustainable Farming Center in Laramie Wyoming
over the last 7 years.
Americans are paying attention--not only to where their food is
grown--but to how it is grown. The rapid expansion of organic produce
in the U.S. is a clear expression of the importance we now place on
food that minimizes the chemicals laid on the land and ingested into
our bodies. Indeed, as Americans show more interest in their food
sources, they are demanding lower pesticide use, a sustainable and
perpetual food chain, and nutrient-rich rather than calorie-rich foods.
These are encouraging trends, and they speak to the demand for a
comprehensive look at how we grow our food in America.
America has run out of Farmland and Water is Close Behind
America last acquired farmland in 1848--following the Mexican
American War. Since that time, the United States has been losing
irreplaceable farmland at a rate of \1/2\ million acres per year while
the U.S. population continues to grow. We ran out of fruit and
vegetable farmland decades ago and our import dependence has been
growing ever since--from under 10% to about 40% and growing. We are now
import-dependent.
Additional ``farmland'' is needed now in order to simply maintain
America's food chain, and even more so to grow it in line with our
population. Far from threatening existing and incumbent farms, the
United States needs controlled environment production to supplement
supply of fruits, vegetables, and other specialty crops that have
become the purview of importers--outside of the concentrated production
in select regions like my native California (the most prolific fruit
and vegetable growing region in the world.
In order to sustain America's and the world's continued growth--we
must have more production capability. This leaves us with two basic
choices--raze and industrialize a plot of land nearly the size of the
Amazon Forest and prepare it for planting, or to change how we grow the
food we eat. Industrializing that much land would increase humanity's
total carbon footprint by 10-15%--clearly not a viable option in a
world that is in the midst of a rapid warming cycle that is disrupting
our food chain and exposing its stressed fragility.
Vertical farming's revolutionary ability to grow plants in three
dimensions and in a fraction of the time allows us to now grow a
massive farm's worth of food in a structure the size of a Walmart.
Vertical farming maximizes space utilization--allowing for scale-level
production in facilities that can be placed nearly anywhere there is
water, people, and power.
To that end, vertical farming consumes a minor fraction of the
water that is utilized by traditional agriculture. Our current
agricultural water consumption has reached an unsustainable point--with
farms sitting an entire telephone poll lower because the aquifers
beneath them have been sucked dry.
Plenty's farms are designed to run at industrial farm-scale
production levels while 90% less water than a traditional farm.
Addressing the Climate
For the vast majority of human history--agricultural production has
been at the mercy of the elements. The recent increase in severe
weather events across the country has highlighted the fragility of our
agriculture production, and the reliance that remains on elements
beyond our control. The global systems upon which our food chain
relies, water, climate, and interdependent ecosystems--are strained to
the breaking point and in urgent need of repair. Meanwhile, the global
population continues to rise. This rapid growth (a doubling of the
human population during our lifetime) has delivered us from abundance
to a stressed fragility that necessitates the slashing of the water,
land, and carbon usage of our food production.
As scientists expect the severity and frequency of these dangerous
storms, flooding, and other catastrophes to continue increasing,
America must look to ways to protect its food chain from these adverse
events.
Thanks to the controlled nature of our facilities, we can now
control all of the factors that account for plant development: light,
climate, water, and nutrient loads are all carefully balanced to ensure
that the produce is receiving exactly what it needs, and nothing that
it does not. This careful balance performs many important functions.
First, by providing the plant with everything it needs to grow, we
do not need to expose it to the elements at all--thoroughly protecting
the food from pathogens, pests, and even floods and hurricanes.
Second, it allows us to grow food faster and with higher nutrition
density that with any other method. In fact, at my farm in South San
Francisco, we can produce up to 40 seasons of produce in a single
year--meaning nutritious food that was growing just hours or days
before is accessible, 365 days a year. In fact, Plenty's plant
scientists are now able to affect the flavor characteristics of our
plants by controlling their nutrient, water, and light intake.
Vertically farmed food really does taste better!
Vertical Farming Shortens, Simplifies and Hardens the Food Chain
In addition to protecting our food from the local climate and other
stressors, Plenty's vertical farming operations are allowing for food
production where there has never been farmland to begin with. As I
mentioned before, Plenty's vertical farms are capable of growing food
wherever there is water, power, and people. This flexibility allows us
to bring our farms to the market and produce hyper-locally like our new
facility in Compton, CA.
Currently, the average fruit and vegetable can spend around 2,000
miles traveling to its final market. This travel time means a larger
carbon footprint for the food, and a shorter shelf life for the
consumer. Plenty's farms address both of these issues by producing the
food within the communities that purchase it. This localized production
has the added economic benefit of opening up what are essentially high-
tech manufacturing jobs in communities where economic opportunity can
be as scarce as access to healthy foods.
Food Safety
I've mentioned that controlling the environment allows vertical
farms like Plenty to control for flavor, environmental stressors, and
water consumption, but the most important aspect of vertical farming's
controlled infrastructure is the safety benefits provided by our Food
Safe Certified production facilities. By certifying our entire
production facility as food safe--we are able to forego pesticide and
fertilizer production. This, in turn, allows us to forego chemically
treating the produce and means that our plants are up to one million
times cleaner than chemically treated food from the field.
Congress Has a Role
I reach out to you today because, while the vertical farming
industry shows incredible promise, it remains a very new and fragile
industry. Our farms require significant capital expenditures to build,
and traditional agriculture capital financing is simply not available
to innovative producers like Plenty. Instead, we are forced to seek out
venture capital funding at a detrimental rate that involves forfeiting
ownership of our companies. I ask you to consider opportunities for
backstopping funding opportunities so that our industry can continue to
scale and grow to fit the demands of American consumers. Thank you for
your attention to this important matter, and I look forward to working
with you to advance these important objectives.
______

Submitted Letter by David Rosenberg, Co-Founder and Chief Executive
Officer, AeroFarms
August 9, 2021

Hon. David Scott,                    Hon. Glenn Thompson,
Chairman,                            Ranking Minority Member,
House Committee on Agriculture,      House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.

Dear Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Thompson:

Since 2004, AeroFarms has been the pioneer and leader for indoor
vertical farming, and we were very excited to see you convene the
hearing on ``21st Century Food Systems: Controlled Environment
Agriculture's Role in Protecting Domestic Food Supply Chains and
Infrastructure.''
COVID has put a spotlight on how fragile our food system is, and we
fundamentally need a more resilient approach. Vertical farming is
highly relevant to address climate change challenges, enable local
production, and create new year-round jobs with fair wages and
benefits.
Indoor vertical farming companies like AeroFarms are able to bring
the farms to the cities right where the consumers are, by-passing what
is typically a very long and complex supply chain. Through our cutting-
edge growing platform, AeroFarms is able to grow with up to 390 times
greater productivity per square foot annually vs. field farmers while
using up to 99% less land, up to 95% less water, and zero pesticides,
fungicides, herbicides, or insecticides. Another key benefit is that
our totally controlled growing approach from seed to packaging is also
setting a new standard for traceability and food safety to give our
consumers better, safer choices than ever before.
AeroFarms has been leading the way not only for vertical farming,
but agriculture overall. Our expert team of plant scientists and
engineers are focused on helping the broader agricultural community
with state-of-art innovation and breakthroughs including the latest in
speed breeding. In fact, AeroFarms is the principal investigator for
the Foundation of Food and Agriculture Research (FFAR) and their
Precision Indoor Plants (PIP) Consortium, a group of multi-national
companies focused on next-generation crops and solutions. In addition,
AeroFarms has partnered closely with USDA on key grants to enhance
product quality and shelf life.
AeroFarms is a great example of public-private partnerships working
in concert to drive innovation and impact in the community.
We look forward to future additional hearings and more importantly,
the opportunity to share directly with the House Committee the work
that we are doing to help agriculture overall.
All are welcome to come visit our global headquarters in Newark, NJ
as well and see first-hand our transformative work, and even better,
taste our difference.
Please advise on any questions or comments.
Best,

David Rosenberg,
CoFounder & CEO,
AeroFarms.
______

Submitted Letter by Jonathan Webb, Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
AppHarvest
July 27, 2021

Hon. David Scott
Chairman,
House Agriculture Committee
Washington, D.C.

Dear Mr. Chairman:

I was excited to learn that on Thursday the House Agriculture
Committee would be conducting a hearing on, ``21st Century Food
Systems: Controlled Environment Agriculture's Role in Protecting
Domestic Food Supply Chains and Infrastructure.'' AppHarvest \1\ is
based in Appalachia and uses Controlled Environment Agriculture/CEA to
grow a climate smart, sustainable, year-round, food supply. In the last
year, AppHarvest has expanded from 25 employees to more than 500. We
began operating in October in Morehead, Kentucky, where we produce
tomatoes. Our facility in Morehead is 2.76\2\ million --a full 60
acres under glass--and sold 3.8 million pounds of tomatoes in the first
quarter of the 2021. We have four more sites under construction in
Kentucky and they will soon be opening to create even more permanent
jobs in transitioning coal communities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.appharvest.com/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The plentiful rain in the region enables AppHarvest to rely
exclusively on recycled rainwater. Because of that and our proximity to
East Coast markets--70% of the U.S. population is within a day's
drive--we expect to play an essential role in protecting America's
domestic food supply and infrastructure. I would welcome the
opportunity to show you and your colleagues on the Committee how our
state-of-the-art facilities operate and share the insights that we have
gleaned over the last 2 years.
One issue that I hope you will raise during the hearing is the need
for CEA crop insurance. We know that USDA and RMA embarked on a study
in January of this year and will be working over the next few months to
develop a policy that covers ``diseases'' that might impact the sector.
Given how important CEA will be to America's future food supply, that
initiative is important and timely.
I would be honored to confer with you or your staff at any time,
whether prior to the hearing or after, and welcome all of you to plan a
site visit to our facility in Morehead.
Sincerely,

Jonathan Webb,
Founder & CEO,
AppHarvest.
______

Submitted Statement by Bowery Farming Inc.
Bowery applauds Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Thompson for
holding a hearing on the role Controlled-environment agriculture (CEA)
plays in protecting our national fresh food supply.
Bowery Farming is the largest vertical farming company in the
United States. Founded in 2015 by Irving Fain, our mission is to
strengthen and fortify our national food system by building smart
indoor farms close to the cities we serve. We grow local, pesticide-
free produce 365 days a year. We transform non-arable land into
warehouses that become incredibly productive farms and create green
jobs in the communities where we operate. Our farms stack vertically,
leveraging hydroponics and using LED lighting that mimics the spectrum
of the sun. Our operations are run by our proprietary BoweryOS that
integrates sensors, vision systems, robotics, automation and data that
orchestrates the entire farm operation from seed to shelf and provides
our plants with exactly what they need when they need it.
We grow in a completely controlled environment, and we hold our
farms to the highest food safety standards. Each farm is SQF Certified.
Our produce moves from harvest to store shelves within a few days,
which means we are reducing our transportation footprint, extending
shelf life (reducing waste at the store level) and maximizing the
nutritional density of produce. We are 100X more productive on the same
square foot of land as traditional agriculture and we are 90% more
efficient with our water usage. Bowery is also committed to reducing
our carbon footprint and is pulling our farm energy from low-impact
renewable sources. The result is a vertically integrated fresh food
supply chain that offers a fresher, safer, more transparent, resilient
and sustainable approach to growing our produce.
Bowery currently has two commercial farms in Kearney, NJ and
Nottingham, MD serving the Tri-State and Mid-Atlantic regions in over
850 stores with retail partnerships that range from Whole Foods Market
to Albertsons to Giant to Amazon to Walmart. We are preparing to open
our third farm in Bethlehem, PA in early 2022 with line of site to two
more farm openings at the end of 2022 that will expand our footprint
nationally. In addition to our commercial farms, we also have a major
R&D facility in Kearney, NJ focused on plant sciences and breeding
programs that will enable us to accelerate our work in product
development to continue optimizing quality and yield within lettuces
and herbs and to drive innovation in the indoor space beyond leafy
greens including strawberries, fruiting crops and root vegetables.
Most recently, Bowery closed our Series C funding, raising $300M in
additional capital with Fidelity joining as our lead investor, bringing
our total capital raised to $475MM.
This capitalization in our business will enable us to accelerate
building our farm footprint throughout the U.S. In addition to lead
agricultural and tech investors like Temasek and GV (formerly Google
Ventures), we are fortunate to have advisors who are at the forefront
of shaping food policies that champion a more equitable future
including Chefs Jose Andres and Tom Colicchio.
As discussed in the hearing, our food system sits at the heart of
so many of our most pressing issues and opportunities, such as climate
change, national self-sufficiency, safety, health, equity and labor.
Although not the only solution, we believe CEA is a critical part of
strengthening and fortifying our national food system. We look forward
to supporting and helping shape the future of our U.S. fresh food
supply chain.
______

Submitted Questions
Questions Submitted by Hon. Kim Schrier, a Representative in Congress
from Washington
Response from Aaron Z. Gadouas, Managing Director, B.C. Ziegler and
Company
Question. Mr. Gadouas, in your testimony you discussed the barriers
for smaller CEA producers to access capital. I've heard from CEA
farmers in my state about the difficulty in accessing capital,
especially to overcome high startup costs. From your perspective, how
can this Committee, Congress, and USDA be better partners in ensuring
CEA producers have access to the necessary resources to enter and
succeed in this industry?
Answer. As I described in my testimony, capital markets resources
can be made available to finance large CEA projects, as they are most
efficient at large economies of scale. Obtaining financing for smaller
CEA producers will continue to be a challenge. Commercial banks and
specialized lenders in the agriculture space usually require
substantial equity and personal recourse. The real issue in this
country is there is a dearth of food system infrastructure for all
participants across the broad supply chain.
As local, state and Federal Governments have risen to the challenge
of providing assistance to broad constituencies during the pandemic,
this is an opportune time to advance salient public initiatives for
food safety and food security and infrastructure by recognizing CEA as
an asset class.
Response from Kevin Safrance, Executive Vice Chairman, Mastronardi
Produce Limited, Mastronardi Produce--USA, Inc.
Question 1. Mr. Safrance, in your testimony, you said the primary
barrier to the success of the Controlled Environment Agriculture
industry right now is a lack of access to labor. I have heard about
this from farmers in my district, both CEA and non-CEA, repeatedly over
the last few months. Can you discuss the unique barriers CEA farms face
in attracting and maintaining workers?
Answer. Representative Schrier, as you indicated, field and CEA
farms often struggle to attract and maintain the workforce necessary to
feed America, and not for want of trying. Both aggressively seek to
hire U.S. employees and then turn to programs such as the H-2A program
only if necessary. Then, both often struggle to secure much-needed
workers through the program. The challenges with the H-2A program are
especially acute for CEA farms, however, because of the unique high-
tech growing processes and attendant labor needs of CEA farming. When
the immigration law was last amended in 1986, no one could envision the
technological and business innovations that have evolved to become a
central part of the 21st-century controlled environment agriculture
industry. As I testified to the Committee, there are two primary
challenges that impact our workforce needs.
First, and most notably, a CEA hydroponic farming system requires
each farm to undergo a significant cleanout and sanitation process at
the end of every harvest and for preparation of the subsequent season.
That means that as a part of each growing cycle, CEA farms clean,
disinfect, and sterilize the entire growing facility, including its
gutters, irrigation, heating/rail systems, and ground cover so that all
plant material is fully removed, and the hydroponic growing systems are
ready to plant for the upcoming season. This unique and vital process
can take up to 8 additional weeks depending on the crop, which means
CEA farms need to retain H-2A workers for slightly longer than the end
of a field farm's typical harvest season, but in no event longer than
the conventional 10 month maximum period generally permitted by the
U.S. Department of Labor. Second, hydroponic CEA farming often includes
multiple segregated, separately enclosed ranges for growing fruits and
or vegetables. Those hydroponic ranges are often specially tailored for
growing one or more general types of fruits and vegetables, and as such
may require separate H-2A workers for each range.
Because of the unique requirements of modern, high-tech CEA
farming, and the lack of action by Congress to update the rules
governing immigrant farm labor, the Department of Labor has been forced
to interpret the 1986 law and establish rules governing the admission
of H-2A workers that have resulted in inconsistent application of
standards that have often made it very difficult for CEA farms to avail
themselves of the H-2A program. This lack of access impedes our ability
to meet the domestic need for fruits and vegetables because we lack the
workforce needed to timely harvest our crops, and at times, resulting
in tons of food being discarded. CEA farms have specific needs for
foreign workers and those needs fully comply with the intent of the H-
2A program, which is to guarantee that no worker who gains employment
through it is here longer than 10 months nor displacing any U.S. job.
Our experience over the years is that the lack of statutory clarity as
to what constitutes ``seasonal and temporary'' workforce needs for CEA
farms leads to Department of Labor decisions that are inconsistent in
their application. In many ways the decision making, and the standard
setting vary so greatly that we find it difficult to plan accordingly.
Not only does this limit the productivity of our existing facilities,
it dramatically limits the potential investment to expand CEA so that
we can reduce our dependence on foreign produce and acts as an
impediment to achieving domestic fresh produce food security.
We believe a handful of clarifying technical amendments to the Farm
Workforce Modernization Act would eliminate this inconsistent access of
CEA farms to the H-2A program and address administrative barriers and
make sure the H-2A program accounts for the technological advancements
and unique temporary and seasonal workforce needs of CEA farming. Those
modifications would: (1) Make clear that work on hydroponic CEA farms
is classified as agricultural labor; (2) clarify that agricultural
workers employed on CEA farms are seasonal workers for purposes of the
H-2A program due to unique seasonal requirements of CEA farming like
facility cleanout, sterilization, and future site preparation; (3)
clarify that staggered end dates are allowed for CEA farms provided the
period of employment in the job opportunity is no more than 10 months;
(4) require the U.S. Department of Labor to establish special
procedures for H-2A work at hydroponic CEA farms notwithstanding the
traditional temporality and seasonality requirement; and (5) clarify
that petitions involving segregated and distinct ranges submitted
within a period of twelve consecutive months can be approved where the
covered job opportunities are no more than 10 months in duration and
the \3/4\ guarantee is met for each worker. We are readily available
and welcome the opportunity to discuss and provide more detail on these
proposed clarifications if you would like. Without these changes, we
believe the business uncertainty caused by lack of access to the H-2A
program will dramatically hinder investment in CEA in the United States
and diminish the opportunity to onshore the production of fresh fruits
and vegetables that have increasingly become dependent on imported
crops over the last 3 decades.

Question 2. Mr. Safrance, I have also heard from farmers and
stakeholders about the need for workforce development for the indoor
agriculture industry. Can you comment on the differences in the
training and technical expertise necessary for workers in CEA as
compared to traditional agriculture?
Answer. There are unique workforce training needs for CEA farms due
primarily to the advanced technological growing systems used on the
farms. For example, as discussed above, CEA farming requires extensive
facility cleanout and future site preparation, including disinfecting
and sterilizing the facility, its gutters, its irrigation, heating/rail
systems, and its ground cover--procedures and physical features unique
to CEA farming. It also requires understanding and using inert medium
Grow Cubes instead of traditional soil, carefully monitoring and
controlling the use of natural and artificial light, capturing and
recycling water, deploying an integrated pest management systems such
as ladybugs instead of the ordinary significant use of pesticides,
using ergonomic ``white glove'' harvesting methods, and generally using
sophisticated computers and systems to assist the growing teams with
management of critical aspects of CEA farming, which technology
continues to be advanced inclusive of robotics and artificial
intelligence. These features of CEA farming are different from field
farming and require specific training. In our experience, however,
training has not been the primary barrier to obtaining the necessary
and qualified workforce to manage the harvest. Our primary challenge is
an inadequate supply of labor, which was prevalent prior to the current
pandemic and will remain unless steps are taken to update the H-2A
rules to account for CEA farming, which we believe could be addressed
through the previously mentioned technical clarifications to the Farm
Workforce Modernization Act.

[all]
