- SUPPORTING CAREERS IN CONSERVATION: WORKFORCE TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND JOB OPPORTUNITIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SUPPORTING CAREERS IN CONSERVATION: WORKFORCE TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND
JOB OPPORTUNITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CONSERVATION AND FORESTRY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 25, 2022

__________

Serial No. 117-34

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-008 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2022

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Chairman

JIM COSTA, California                GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania,
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts     Ranking Minority Member
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina, Vice  AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
Chair                                ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   Arkansas
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
SHONTEL M. BROWN, Ohio               VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              DOUG LaMALFA, California
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine               RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
Northern Mariana Islands             DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois               DON BACON, Nebraska
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York       DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              CHRIS JACOBS, New York
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
RO KHANNA, California                MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida              TRACEY MANN, Kansas
J. LUIS CORREA, California           RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
JOSH HARDER, California              BARRY MOORE, Alabama
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   KAT CAMMACK, Florida
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California            ------
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia      ------
MARCY KAPTUR, Ohio
------

______

Anne Simmons, Staff Director

Parish Braden, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Conservation and Forestry

ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia, Chair

CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine               DOUG LaMALFA, California, Ranking
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         Minority Member
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JIMMY PANETTA, California            RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
J. LUIS CORREA, California           TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
------                               MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
BARRY MOORE, Alabama

Paul Babbitt, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
LaMalfa, Hon. Doug, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................     4
Spanberger, Hon. Abigail Davis, a Representative in Congress from
Virginia, opening statement....................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3

Witnesses

Crowder, Michael, President, National Association of Conservation
Districts, Washington, D.C.....................................     5
Prepared statement...........................................     7
O'Neill, Shane R.C., Forest Industry Business Development
Manager, University of Maine; Member, Association of Public and
Land-grant Universities, Orono, ME.............................    10
Prepared statement...........................................    11
Olander, Keith, Dean of Agricultural Studies, Central Lakes
College, Staples, MN...........................................    14
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Holzer, Ph.D., Margaret A., Past Chair, K-12 Committee, Soil
Science Society of America; Science Standards Specialist; Great
Minds PBC
TM
, PhD Science
'
, Madison, WI...    17
Prepared statement...........................................    18
Jensen, Marissa, Manager, Education & Outreach Conservation
Leadership Program, Pheasants Forever and Quail Forever, Saint
Paul, MN.......................................................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Schohr, Tracy K., Livestock and Natural Resource Advisor,
Agriculture and Natural Resources, Cooperative Extension,
University of California; Partner, Schohr Ranch, Gridley, CA...    28
Prepared statement...........................................    30

SUPPORTING CAREERS IN CONSERVATION: WORKFORCE TRAINING, EDUCATION, AND

JOB OPPORTUNITIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2022

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Conservation and Forestry,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 1:02 p.m., via
Zoom, Hon. Abigail Davis Spanberger [Chair of the Subcommittee]
presiding.
Members present: Representatives Spanberger, Pingree,
Kuster, O'Halleran, Panetta, Correa, Schrier, LaMalfa,
DesJarlais, and Moore.
Staff present: Paul Babbitt, Lyron Blum-Evitts, Prescott
Martin III, John Busovsky, Patricia Straughn, Erin Wilson,
Faisal Siddiqui, and Dana Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, A
REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM VIRGINIA

The Chair. This hearing of the Subcommittee on Conservation
and Forestry entitled, Supporting Careers in Conservation:
Workforce Training, Education, and Job Opportunities, will come
to order.
Welcome, and thank you for joining today's hearing. After
brief opening remarks, Members will receive testimony from our
witnesses today, and then the hearing will be open to
questions.
Good afternoon. I would like to welcome you to today's
hearing focused on how this Committee and USDA can work with
partners to better build and support a pipeline for careers in
the conservation space, including at NRCS. I am looking forward
to hearing from our witnesses about the work they are doing,
the needs they see, and the opportunities we have to encourage
careers in the conservation workforce.
Our robust conservation workforce plays a critical role in
helping America's growers, producers, and forest landowners
implement conservation practices, practices that not only have
improved environmental outcomes but also have improved their
operations' bottom lines through increased crop quality, better
yields, and other co-benefits. Since the 1930s, NRCS has
provided producers with technical support and financial
assistance to achieve the benefits of a healthy and productive
landscape. In 2019 alone, NRCS and its partners worked with
more than 500,000 producers, \1/2\ million producers, on more
than 43 million acres to build conservation plans and implement
practices that increase production, reduce input costs,
conserve natural resources, and protect wildlife habitat.
Together, these actions not only have a positive impact on
farms but also on their neighbors, their watersheds, and the
entire U.S. population through well-documented environmental
benefits, including improved water quality through the
reduction of runoff, increased resilience of the land against
drought in dry years, and reduced carbon dioxide emissions in
the environment through the sequestration of carbon from
healthier soils.
As we continue rebuilding our economy and finding solutions
to the climate crisis, voluntary conservation programs can play
a critical role in reducing our carbon footprint, making our
food supply chains more resilient while growing our economy,
especially in rural communities. But it takes a qualified
workforce to make that happen. While farmers and producers
stand ready to play their part in conservation, attrition in
on-the-ground staff has reduced landowners' opportunities to
learn from trained technical assistance providers who provide
site-specific solutions to implement conservation practices
effectively. Consider this: Between 2004 and 2019, staffing
levels at NRCS have declined 24 percent. Unlike many other
Federal agencies, nearly all NRCS staff or 98 percent are
located outside of Washington, D.C. and, as such, attrition in
NRCS's ranks is felt disproportionately by those who are
seeking to implement conservation practices on their land.
Farmers are the original conservationists and play a
critical role in helping to safeguard our environment. In 2018,
Congress reaffirmed the importance of voluntary incentive-based
conservation in the farm bill by maintaining robust funding in
the conservation title. Moving forward, it is critical that
Congress adequately fund technical assistance at NRCS to ensure
the effective implementation and to maximize accountability of
these voluntary programs.
However, while increasing funding can help reduce attrition
within the conservation workforce at NRCS, it does not reach
the underlying issue of the conservation workforce shortage.
Instead, I have heard directly about the fierce competition
between state agencies, nonprofit technical service providers,
and NRCS for the same small number of specialists in
communities across my district and the country. In order to
meet the needs of farmers, it is essential that we do more to
attract more young Americans into this field and grow the size
of this essential workforce.
Today, I am excited to hear from our witnesses who are
working to build this pipeline, starting from K through 12 all
the way through community colleges and land-grant universities.
I am excited to hear how we can do more to retain those working
in conservation already. We have seen the challenges of and the
innovation sparked by a reduced workforce, and today's
witnesses offer unique perspectives regarding these challenges
and opportunities that will help us build a pipeline into the
conservation workforce. As we look ahead to the 2023 Farm Bill,
I am excited to learn more about how we can build this pipeline
by meeting people where they are and making sure they have the
necessary information to consider and prepare for careers in
conservation.
And just yesterday, I was in my district visiting with a
career and technical education program where we were honoring
students who were graduating and heading off into technical
careers. Throughout my district, we have programs that are
starting to get set up related to conservation and
agricultural-related studies, and so there is this energy on
the ground. I am excited to see it in Virginia, and I look
forward to learning about what is happening across the country
and what we should know as we head into the 2023 Farm Bill.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Spanberger follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Abigail Davis Spanberger, a Representative
in Congress from Virginia
Good afternoon, I would like to welcome you to today's hearing
focused on how this Committee and USDA can work with partners to better
build and support a pipeline for careers in the conservation space,
including at NRCS. I'm looking forward to hearing from our witnesses
about the work they are doing, the needs they see, and the
opportunities we have to encourage careers in the conservation
workforce. A robust conservation workforce plays a critical role in
helping America's growers, producers, and forest landowners implement
conservation practices--practices that not only have improved
environmental outcomes, but also improved their operations' bottom
lines through increased crop quality, better yields, and other co-
benefits.
Since the 1930s, NRCS has provided producers with technical support
and financial assistance to achieve the benefits of a healthy and
productive landscape. In 2019 alone, NRCS and its partners worked with
more than 500,000 producers--\1/2\ million--on more than 43 million
acres to build conservation plans and implement practices that increase
production, reduce input costs, conserve natural resources, and protect
wildlife habitat.
Together, these actions not only have a positive impact on farms,
but also on their neighbors, their watersheds, and the entire U.S.
population through well-documented environmental benefits, including
improved water quality through the reduction of run-off, increased
resilience of the land against drought in dry years, and reduced carbon
dioxide emissions in the environment through the sequestration of
carbon from healthier soils.
As we continue rebuilding our economy and finding solutions to the
climate crisis, voluntary conservation programs can play a critical
role in reducing our carbon footprint, making our food supply chains
more resilient, while growing our economy, especially in rural
communities. But it takes a qualified workforce to make that happen.
While farmers and producers stand ready to play their part in
conservation, attrition in on-the-ground staff has reduced landowners'
opportunities to learn from trained technical assistance providers who
provide site-specific solutions to implement conservation practices
effectively. Consider: between 2004 and 2019, staffing levels at NRCS
have declined 24 percent. Unlike many other Federal agencies, nearly
all NRCS staff, or 98 percent, are located outside Washington, D.C. As
such, attrition in NRCS' ranks is felt disproportionately by those
seeking to implement conservation practices on their land.
Farmers are the original conservationists and can play a critical
role in helping to safeguard our environment. In 2018, Congress
reaffirmed the importance of voluntary, incentive-based conservation in
the farm bill by maintaining robust funding in the conservation title.
Moving forward, it is critical that Congress adequately fund technical
assistance at NRCS to ensure the effective implementation and maximize
accountability of these voluntary programs.
However, while increasing funding can help reduce attrition within
the conservation workforce at NRCS, it does not reach the underlying
issue of the conservation workforce shortage. Instead, I have heard
directly about the fierce competition between state agencies, nonprofit
technical service providers, and NRCS for the same small number of
specialists in communities across my district and the country. In order
to meet the needs of farmers, it is essential that we do more to
attract more young Americans into this field and grow the size of this
essential workforce.
Today, I am excited to hear more from our witnesses who are working
to build this pipeline starting from K-12 all the way through our
community colleges and land-grant universities. I am also excited to
hear how we can do more to retain those working in conservation
already.
We have seen the challenges of, and innovations sparked by, a
reduced workforce. Today's witnesses offer unique perspectives
regarding these challenges and opportunities that will help us build a
pipeline into the conservation workforce. As we look ahead to the 2023
Farm Bill, I am excited to learn more about how we can build this
pipeline by meeting people where they are and making sure they have the
necessary information to consider and prepare for careers in
conservation.

The Chair. So with that, I would now like to welcome the
distinguished gentleman, the Ranking Member, Mr. LaMalfa, for
any opening remarks that he would like to make.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DOUG LaMALFA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

Mr. LaMalfa. Well, thank you, Madam Chair. I hope you are
doing well. We are out here on the West Coast where it is
already getting hot, but thanks for this opportunity for having
today's hearing and hopefully meet the goals of this issue.
So we are talking about in the farm bill where we are going
to have a heavy lift next year getting that done, so I am glad
we are getting ahead of it with hearings on many aspects.
Title II of the farm bill provides farmers, ranchers, and
landowners with a variety of programs and tools to engage in
voluntary incentive-based conservation activities. Some of them
work very well in rice country where I live. These management
activities stress various natural resources concerns and are
really a win-win for both the producer, as well as
environmentally, as benefits to both are indeed well-
established.
Under the 2018 Farm Bill, the conservation title provides
over $6 billion in funding for these programs each year. This
funding supports working lands programs such as the EQIP, the
CSP, the Regional Conservation Partnership Program. It supports
nonworking land such as the CRP program and the Ag Conservation
and Easement Program. In my home State of California, we
continue to see the value of voluntary conservation and the
great need for increased land management. Conservation
activities and active management directly improve water and
soil quality and encourage wildlife habitat and could help
restore forest lands after wildfires, something we desperately
need as the fires in this area are in the six-digit range in
acres, the Dixie Fire just under 1 million last year, 1 million
acres. We are far behind on this, so I hope that these
programs, as well as the increased employment, can kick in and
really help get us fast-forward on putting these lands back to
something that I think the American people would like.
So indeed, wildfires in crisis this year already. We have
had several fires in the open space areas just in my district.
Thankfully, they are not in the forest yet, but with the north
wind and such, it is indeed a threat all the time, and I hold
my breath as to what is coming here later this year.
So we need every tool we can in order to help battle this.
For example, in one of my counties from north Siskiyou County
to Butte Valley south, the Joint Chiefs' Landscape Restoration
Partnership project will assist private forest owners in
treating acres adjoining public lands. In Modoc County, NRCS
has been removing juniper trees in a multiyear project to
improve sage grouse habitat and grazing for local ranchers
post-fire. NRCS has worked with ranchers installing new water
sources, notably, in Butte County where the Camp Fire, meaning
the Paradise area, damaged what is known as the Miocene Canal.
So indeed, on forest restoration, we are getting ahead of
the curve so we don't have such devastating fires. As I
mentioned with the sage grouse situation up there, the sage
grouse at any moment could be listed, which will take a lot of
ability away to manage lands and for ranchers to actually do
their good work in conjunction with that.
So I have a lot more I could say here, but I think I would
like to get started with our witnesses here. So, I look forward
to the discussion today and the opportunity for training the
next generation of technical assistance providers is a big one.
It is important that we meet the objectives of these
conservation plans, and we need the people to do that, so it is
the importance of indeed bringing more people into place.
So I would like to welcome all of our witnesses here today
and say thank you for joining us. I would also like to say
thanks specifically to Tracy Schohr, who I will make the
introduction for in a little bit, and for her for sharing her
story with us.
So, Madam Chair, I will yield back. Thank you.
The Chair. Thank you very much, Mr. LaMalfa.
The chair would request that other Members submit their
opening statements for the record so witnesses may begin their
testimony and to ensure that there is ample time for questions.
I am pleased to welcome our panel of witnesses to the
Agriculture Committee today and the Subcommittee on
Conservation and Forestry. Our first witness today is Mr.
Michael Crowder, who is the President of the National
Association of Conservation Districts. Mr. Crowder, I look
forward to your first time testifying before our Subcommittee.
You have 5 minutes for your opening statements, and there will
be a clock that appears on the screen. But in these virtual
scenarios, I tend to yield to towards being a bit more generous
with time in case you are keeping track of your comments and
not the clock. But, Mr. Crowder, I open it up to you, sir.
Please go ahead.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL CROWDER, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF CONSERVATION DISTRICTS, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Crowder. Thank you, Chair Spanberger, Ranking Member
LaMalfa, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to join you today to discuss the challenges
currently facing the conservation workforce and opportunities
to address and overcome these issues. My name is Michael
Crowder, and I serve as President of the National Association
of Conservation Districts and have been the general manager of
the Barker Ranch in eastern Washington State for 22 years and
have been a partner of my family's third-generation farm in
Indiana since 2002. I have also served as an adjunct professor
at Washington State University Tri-Cities where I taught
graduate- and undergraduate-level classes in wildlife science,
ecology, and wetland restoration. I have spent my entire career
working on conservation, agriculture, and wildlife science
issues, and I am very proud of Barker Ranch's summer internship
program, which provides real-world experience and college
credit for young men and women working in conservation
practices. I take a lot of pride in my efforts to prepare the
next generation of conservation leaders, and I am particularly
proud to serve as NACD's President and work with local
conservation districts at the local, state, Tribal, and
national levels.
NACD represents America's 3,000 conservation districts
across the nation and the 17,000 men and women who serve on
their governing boards, as well as their state and Territory
associations. Conservation districts are local units of
government that coordinate with many partners at all levels to
help millions of cooperating landowners and operators implement
conservation practices.
Producers are on the frontlines of ensuring global food
security, as well as protecting our country's natural
resources. Our conservation workforce plays a critical role in
achieving this goal by providing producers the resources and
assistance necessary to implement effective conservation
practices. NRCS works with partners such as conservation
districts to implement critical USDA working lands conservation
programs. These programs provide resources and support for
producers to conserve the environment, protect water quality,
and improve soil health. Unfortunately, only about \1/3\ of
USDA working lands conservation programs applications are
approved each year. As demand for conservation grows, resources
and staff are often stretched thin, negatively affecting their
ability to implement conservation programs and staff morale.
NACD has asked Congress to include at least $1.2 billion
for NRCS's conservation operations budget in the Fiscal Year
2023 spending bill. This funding would allow USDA to hire
staff, better administer conservation programs, and provide
critical technical assistance. However, funding alone will not
resolve all the challenges facing our conservation workforce.
We are not cultivating the next generation of workers at the
scale required to meet our goals and keep pace with attrition.
From elementary school to colleges and beyond, we need to
inspire, educate, and provide more opportunities for the next
generation to enter the conservation workforce.
NACD is proud to be taking action to achieve this goal.
Each year, NACD works closely with the National Conservation
Foundation to manage Envirothon, an international competition
between 25,000 high school students across the United States
and Canada to find creative solutions to complex natural
resource issues. NACD also partners with Ag Future of America;
Minorities in Agricultural, Natural Resources, and Related
Sciences; NRCS; and the Forest Service to host the
Sustainability Institute. This workshop provides students with
important professional development opportunities and pathways
to conservation careers.
NACD is working closely with the NRCS to develop an
education program to prepare underrepresented high school and
college students for conservation careers. We also support
NRCS's Pathways Program, which offers internships, fellowships,
and other opportunities to inspire and prepare the next
generation of conservation leaders.
Although NACD and other conservation advocates have taken
steps to address this growing issue, we recognize that there is
much more left to do. Providing additional educational
opportunities, introducing students to conservation careers,
bolstering training programs, and increasing compensation for
conservation professionals are just some of the things we need
to make progress on if we are going to tackle this challenge. I
look forward to working with our partners and Members of this
Subcommittee to support those efforts.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this
hearing, and I look forward to your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Crowder follows:]

Prepared Statement of Michael Crowder, President, National Association
of Conservation Districts, Washington, D.C.
Chair Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa, and Members of the
Subcommittee--thank you for the opportunity to join you today to
discuss the challenges currently facing the conservation workforce and
opportunities to address and overcome these issues.
My name is Michael Crowder and I serve as the President of the
National Association of Conservation Districts (NACD). I have been the
General Manager of Barker Ranch in eastern Washington State for 22
years, since graduating from Purdue University with a master's degree
in wildlife science and a bachelor's degree in natural resources and
environmental science. I have been a partner of my third-generation
family farm in Indiana since 2002, and I also own farmland and
conservation easements in Illinois.
I have spent my entire career working on conservation, agriculture,
and wildlife science issues. On Barker Ranch, we work very closely with
the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) on wetland
conservation easements and restoring wildlife habitat, as well as other
practices such as prescriptive grazing, riparian fencing, irrigation
water management, and many more. I served as an Adjunct Professor at
Washington State University Tri-Cities for 8 years and taught classes
in wildlife science, ecology, and wetland restoration at both graduate
and undergraduate levels. On Barker Ranch, I am very proud of our
summer internship program that is receiving national attention for
training and providing real-world experience for young men and women in
wetland and waterfowl habitat management. This year, we have six summer
interns from five different colleges from across the nation. I am
honored to serve as the President of NACD, and I am especially proud of
the many years I have dedicated to working with conservation districts
at the local, state, Tribal, and national levels.
NACD represents America's 3,000 conservation districts and the
17,000 men and women who serve on their governing boards, as well as
their respective state and territory associations. Conservation
districts are local units of government established under state law to
carry out natural resource management programs at the local level.
Districts work closely with Federal and state conservation agencies to
help millions of cooperating landowners and operators protect land and
water resources across the United States. NACD's mission is to promote
voluntary conservation and the responsible management of natural
resources on all lands by supporting locally led conservation districts
and their associations through grassroots advocacy, education, and
partnerships. We do this in close coordination with our national
partners at NRCS, the National Association of State Conservation
Agencies (NASCA), the National Conservation District Employees
Association (NCDEA), and the National Association of Resource
Conservation and Development Councils (NARC&DC).
I sincerely appreciate the Subcommittee's leadership in championing
voluntary, locally led conservation to improve our country's soil,
forests, air, and water, and to mitigate the increasingly harmful
effects of climate change.
Producers across the nation are on the front lines of ensuring
global food security and protecting our country's land, water, and
other natural resources for future generations. Conservation districts
play a critical role in achieving this goal by providing producers with
technical assistance, resources, and tools to implement effective
conservation practices on their lands. Conservation district
professionals are trusted advisors within their local communities and
play a key role in educating producers, facilitating the conservation
planning process, and working with producers to design and implement
the most effective conservation systems for their operations. These
proven conservation practices--such as cover cropping, nutrient
management, and forest stand improvement--can increase production,
enhance resilience, and improve biodiversity, land, and water quality
in communities across the country.
Conservation districts are relied upon by USDA to administer
conservation programs and to help people in their local communities
implement conservation practices. Due to the pandemic, the last 2 years
have been particularly difficult for many conservation professionals.
In response to the challenges presented by COVID-19, our conservation
workforce adopted innovative approaches to reach producers and support
conservation in their communities.
Our communities and conservation professionals are also
experiencing an increasing number of devastating extreme weather events
across the country, including hurricanes, tornados, droughts,
wildfires, and floods. Conservation districts, in collaboration with
Federal and local partners, have played a key role in helping
communities respond to these disasters and build resilience against
future extreme weather.
The United States Department of Agriculture's (USDA) Natural
Resource[s] Conservation [Service] (NRCS) staff, in coordination with
partners such as conservation districts, implement critical USDA
working lands conservation programs, like the Environmental Quality
Incentives Program (EQIP) and Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP).
These programs provide resources that allow farmers, foresters, and
ranchers to conserve land and water, protect water quality, and improve
soil health. NRCS employees often work hand-in-hand with conservation
district staff to inform producers about conservation opportunities,
develop conservation plans, and ultimately help landowners implement
effective conservation practices.
As producers face growing environmental challenges and uncertain
markets, these conservation programs are increasingly utilized to
bolster resilience, support the economic viability of family farms, and
implement climate-smart conservation practices. Unfortunately, across
the United States, only about \1/3\ of EQIP and CSP applications are
approved each year because of limited funding.
As producer demand for conservation grows, resources and staff for
our Federal and local conservation workforces are often stretched thin.
Over the past decade, USDA and their conservation partners have
struggled to keep staffing levels on pace with attrition. Although NRCS
has made progress by adding 3,000 workers over the past 2 years, there
remain critical staff shortages at NRCS. This capacity issue has a very
real impact on the administration of conservation programs,
conservation planning, and producers' access to technical assistance,
as well as staff morale.
Conservation staffing concerns also extend beyond [NRCS]. Other
state, local, and private conservation professionals, including
conservation districts, often struggle to reach and maintain adequate
staffing levels. A 2021 Soil and Water Conservation Society poll of
1,715 public and private conservation practitioners found that 90
percent of respondents reported that a lack of conservation
practitioners negatively impacts conservation momentum. 78 percent
agreed that a lack of field staff reduces an organizations' capacity to
get conservation on the ground.
USDA's Fiscal Year (FY) 2023 budget proposal requests a $41 million
increase to secure 535 new NRCS staffers. The budget proposal also
requests more than $1 billion for NRCS' Conservation Operations, which
would allow NRCS to hire additional staff, ensure that staff are
adequately trained, and provide conservation technical assistance to
more producers across the country. It is critical that Congress passes
an FY 2023 spending bill that increases funding for NRCS to hire and
onboard additional employees. It is also important that USDA is
provided with the direct hire authority needed to maintain adequate
staffing levels.
NACD has asked Congress to include at least $1.2 billion for NRCS'
Conservation Operations. An increase in funding for NRCS' Conservation
Operation will allow USDA to hire additional staff to more effectively
administer oversubscribed farm bill conservation programs and provide
producers with additional support. This funding also helps key
partners, such as conservation districts, get more conservation on the
ground. Districts conduct substantial outreach and educate cooperating
producers on the benefits of conservation and help them access farm
bill programs. They also walk the land with producers to provide the
personalized technical assistance needed to develop conservation plans,
and design and implement practices.
However, funding alone will not resolve all the challenges facing
our conservation workforce. As conservation professionals increasingly
retire from or leave their positions, there is growing concern that the
United States is not cultivating the next generation of this workforce
at the scale required to meet our conservation goals.
We need to inspire, educate, and provide more opportunities for the
next generation to enter the conservation workforce. From elementary
school to college--we need young people to understand the importance of
conservation and provide them with the requisite tools and pathways to
secure conservation careers.
NACD is already taking action to bolster the conservation workforce
pipeline.
Each year, more than 25,000 high school students from across the
United States, Canada, and China participate in Envirothon, which
includes a competition to find creative solutions to complex
environmental and natural resource issues. NACD works closely with the
National Conservation Foundation to manage the Envirothon program,
which provide students with hands-on outdoor field experiences,
opportunities to engage with their local communities, education in
environmental disciplines, and information to pursue conservation
careers. The Envirothon also facilitates direct engagement between
students and environmental and natural resource professionals, which
helps students understand career opportunities. NACD is excited for the
2022 Envirothon competition in July, which will be hosted by the Ohio
Federation of Soil and Water Conservation Districts in Oxford, Ohio.
For the past several years, NACD has partnered with Agriculture
Future of America; Minorities in Agriculture, Natural Resources, and
Related Sciences; NRCS; and the U.S. Forest Service (USFS) to raise
awareness among college students about careers in conservation. Along
with our partners, we have hosted career workshops for undergraduate
students showcasing careers in conservation, agriculture, and natural
resources management. Up to 50 college students are invited to
participate in these workshops, which focus on professional development
and allow students to engage with professionals from conservation
districts, state conservation agencies, private companies, and Federal
resource management partners like NRCS and the USFS. NACD was pleased
to welcome a new class of 50 students to this year's AFA-NACD
Sustainability Institute, which was held February 13 to 15.
NACD strongly supports paid student internship programs--at both
NRCS and conservation districts--to supplement relevant coursework.
Retirement drives attrition in the conservation workforce, which will
require training and hiring a significant number of younger people to
address. We cannot recruit and onboard recent graduates quickly enough.
While both NRCS and districts provide substantial on-the-job training,
we have seen that students with real-world experience better understand
producers' needs and are more productive from the start. We must
bolster the student recruitment pipeline in order to effectively build
capacity and deliver high quality service and technical assistance.
NACD is also working closely with NRCS to develop an education
program to prepare underrepresented high school and college students'
for NRCS conservation careers. The program will promote NRCS and
conservation districts as employers of choice for diverse populations
and develop future leaders in agriculture and conservation. We are
excited to continue working with NRCS and stakeholders to develop this
initiative. NACD also works to support NRCS' Pathways Programs, which
offer internships, development opportunities, and fellowships to
inspire and prepare the next generation of conservation leaders.
Although NACD has taken steps to address this growing issue, we
recognize that there is much more left to do. Inspiring young children
to become passionate about conservation, providing additional education
opportunities, introducing students to conservation careers, bolstering
training programs, and increasing compensation for conservation
professionals are just some of the things we need to make progress on
if we are going to tackle this challenge.
Many of the other witnesses testifying today are taking big steps
to prepare the next generation of conservation workers, and I look
forward to working with them and Members of this Subcommittee to
support those efforts. The future of our country's land and natural
resources are depending on us.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this hearing, and I
appreciate the opportunity to submit written testimony.

The Chair. Thank you very much, Mr. Crowder.
Now, our second witness today is Mr. Shane O'Neill, the
Forest Industry Business Development Manager at the School of
Forest Resources of the University of Maine, who is testifying
on behalf of the Association of Public and Land-grant
Universities. And I am excited to learn more about your work
regarding workforce resiliency.
Mr. O'Neill, you have 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF SHANE R.C. O'NEILL, FOREST INDUSTRY
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT MANAGER, UNIVERSITY OF MAINE; MEMBER,
ASSOCIATION OF PUBLIC AND LAND-GRANT UNIVERSITIES, ORONO, ME

Mr. O'Neill. Good afternoon, Chair Spanberger, Ranking
Member LaMalfa, and Members of the Subcommittee, especially
Maine's Representative Pingree. My name is Shane O'Neill, and I
serve as the Forest Industry Business Development Manager at
the University of Maine, an R1 research university, the state's
land, sea, and space grant, and a proud member of the
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities. Thank you
for the opportunity to testify today on an issue of great
importance to our state.
Currently, Maine's forest products industry directly
employs more than 13,000 people, but the nature of our industry
and the jobs it supports is rapidly changing, and so too must
our strategies for developing our future and incumbent
workforce. Public perceptions and attitudes demonstrate a
disconnect from the reality of modern forestry. Many people
view forest management, harvesting, and products manufactured
as ecologically detrimental and requiring low-tech, high-
exertion labor. In reality, the engine of the modern forest
economy is knowledge and innovation. How we manage our forest
resources and extend their product applications will require
new practices, techniques, and be technology-driven.
Accelerating innovation in forest products and training a
skilled workforce which meets the current and emerging needs of
these new products and practices is key to meeting the
increasing global demand for low-carbon materials, chemicals,
and fuels that can come from our forests.
To build from our transitional assets and strengths and
strategically transition to an entire forest products sector
for local sustainability and global growth, in 2016 a unique
cross-sector collaboration called Forest Opportunity Roadmap
Maine, known as FOR/Maine, was initiated between industry,
communities, government, education, and nonprofits with the
support from the U.S. Economic Development Administration and
our main Congressional delegation. Not surprising, preparing
the workforce for the future forest products economy is one of
the primary goals identified by FOR/Maine. As the largest
generator of graduates in the state, a university can directly
impact the size and skill of the sector's workforce.
To inform how we specifically do this, I joined with
university colleagues in developing the first-of-its-kind
forest industry workforce development strategy for our state.
Our research determined that by 2035, 37 percent of Maine's
current workforce in the forest economy, 5,000 people, will be
at or beyond retirement age. Furthermore, as we transition to
new or emerging technologies, we will require an additional
2,600 positions.
In a separate UMaine study, surveyed forest products firms
noted a strong need for employee soft skills, along with
communication, database decision-making, and digital skills.
Professional development strategies must include both the
technical and soft skills.
To meet this need, our report recommends the development of
workforce pipelines through six strategic actions, many of
which may be relevant to your own districts and states for this
and other traditional industries. These actions are detailed in
my written testimony and linked report,* but I would like to
highlight a few key points, including implementing a
coordinated marketing and branding campaign showcasing career
opportunities in the sector to counter public misperceptions,
fostering greater education, outreach, and awareness of forest
sector opportunities with secondary school students, career
changers, and underrepresented populations and working with
rural communities on placemaking to support workforce
attraction and retention.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: the report is retained in Committee file and is
available at https://formaine.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/FORMaine-
Workforce-Report-Final_Revised_06.
2021.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To advance these actions and further scale and accelerate
the FOR/Maine efforts, UMaine is currently leading our
coalition in pursuing EDA Build Back Better Regional Challenge
funding to develop a northern forest bioeconomy cluster and
recently submitted our phase II proposal.
Our work and the workforce we are developing together has
never been more essential to Maine and applicable to our
nation's ability to sustainably manage and utilize our forest
resources; mitigate forest fire risks and invasives, sequester
carbon; improve air, water, and habitat; and protect the
economic foundation and identity of many of our rural
communities.
In closing, I would like to again thank the Committee and
APLU for this opportunity to speak today and for your interest
and support of our nation's forests and dependent citizens and
communities. I look forward to answering your questions. Thank
you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Neill follows:]

Prepared Statement of Shane R.C. O'Neill, Forest Industry Business
Development Manager, University of Maine; Member, Association of
Public and Land-grant Universities, Orono, ME
Good afternoon, Chair Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa, and
Members of the Subcommittee. My name is Shane O'Neill, and I serve as
the Forest Industry Business Development Manager at the University of
Maine: an R1 research university; the state's land, sea, and space
grant; and a proud member of the Association of Public & Land-grant
Universities (APLU), which helped invite me here.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on workforce challenges
and opportunities in the forestry and conservation sectors, an issue of
great importance to our state, which is nearly 90% forested--a number
relatively unchanged since European settlement. Since then, Maine's
forest has provided an ever-evolving suite of products of the highest
quality to the world, as has our nearly 3,500 miles of coastline. The
past and future health of Maine's rural communities is highly dependent
on our so-called ``heritage industries'': farming, fishing, and
forestry. Leveraging the vast natural resources from our fields, woods,
and waters to sustain these special places through these sectors relies
entirely upon our ability to innovate and access to skilled human
capital.
Currently, Maine's forest products industry employs more than
13,000 people across the state. But the nature of the industry, and the
jobs it supports, is rapidly changing--in great part through data-
driven modernization, application of AI and increasingly sophisticated
technologies--and so too must our education and training practices of
our future and incumbent workforce.
Three key factors have converged over the last few decades that
created the urgency, and opportunity, to transition to our next phase:
a sustainable forest bioeconomy. They are not unique to Maine, nor are
our strategies for moving forward. First, the impacts of climate change
on forest health are increasingly evident, whether it is through
temperature, drought, fire, invasive pests, muddy roads from early
thaws that prevent passage of logs and equipment or heavy rain events.
How we manage our forest resources and extend their application will
require new practices, techniques and be technology driven. Second, the
transition to a digital information age has drastically reduced the
demand for print and graphic paper. Mills that couldn't adapt to these
changing markets closed, causing their workers--more than 7,600 over
the last 20 years just in Maine--to lose their livelihoods. Third,
there is a growing understanding that sustainably managed forests and
their products are a pathway to reduce carbon emissions, both in
sequestration in a growing forest, and storage in long life cycle
forest products. Adapting the management of our forests and advanced
products manufacturing has become more technically intensive with
increasing processing automation, advanced material science and
engineering, remote sensing, machine learning modeling, and growth
forecasting using advanced artificial intelligence systems.
From these realizations and changing markets, exciting
opportunities are emerging that if we strategically partner, invest,
and innovate, will ultimately diversify, strengthen, and sustain the
forest economy and the communities dependent upon it. Accelerating
innovation in forest products and training a skilled workforce which
meets the current and emerging needs of these new products and
practices is key to meeting the increasing global demand for low-carbon
materials, chemicals, and fuels that can come from forests
Currently, public perceptions and attitudes demonstrate a
disconnect from the reality of modern forestry. Many people view forest
management, harvesting, and products manufacture as ecologically
detrimental, and requiring low-tech, high-exertion labor. Some of these
perceptions are informed by images from long ago, where strength and
brawn were the tools required to be successful, and sustainability
wasn't standard practice. In reality, the engine of the modern forest
economy is knowledge: utilizing technology, automation, science and
engineering to increase the precision and positive impact of forest
management practices and commercialize new forest-based processes and
value-added products under the most sustainable and environmentally
friendly means possible. For example, the University of Maine is
pioneering the development and commercialization of value-added forest
bioproducts manufactured from low-value forest residuals, including
cellulosic nanofibrils for use in a multitude of products, biofuels
such as diesel and jet fuel directly offsetting petrochemical
consumption, and advanced materials including large scale 3D-printed
bioproducts for use in transportation infrastructure, housing and
manufacturing.
To build from our traditional assets and strengths and
strategically transition our entire forest products sector through
innovation and global assessment, in 2016 a unique cross-sector
collaboration called Forest Opportunity Roadmap/Maine \1\ (FOR/Maine)
was initiated between industry, communities, government, education, and
nonprofits with support from the U.S. Economic Development
Administration and our Maine Congressional Delegation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://formaine.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a founding member of FOR/Maine with extensive expertise, broad
relationships, statewide reach, and research and development capacity
across the forest economy and beyond (including that supported by
McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry through USDA National Institute
of Food and Agriculture), the University of Maine is critical to this
collaboration, providing knowledge-based information and innovations to
deliver on FOR/Maine's strategic objectives. And, as the largest
generator of graduates in the state, we can most impact the size and
skill of the workforce for this sector (and most others in Maine). To
facilitate partnership and progress, the university created the
position of Forest Industry Business Development Manager--the job I
currently hold. By serving as a focused sector advocate with subject
matter expertise and access to the full span of scientists and
engineers within our system, my work plays an important role in
bringing diverse stakeholders together to assess industry and community
needs, and collaboratively develop solutions that address needs and
include all vested voices, including those historically excluded.
Not surprisingly, preparing the workforce for the future forest
products economy is one of the primary goals identified by FOR/Maine,
and our high-level strategies toward this include attracting young
people into the industry in our oldest-in-the-nation state; ensuring
that new, replacement, and incumbent workers have the skills needed for
existing jobs, and preparing the workforce for emerging products and
technologies in the industry. To inform how we specifically do this, I
joined colleagues from UMaine's Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center \2\
and the University of Southern Maine Center for Business and Economic
Research \3\ to develop the first-of-its kind forest industry workforce
development strategy \4\ through analysis of current and projected
workforce and population trends, defining skill demands for current and
emerging careers, and directed surveys and interviews with forest
industry employers in the state.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://mcspolicycenter.umaine.edu/.
\3\ https://www.mainecber.com/.
\4\ https://formaine.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/FORMaine-
Workforce-Report-Final_
Revised_06.2021.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our research determined that by 2035, 37% of Maine's current forest
economy workforce will be at or beyond retirement age, with the oldest
workers currently concentrated in harvesting and logging. This
translates to approximately 5,000 positions that will need to be filled
in the next 15 years. As the older workforce exits, they take with them
decades of learned experience that is not easily replicable, compelling
companies to identify new ways to help transfer knowledge and train
younger employees. Furthermore, as Maine transitions into newer
emerging technologies, it is estimated that an additional 2,600
positions will be added. Many of these will be highly skilled,
specialized STEM positions like photogrammetry, industrial engineers,
process technicians, and programmers. However, it should be noted that
in a recent UMaine study of 177 forest product firms referenced in our
report noted a strong need for employee soft skills such as managing
uncertainty, flexibility, adaptability, along with communication, data-
based decision making and digital skills. Professional development must
include both the technical and soft skills to increase employee
success.
To meet this need, our report recommends the development of
workforce pipelines through six strategic actions, many of which may be
relevant in your own districts and states for this and other
traditional industries:

(1)  Design, prepare, and execute a coordinated marketing and
branding campaign that showcases the career opportunities
in forest products in Maine, as careers in the sector are
often overlooked in part because of the negative publicity
in recent years due to mill closures or perceptions about
the types of jobs available;

(2)  Foster greater education, outreach, and awareness of
opportunities in the forest products sector to Maine
secondary school students and advisors, leveraging the
younger generation's interest in sustainability and
stewardship;

(3)  Cultivate out-of-state workforce pipelines and integrate with
statewide attraction and recruitment efforts, including
from labor pools in forest product cluster regions
elsewhere, Veterans looking to resettle after their
service, and those who enjoy the outdoors;

(4)  Leverage existing workforce infrastructure to increase
coordination and engagement and expand existing internship,
apprenticeship, and training programs including through
university research learning experiences and inclusion of
justice or substance impacted individuals;

(5)  Community placemaking is important in workforce attraction and
retention including access to affordable housing and
quality health care; and

(6)  Maintain systems to continuously monitor and evaluate workforce
conditions and requirements across the industry to be
responsive in developing and adapting workforce development
initiatives.

To advance these actions, and further develop and scale our FOR/
Maine efforts, UMaine is currently leading our coalition in pursuing
EDA Build Back Better funding to develop a Northern Forest bioeconomy
cluster, and recently submitted our Phase II proposal.
Our work, and the workforce we are developing, has never been more
essential to Maine and our nation's ability to sustainably manage and
utilize our nation's forest resources, mitigate forest fire and
invasive risks, sequester carbon, improve clean air, water, and
habitat, and protect the economic foundation and identity of many rural
communities.
In closing, I would like to again thank the Committee and APLU for
the opportunity to speak with you today, and for your interest and
support of our nation's forests and the citizens and communities
reliant on its rich resources. I look forward to answering your
questions.

The Chair. Thank you very much.
Our next witness is Mr. Keith Olander, who is the Dean of
Agricultural Studies at Central Lakes College in Staples,
Minnesota. Mr. Olander, you are an innovator in this space, and
I appreciate the opportunity to hear from you today. And I now
recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF KEITH OLANDER, DEAN OF AGRICULTURAL STUDIES,
CENTRAL LAKES COLLEGE, STAPLES, MN

Mr. Olander. Chair Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
share my passion for agriculture and I am going to share a few
of the practices we are employing to support workforce
development and employer retention specific to Natural
Resources Conservation Service, or NRCS.
For context, I grew up on a farm and continue to farm
today. I am an agriculture education educator of 28 years with
experience in high school, community college faculty, and now
as program administrator. I live my life in and around
agriculture and have developed a passion for workforce
development to make our youth aware of the opportunities that
await them in agriculture, food, and natural resources, or
AFNR. Furthermore, the work continues in connecting secondary,
postsecondary, and industry partners, and our work focuses
around streamlining these career pathways that minimizes
barriers for our youth to gain successful careers in AFNR.
Now, specific to the relationship that we had between
Central Lakes College and Natural Resources Conservation
Service, there are some specific practices I will go over, and
I am going to cover three of them and try to break them out a
little bit in an organization for you. First of all, we are
enhancing college curriculum to better align the natural
resource program outcomes with the NRCS employee
qualifications. And really this is for on-farm production
knowledge. The course work focuses on partnering concepts in
natural resource management and agronomic practices on the farm
in a way to develop a student's skill set that can assist
farmers in problem-solving challenges for farmers who desire to
both improve environmental impacts and maintain economic
viability.
Second, we are providing an internship program that is a
direct-hire approach of community college students directly to
NRCS, and that experiences include exposure to a broad array of
NRCS employee opportunities collaborating with college faculty
to assure a superior college education experience.
And third, the one I want to spend just a few minutes on,
is the practice where we provide professional development for
early-career NRCS employees that is immersive in design. This
supports employee success in connecting with farmers and
improving job retention. Early results indicate that we have
low confidence level in communicating with farmers about their
particular operations simply due to a lack of farm literacy.
All of these trainings take place on a 2,000 acre farm complex
at Central Lakes College Ag and Energy Research Center.
The employees experience over 30 hours of on-farm
experience that include these particular pieces: First, tillage
practices, tools, equipment, and technology. The employees are
driving tillage machines with current technology to learn a
farmer view of things like carbon sequestration as it relates
to things like reduced tillage concepts.
Second, planting operations and technology, they are
describing, setting, and operating planters that are employed
with GIS guidance, precision seed placement, and variable rate
technology to better align the farmer profitability with
environmental enhancements.
Third, they experience crop harvest operations and data
output. Operating harvest equipment to view and understand the
yield, mapping technologies that produce yield maps, which
supports the NRCS employees' ability to match field production
capacity and environmental outcomes to find precision, site-
based solutions to enhance the farm's ability in improving soil
health and water quality.
And the fourth component of this particular immersive
training is soil health, cover crops, and livestock grazing. So
this component is the idea that we educate the cover crop
varieties through identification and potential adoption
species.
Additionally, we have plots in place where we are able to
take the employees out to places where they are planted within
row crops, variable row width scenarios, and different planting
times to ascertain the best outcomes for both the agronomic
crop and the cover crop success.
And then finally, we demonstrate raising of cover crops
that we have created an initial set of economic data with the
outcomes of pairing row crop production with cover crops and
livestock grazing into our system. And that was a desired
outcome of the state leadership of NRCS.
So as we look to all three of these particular practices,
the curriculum changes, the internships, and the professional
development have had a positive impact according to our pre-
and post-surveys. This includes feedback from the students in
the course, the interns, and the employees that participated in
the trainings. Our goal is to expand these programs with NRCS,
and we hope to see the option for their staff to learn and grow
in a professional setting to strengthen the agency overall.
I am also aware that through our partnerships with other
community colleges in other states like the C2A3 Alliance
(Community College Alliance for Agriculture Advancement), that
there is interest in replicating elements of our work in their
regions to serve students better and support NRCS and its
mission. Currently, this type of partnership across the country
is in its infancy.
Madam Chair, I appreciate the opportunity that I have had
to share comments, and I look forward to answering questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Olander follows:]

Prepared Statement of Keith Olander, Dean of Agricultural Studies,
Central Lakes College, Staples, MN
Thank you, [Madam Chair], Member[s] of the Committee, for the
opportunity share my passion for agriculture and a few of the practices
we are employing to support workforce development and employee
retention.
For context, I grew up on a farm and continue to farm to this day.
I am an agriculture education educator of 28 years with experience in
high school teaching, as a community college faculty, and as a program
administrator. I live my life in and around agriculture and have
developed a passion of workforce development to make our youth aware of
the opportunities that await them in Agriculture, Food, and Natural
Resources (AFNR) careers. Furthermore, the work continues in connecting
our secondary, post-secondary, and industry partners. Our work focuses
around streamlining a career pathway that minimizes the barriers for
our youth to gain a successful career in AFNR.
Specific practices we are deploying to meet workforce challenges
are threefold:

1.  We are enhancing community college curriculum to better align
natural resources outcomes with NRCS employee employment
qualifications, i.e.,--farm production knowledge. This
coursework focuses on partnering concepts in natural
resource management with agronomic practices on the farm in
a way to develop students skillset who can assist farmers
in problem solving challenges for farmers who desire to
improve environmental impacts and maintain economically
viability.

1.  Second, we provide an internship program that is a direct hire
approach of community college students directly into NRCS
experiences that include exposure to an array of NRCS
employee opportunities collaborating with college faculty
to assure a superior educational experience.

3.  Our third practice provides professional development for early
career NRCS employees that is immersive in design. This
supports employees' success in connecting to farmers and
job retention. Early results indicate many have a low
confidence level in communicating with farmers about their
particular operations due to lack of farm literacy. All of
these trainings take place on a 2,000 acre complex, the
Central Lakes College Ag & Energy Research Center.

a.  Employees experience over 30 hours of on-farm experiences
that include:

i.  Tillage practices, tools, equipment, and technology.

1.  Driving tillage machines with current technology to
learn farmer
view of carbon sequestration/reduced tillage
concepts.

ii.  Planting operations and technology.

1.  Describing, setting, and operating planters that are
employed
with GIS guidance, precision seed placement,
and variable rate
technology to better align farmer profitability
with environ-
mental enhancements.

iii.  Crop Harvest operations and data output.

1.  Operating harvest equipment to view and understand
the yield
mapping technologies that produce yield maps,
which supports
the NRCS employee's ability to match field
production capacity
with environmental outcomes to find precision
site-based solu-
tions to enhance the farms profitability and
improving soil health
and water quality.

iv.  Soil Health, Cover Crops, and Livestock grazing.

1.  A final component to this professional development is
the edu-
cation of cover crop varieties through ID, and
potential adoption
of species.

2.  Additionally, walking through plots where cover crops
have been
planted within row crops, variable row width
scenarios, and dif-
ferent planting times to ascertain best
outcomes for agronomic
crop outcomes and cover crop success.

3.  Finally, we demonstrate grazing of cover crops and
have created
initial data on the economic outcomes of paring
row crop produc-
tion with cover crops and livestock grazing
into that system.

All three of these practices: curriculum changes, internships, and
professional development have had a positive impact based on pre/post
surveys. This includes feedback for students in the course, on
internship, and the employees that participate in the trainings.
Our goal is to expand this program with NRCS and we hope to see
option for their staff to learn and grow in their professional setting
them to strengthen the agency.
I am also aware that through our partnerships with other community
colleges in other states that there is interest in replicating elements
of our work in their regions to serve students better and support NRCS
in its mission. Currently this type of partnership across the country
is in its infancy.
[Madam Chair:] I thank you for your time and I am open to any
questions that the Members may have.

The Chair. Thank you very much.
Our fourth witness today is Dr. Margaret Holzer, who is a
member of the K-12 Committee of the Soil Science Society of
America. Dr. Holzer, as an experienced educator, you have so
much to offer regarding this topic, and I thank you for being
here. I now recognize you for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARGARET A. HOLZER, Ph.D., PAST CHAIR, K-12
COMMITTEE, SOIL SCIENCE SOCIETY OF AMERICA; SCIENCE STANDARDS
SPECIALIST, GREAT MINDS PBC
TM
, PhD
SCIENCE
'
, MADISON, WI

Dr. Holzer. Okay. Thank you, Chair Spanberger, Ranking
Member LaMalfa, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for
inviting me to speak today. My name is Dr. Margaret Holzer, and
I serve on the Soil Science Society of America's K-12
Committee.
The Soil Science Society of America is an international
scientific society that fosters a transfer of knowledge and
practices to sustain global soils. We are based in Madison,
Wisconsin, and founded in 1936. We are a professional home to
over 6,000 members and over 800 certified professionals
dedicated to advancing the field of soil science. Our
organization is dedicated to making soils science a dinner
table topic in every household.
For more than 16 years, our K-12 Committee has been in the
frontline designing instructional resources, providing
professional development for teachers, and supporting soil
scientists as they provide K-12 outreach. Through my
professional affiliations, I was asked to serve on this
committee in 2006, excitedly said yes given my passion for soil
science, and I have served on it ever since.
The charge of our committee is to increase interest and
awareness in soil science as a scientific pursuit and career
choice, especially among K-12 teachers and their students and
to work to integrate more information on soil science into
biology, chemistry, physics, and Earth science areas taught at
multiple grade levels. Please see the appendix of my written
testimony for detailed description of these activities, many of
which the NRCS funding assisted us in developing.
As impressive as our work is, there are challenges to
overcome in building awareness of soil science and conservation
and the career possibilities in each. I personally love soil
science and connecting my students with the role soils play in
every aspect of their lives. But how do we engage classrooms
located where the landscape includes lawns, asphalt, concrete,
and their agricultural products come in little cellophane-
covered trays?
There are four challenges and potential solutions to
consider when designing solutions for our workforce needs.
Earth and space science courses are on equal footing with life
science and physical sciences through middle school grades.
However, high school students have limited access to full-year,
high school-level Earth science courses where soil science and
conservation are key topics within those courses. The solution
to this challenge is for school districts across the country to
reconsider their high school science course sequence. This is
key, especially for districts where the local landscape
includes lawns, asphalt, and concrete.
For many teachers who would like to include soil science in
their curriculums, there is a challenge in accessing outdoor
spaces and laboratory materials needed to run basic soil
laboratories in their classrooms. Our K-12 Committee efforts
have most certainly played a role in the needed effort for
support, but those state and local entities that can share
their expertise, provide access to soil samples, basic
laboratory supplies, their efforts are welcome, too. County
extension offices might consider an awareness campaign to alert
schools to the resources they may have to offer.
If high school coursework is limited to soil science and
conservation, a workaround is to engage students in events that
are extensions of the classroom. A few are already mentioned
but I will reiterate. For example, the competitive World Food
Prize Global Youth Institute is a phenomenal opportunity for
students from around the world and outside our country to
discuss solutions for food security issues and learn about
extensive opportunities and careers available in agriculture.
Another impactful program is the national competition
called Envirothon, which has five topic areas, of which soils
and land use is one. Students participating in this competition
learn about available careers while working directly with real
issues that are meaningful to their lives. In each of these
competitions mentors support students and are role models that
could influence the career choices of their mentees. Ongoing
funding of these programs such as these, as well as Future
Farmers of America and 4-H, will ensure that our students are
engaged with soils and our environment.
And finally, if students are unaware that they could major
in soil science or it is buried in another major, they are
going to be unaware of career choices they might have, and they
are not going to choose a college that has soil science as a
major.
Solutions that may encourage additional majors in soil
science from a secondary level are strategic marketing of
higher education soil science and conservation programs,
connecting soil science professionals with high school
students, support for dual-credit programs that provide high
school students with college-level soil science and
conservation courses and the college credit that goes with
them, and provide high school students with internships in
conservation fields. The solutions could work for students who
live in rural, suburban, and urban regions of our country.
However, the key is that we are going to need a portfolio,
identify a portfolio of solutions that is difficult to clearly
identify what connects a student to college and career. We on
the Soil Science Society K-12 Committee are committed to
finding and supporting the items found in a portfolio of
solutions that help build that pipeline of our next-generation
of soil science and conservation careers and stewards of our
natural environment. We love soils and want others to love it,
too. Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Holzer follows:]

Prepared Statement of Margaret A. Holzer, Ph.D., Past Chair, K-12
Committee, Soil Science Society of America; Science Standards
Specialist, Great Minds PBC
TM
, PhD Science
'
,
Madison, WI
[Chair] Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa and Members of the
Subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. My name
is Dr. Margaret Holzer, and I serve on the K-12 Committee of the Soil
Science Society of America K-12 Committee. For over 30 years, I taught
secondary and higher education courses in Earth and space science,
environmental science, and physical geography. Currently I am a science
standards specialist at Great Minds PBC.
The Soil Science Society of America (SSSA) is an international
scientific society that fosters the transfer of knowledge and practices
to sustain global soils. Based in Madison, WI, and founded in 1936,
SSSA is the professional home for 6,000+ members and 800+ certified
professionals dedicated to advancing the field of soil science. The
Society provides information about soils related to conservation, crop
production, environmental quality, forestry, ecosystem sustainability,
bioremediation, waste management, urban uses, mining and reclamation,
and more. SSSA is dedicated to making soil a dinner table topic in
every household. Members share the story of soil through the Soils
Matter blog and through outreach to K-12 students and teachers in
addition to supporting scientific knowledge exchange through an annual
meeting and several scholarly journals.
Soils are more than the material under our feet; as a matter of
fact, without soils, we would be ``Hungry, Naked, Homeless, and
Breathless,'' as a colleague on our committee stresses during his K-12
outreach programs. By acting out this little skit, students come to the
``ah-ha'' moment that soils are vital to our survival. We can no longer
assume students will learn about the soil beneath their feet through
the light touches found in textbooks and local curricula; we need to
explicitly integrate soil science across all grade levels taking
advantage of a variety of entry points in doing so. For more than 16
years, the Soil Science Society of America (SSSA) K-12 Committee has
been on the frontline designing instructional resources, providing
professional development for teachers, and supporting soil scientists
who provide K-12 outreach. I am excited to share a little about our
organization, our committee, our work, and some challenges ahead in
encouraging our next generation of soil scientists and
conservationists.
In July 2008, Dig It! The Secrets of Soil exhibition opened for an
18 month run at the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of
Natural History (of which SSSA was a Founding Sponsor). In preparation
for the exhibit, SSSA was eager to build resources for those viewing
the exhibit and resources for K-12 teachers. Thus, the SSSA K-12
Committee was formed in 2006 and is made up of a group of SSSA members
passionate about telling the story of soils. Through my professional
affiliations, I was asked to serve on this committee in 2006, and I
have served on it ever since. Soil science has been a part of my life
since I was a little girl when my father was a Ph.D. candidate at
Rutgers University studying soil science applications for his
dissertation. Soil samples and soil sieves were regularly fixtures in
our kitchen. Once I became a teacher, soil science was always a central
part of my curricula.
The charge to our committee is to increase interest and awareness
of soil science as a scientific pursuit and career choice, especially
among K-12 teachers and their students and work to integrate more
information on soil science into biology, chemistry, physics, and Earth
science areas taught at multiple grade levels. In addition, the
American Society of Agronomy and Crop Science Society of America have
also developed K-12 committees to provide teachers with resources for
their classrooms and spark interest in their specific sciences as a
pathway to career interest. Since the committee formed, we have
developed:

Three K-12 websites (with over 800,000 visits in 2020)

Published four K-12 focused books (for use in formal or
informal classrooms or at home)

Developed two train-the-trainer workshops, two webinars, and
two teachers guides

Curated over 200 lessons, activities, and reading resources
for K-12 teachers

Developed state soil booklets for all 50 states and Guam

Partnered with other organizations to develop and
disseminate materials for K-12 teachers

Produced I ``Heart'' Soil stickers in 15 languages and have
distributed over 500,000 stickers

And developed twelve 2 minute animated videos on various
aspects of soil, as part of the 2015 International Year of
Soils.

(Please see the Appendix for a detailed description of these
activities.)

As impressive as our work is, there are challenges to overcome in
building awareness of soil science and conservation, and the careers
possibilities in each. I personally love soil science and connecting my
students with the role soils play in every aspect of their lives. But
how do we engage classrooms located where the landscape includes lawns,
asphalt, and concrete, and agricultural products come in little
cellophane covered trays? Fortunately, those who wrote the A Framework
for K12 Science Education (2012) \1\ and the subsequent standards
adapted or adopted in 44 states and the District of Columbia
(represents 71% of our students), included soil science in the Earth
science core ideas for learning. Although Earth and space science is on
equal footing with life and physical science in elementary and middle
school, at the high school level, it has taken a backseat to biology,
chemistry, and physics in many states. The intention is for all
students to develop proficiency in all science standards, and therefore
our high school biology, chemistry, and physics teachers must integrate
teach Earth and space science topics in their courses, while having
little to no training in the Earth and space sciences. The domino-
effect of this course sequence is that our high school students are not
introduced to fields of study such as soil science and conservation. A
solution to this career barrier is to rethink our high school science
course sequence such as combining physics and chemistry into one
course, which will ensure students receive quality instruction in Earth
and space science while in high school and build that awareness of
career pathways in this field of study.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Research Council. 2012. A Framework for K-12 Science
Education: Practices, Crosscutting Concepts, and Core Ideas.
Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/
10.17226/13165.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In my situation, it was easy to get my students outside to dig soil
samples, and handle soil with the purpose of figuring out the role
soils play in their existence, and to recognize that we need to
conserve it through effective strategies in land-use development,
forestry, and agriculture. However, for many teachers who would like to
include soil science in their curriculums, there is a challenge in
accessing outdoor spaces and laboratory materials needed to run basic
soil labs in their classrooms. Our K-12 Committee efforts have most
certainly played a role in this needed support, but those state and
local entities that can share their expertise, provide access to soil
samples, and basic laboratory supplies, their efforts are welcome too.
Teachers need to know that these resources are available, and county
extension offices might consider an awareness campaign to alert schools
to the resources they may have to offer.
As much as the career pipeline for soil science and careers is in
the forefront of our work on the K-12 Committee, there is a challenge
to connect our efforts with the efforts elsewhere. Our instructional
materials include careers; however, it is up to the classroom teacher
to enact our materials. A workaround for this is to engage students in
events that are extensions of the classroom. For example, the World
Food Prize Global Youth Institute is a phenomenal opportunity for
students from around and outside our country to discuss solutions for
food security issues and learn about the extensive opportunities and
careers available in agriculture. This awareness is especially
impactful for those students who live in areas covered by lawns,
asphalt, and concrete. Another impactful program is the national
competition called Envirothon which has five topic areas, of which
soils and land use is one. The mission of the Envirothon is as follows:

``The Envirothon mission is accomplished by developing in
young people an understanding of the principles and practices
of natural resource management and ecology and through practice
dealing with complex resource management decisions. The
following goals and objectives should be used as a guide to
develop effective curricula, educational resources, and testing
scenarios.'' \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Envirothon webpage: https://envirothon.org/about-us/missions-
goals-and-objectives/.

Students participating in this competition learn about available
careers, while working directly with real issues that have meaning to
their lives. In each of these competitions, mentors support students
and are role models who could influence career choices of their
mentees. Ongoing funding of programs such as these will ensure more
students are engaging with soils and our environment.
While students are in high school, they are gravitating towards
their initial college major and are considering colleges that house
those majors. Students do not know what they do not know. For example,
if they are unaware that they could major in soil science or are
unaware of the myriad of career choices they would have, then they are
not going to select a college to major in soil science. Similarly, if
soil science is intertwined in an agriculture department in a
university, and students are not interested in agriculture as a major,
then they will not select that university. Solutions that may encourage
additional majors in soils science and careers, are strategic marketing
of higher-education soil science and conservation programs, connecting
soil science professionals with high school students, build awareness
in teachers of soil science and conservation careers, support for dual-
credit programs that provide high school students with semester or
year-long soil science and conservation courses and the college credit
that goes with them, and provide high school student internships in
conservation fields. These solutions could work for students who live
in regions of our country where agriculture is prominent, or in regions
of our country where urban and suburban landscapes are most prominent.
However, the key is that we need to identify a portfolio of solutions
since it is difficult to clearly identify what connects a student to a
college or a career. For some students it may have been the dynamic
teacher, or participating in a competition, or visiting a college soil
science laboratory that provided that needed connection. We on the SSSA
K-12 Committee are committed to finding and supporting the items found
in a portfolio of solutions to help fill the pipeline with our next
generation of soil science and conservation careers and stewards of our
natural environment. We love soils, and we want others to love it too!
My intention was to provide an outline our committee work and
highlight some career challenges and solutions through the lens of the
K-12 arena. Our discussions today will bring to the table additional
lenses as others share their experiences, and together we can build a
robust portfolio of solutions to the soil science and conservation
career pipeline issue. Thank you for the opportunity to testify before
this panel. I would be glad to address your questions and I look
forward to the discussion.
Appendix
Soil Science Society of America K-12 Committee Additional Information
History
In July 2008 through December 2009, Dig It! The Secrets of Soil
exhibition was presented at the Smithsonian Institution's National
Museum of Natural History (of which SSSA was a Founding Sponsor). In
preparation, the SSSA Board of Directors approved a K-12 Committee in
2006 and a group of SSSA members got to work. The charge to the
committee was to increase interest and awareness of soil science as a
scientific pursuit and career choice, especially among K-12 teachers
and their students and work to integrate more information on soil
science into biology, chemistry, physics, and Earth science areas
taught at multiple grade levels. The American Society of Agronomy and
Crop Science Society of America have also developed K-12 committees to
provide teachers with resources for their classrooms and spark interest
in their specific sciences as a pathway to career interest.
Activity Centers
Activities center around five areas:

Assessment and Standards--connecting soil to state and
national standards

Curriculum Development--developing new curricula for K-12
instruction

Website Development--enhancing the K-12 website resources

Books--publish books relevant to the K-12 audience

Develop and Disseminate Soils Information--for all audiences
Accomplishments
During the 16 years the SSSA K-12 Committee has been active, they
have achieved an exceptional amount. Read on to learn more.
Publications and Lesson Plans
Soil! Get the Inside Scoop and supplemental Teachers Guide
The book explores the basics of soil and how soil is part of our
life--the food we eat, the air we breathe, the water we drink, the
houses we live in, and more. A free online teachers guide is available
for each chapter of the book--with accompanying PowerPoints,
definitions, activities, quiz questions, and more.
Know Soil, Know Life and supplemental Educators Guide
This 200-page book is targeted at high-school students. Chapters
include Physical Properties of Soil and Soil Formation, Soil
Ecosystems/Biology, Chemical Properties of Soil and Soil Fertility,
Classification/Soil Mapping/Interpretation, Environmental Science/Soil
Conservation/Land Use Management, Soils and Biomes, Soil in History and
Modern Life, and Career Opportunities. An online educators guide is
free for all educators to use, with overviews, PowerPoints, activities,
standards integration, and worksheets.
Curated Collection of Resources
We've curated a collection of lessons, hands-on activities, labs,
readings, and more--all about soils and topics related to soils--and in
a searchable database. Some are posted directly by SSSA others we have
reviewed and recommend. Searchable areas include by grade level, topic
area, resource type, and NGSS standard. Over 200 resources are in the
database. In addition, the SSSA K-12 committee reviews submissions for
the addition of resources to the database.
Soils Unit
Designed for middle-school, this soils-focused unit with lessons
that provide students with a basic understanding of the fundamentals of
soil science through the integration of disciplinary core ideas,
science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts in the
lessons, investigations, and activities
Coolbean the Soybean (Crop Science Society of America)
Coolbean the Soybean is a super bean! Find out how Coolbean became
so special with the help of scientists, how to farm to help the
environment, photosynthesis, how agronomists keep Coolbean safe, a
soybean's life cycle, and how soybeans feed billions of people and are
used for many products. All in alignment with common core standards for
reading and science. Aimed at Grades 3-5.
Agronomy Grow with It! (American Society of Agronomy)
Explore the science of agriculture--Agronomy! Agronomy is the
science we use to grow the crops that feed us, feed our livestock, and
even fuel our cars. It's a science that tackles the big challenge of
our future: How can we grow enough food to end world hunger--and, at
the same time, adapt to a changing climate and protect our environment?
Meet 20 real agronomists who face that challenge every day. Seven
sections cover main topics in agronomy and align with basic science
topics in the Next Generation Science Standards: Agronomists Feed the
World
Crops: Sooo Much More than Food
Problems with
Pests
Bringing Crops and Livestock to the Farm . . . Together

Water Matters! Getting Enough . . . Keeping it Safe

Soil: We Gotta Have It, But Will We?
Coping With Climate
Change Audience: Aimed at Grades 6-8, of interest to older and younger
students alike!
State Soil Booklets
An in-depth, easy to read booklet (4-8 pages each) with information
on each state soil. The booklets include a brief history of the origin
of the state soil, where the state soil is found, importance and uses,
limitations, management, soil formation, ecoregions and land use, a
glossary, and additional resources.
Webinars
The K12 committee has produced two webinars for K-12 educators,
focused on soil science at different grade levels:

Soils: Fundamental for Life

This webinar focused on basics, formation, characteristics, and
fertility (the ability of a soil to sustain plant growth by
providing plant nutrients and favorable habitats for plant
growth).

Soil Physics, Chemistry, and Biology . . . Oh My!

Soil is so much more than what food is grown in, we walk on, or
move out of the way to build houses or buildings on. It's
complex, life-giving, and is critical for a balanced ecosystem.
Attendees learned about each area, why each is important, and
ideas for classroom activities. In addition, they heard about
career opportunities in soil science.
Partnerships

National Association of Conservation Districts (NACD)--
Stewardship Week on Soils (2009), review panel on scientific
resources

National Science Teachers Association (NSTA)--exhibiting,
annual workshop

National Earth Science Teachers Association--webinars,
share-a-thons, articles, promotions

American Geological Institute (AGI)--AGI hosts Earth Science
Week in cooperation with sponsors as a service to the
geoscience community. As an AGI member we develop a soil
science activity for the annual calendar and contribute to the
Earth Science Week kits which are distributed to 10,000+
teachers. Earth Science Week is held annually in October with
each year having a unique theme.
Dig It! Exhibition Activities
Two Train-the-Trainer Workshops were conducted at the Smithsonian
Exhibition--with over 60 teachers in the Washington DC area
participating, January and June 2009, with Project Learning Tree
members as the facilitators of the workshop.
The exhibit has also traveled to the Durham Museum, Omaha, NE,
Northwest Museum of Arts and Culture, Spokane, WA and will be heading
to the Bell Museum, St. Paul, MN. Staff and Members have participated
in educational events (such as ``Let's Get Dirty'' day) and SSSA has
provided educational materials, promotional items and books for
giveaways and raffles.
Outreach Activities
Websites
Soils for Teachers: Our teachers website features soils topic
areas, lessons/activities collection, free classroom resources,
definitions, an Ask a Soil Scientist feature. www.soils4teachers.org.
Soils for Kids: Our kids website features areas including all about
soil, fun with soil (activities), soil experiments, soil games, career
exploration, and soil in your community. www.soils4kids.org.
Agronomy for Teachers and Students: Our Agronomy and Crop Science
K-12 website features sections on what is agronomy, understanding
crops, pests and weeds, livestock, nutrients, water, soil health,
climate change and provides lessons and activities--both for teachers
and for students at various grade levels. It also features scientists
in different careers. www.agronomy4me.org.
Member Outreach Activities

Developed an online Career Profiles format for members to
tell their career story and have them upload to the SSSA
websites.

Ask a Soil Scientist program online--members volunteer,
select regions and topic areas--answer questions from general
public, students, and teachers. They may also volunteer to
speak in classrooms. 135 Members have registered to date.

A group of committee members participated in a NGSS
standards review via the SSSA Science Policy Office.
International Year of Soils--2015
The Soil Science Society of America played an integral part the
success of the 2015 International Year of Soils! We worked on raising
awareness of and promoting the sustainability of our limited soil
resources. SSSA members, recognizing that we all have a valuable role
in communicating vital information on soils, came together to develop
new activities and pull together already developed resources to assist
everyone interested in learning more about soils. All the resources on
our site are available for use. Key components included:

12 monthly videos on various aspects of soil and associated
activities.

K-12 Educators kit of resources

Coloring and Activity Book

Careers in Soil Science Career Poster
I ``Heart'' Soil
https://www.soils.org/stickers
Fifteen ``I Heart Soil'' stickers in different languages--another
fun way to get people excited about Soils!

The Chair. Thank you so very much.
Our fifth witness today is Ms. Marissa Jensen, the
education outreach program manager at Pheasants Forever and
Quail Forever. Ms. Jensen, you bring a unique perspective to
this hearing, and I recognize you now for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MARISSA JENSEN, MANAGER, EDUCATION & OUTREACH
CONSERVATION LEADERSHIP PROGRAM,
PHEASANTS FOREVER AND QUAIL FOREVER, SAINT PAUL, MN

Ms. Jensen. Thank you so much, Chair Spanberger, Ranking
Member LaMalfa, and Members of the Conservation and Forestry
Subcommittee. I am the Education and Outreach Conservation
Leadership Program Manager with Pheasants Forever and Quail
Forever based in St. Paul, Minnesota. I am here today
representing 750 community-based Pheasants Forever and Quail
Forever chapters and 400,000 members, volunteers, and
supporters who work every day to promote and implement
conservation and outdoor-related programs. Additionally, I am
here representing over 400 of my colleagues, many of whom
deliver boots-on-the-ground conservation on private and public
lands.
As one of the nation's largest employers of conservation
professionals, we know firsthand the importance of developing
and recruiting the next generation. Our organization's mission
goals are made possible through partnerships and funding from
our chapters and volunteers, NRCS conservation technical
assistance, and farm bill conservation programs. In addition to
funding and programs administered the Farm Service Agency, U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, state wildlife agencies, and many
more.
Since the inception of our farm bill biologist program in
South Dakota in 2003, we have leveraged funding and impacted
over 22 million acres in 40 states. This broad team of partners
delivers Federal and state voluntary conservation practices at
the community level, much of which comes from Title II farm
bill conservation programs. I am thrilled to be here
representing our efforts to reach future conservation
professionals.
I personally began my education and career in the
veterinary field. However, I found my true calling in wildlife
biology, and eventually, my journey with Pheasants Forever and
Quail Forever 4 years ago. I live in Omaha, Nebraska, with my
son and two bird dogs, and although my connection to the
outdoors was strong as a child, I did not grow up in a family
of hunters and was not interested in hunting for most of my
life. Once I learned about a hunter's role in conservation,
coupled with my love for the outdoors and the ability to
connect all of this to food, I went on my first hunt at the age
of 30, and I haven't looked back since.
Today, I would like to share what we are doing for the
future of conservation professionals. In 2006, our organization
began providing education for high school students through our
National Youth Leadership Council. This group of 25 students
from across the country have served as leaders within their age
group by providing inspiration, education, and advocacy for our
organization's mission. Many of these students have since
chosen a career in conservation or agriculture and have become
leaders among their peers in college and careers.
Through our National Youth Leadership Council and our
organization's commitment to developing conservation
professionals, we evaluated our efforts to grow this program.
Now, building on past success, we are expanding and
transitioning our National Youth Leadership Council into a new
program that will reach hundreds of students, Journey to
Conservation Careers. This exciting new program is currently in
its pilot phase and is aimed at reaching a larger, more diverse
audience of students who might not be familiar with what
conservation career opportunities even exist.
Our organization, like many other sectors, is recognizing a
downward trend of resumes and applications for open positions.
To address this concern and elevate our efforts, we have
partnered with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to recruit
the next generation of leaders through this unique and dynamic
program. We recognize the importance of meeting students where
they are at, to help break down barriers and participation and
work toward building an inclusive community and workforce. To
do this, we have developed a self-paced online certificate
program with Bellevue University in Nebraska. As part of the
course, students will have the opportunity to directly connect
with conservation professionals and gain hands-on experience
through job shadowing.
Earlier this year, we hosted our first conservation college
and virtual career fair. With minimal promotion and effort, the
event had over 160 registrations representing participants
across 34 states with requests for a repeat event. Journey to
Conservation Careers will offer scholarship opportunities to
help break down barriers and participation and reach
historically underrepresented communities. We'll do this by
working with high schools, environmental education associations
through marketing efforts and help from our partners.
I need to emphasize that the success of these programs and
efforts would not be possible without the numerous partnerships
that we have with the governmental and nongovernmental
entities. We are stronger together, and these programs and
practices emphasize the effectiveness of a partnership model.
We also must have sound conservation policies, science, and
adequate support to ensure that conservation programs are
effectively and efficiently implemented.
Finally, we recognize the importance of providing resources
and guidance for the next generation. Journey to Conservation
Careers can do just that, by delivering tools to meet students
where they are at.
Thank you, and I look forward to answering any questions
you may have.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Jensen follows:]

Prepared Statement of Marissa Jensen, Manager, Education & Outreach
Conservation Leadership Program, Pheasants Forever and Quail Forever,
Saint Paul, MN
[Chair] Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa, and Members of the
Conservation and Forestry Subcommittee, my name is Marissa Jensen and I
serve as the Education & Outreach Conservation Leadership Program
Manager with Pheasants Forever (PF) and Quail Forever (QF) based out of
St. Paul, Minnesota.
I am here today representing our 750 community-based Pheasants
Forever and Quail Forever chapters; and 400,000 members, volunteers,
and supporters who work every day to promote and implement conservation
programs across the country. Additionally, I am here representing over
400 members of my team who work for Pheasants Forever and Quail
Forever, many of whom deliver boots-on-the-ground services on private
and public lands. This team works one-on-one with state and Federal
partners, and landowners to help deliver critical conservation
practices. As one of the nation's largest employers of conservation
professionals, we know first-hand the importance of developing the next
generation who will work with agriculture producers and land managers
to implement conservation programs now and into the future.
As ``The Habitat Organizations,'' Pheasants Forever and Quail
Forever's mission is to ``conserve pheasants, quail, and other wildlife
through habitat improvements, public access, education, and
conservation advocacy.'' This is meaningful work, and one we do not and
cannot accomplish alone. Beginning in South Dakota in 2003, our Farm
Bill Wildlife Biologist program has helped leverage funding with state
and Federal agencies and numerous partners, with the Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) being a significant partner in these
efforts. These partnerships have worked to develop cooperative
biologist positions that provide one-on-one conservation technical
assistance to private landowners interested in implementing
conservation practices. Supported by funding from NRCS Conservation
Technical Assistance and farm bill conservation programs, as well as
the Farm Service Agency, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, state wildlife
agencies, and others, our staff have directly impacted over 22,000,000
acres, with active partnerships in 40 states. This dedicated team
delivers Federal and state voluntary conservation practices and
programs at the county and community level, much of which comes from
farm bill conservation programs that reduce soil erosion, improve water
quality and wildlife habitat, and provide a host of other ecosystem
benefits. Thanks to these partnerships over the last nearly 20 years,
they have been one of the most successful, and largest boots-on-the-
ground implementation efforts in the country.
My Journey to Conservation
I am thrilled to be here today, representing my team of
conservation professionals, members, and volunteers. In addition, I
would like to share my journey to a career in conservation. I am a
biologist by education and worked as an emergency veterinary technician
prior to my career shift into wildlife and habitat conservation.
Throughout my career, I have learned how to navigate temporary
positions through Nebraska Game and Parks Commission in various roles.
Four years ago, I began my journey with Pheasants Forever and Quail
Forever, and I am excited to help the next generation of conservation
leaders find their place in their careers.
I live in Omaha, Nebraska with my son and two bird dogs. Although I
have lived a life in the city, my parents were born and raised in the
small, rural town of Minden, Nebraska and I continue to stay connected
to this community. This town has provided me with a framework of
knowledge regarding land management and conservation practices that
benefit us all, which I continue to build upon to this day. At an early
age, I learned the importance of habitat from my father and
grandfather's backyard garden full of milkweed and monarchs, and along
with this, the knowledge of the impact one has, even from our own
backyards.
Although my connection to the outdoors was strong, I did not grow
up in a family of hunters and was not exposed to or interested in
hunting for most of my life. With no previous knowledge of how
conservation happens or is funded, I never made the connection between
the outdoors, wildlife, funding, and conservation. Once I gained this
knowledge, coupled with my love for spending time outdoors and the
ability to connect this to food, I went on my first hunt at the age of
thirty and have not looked back since. In an effort to inspire others,
I joined colleagues in the field to share my story as an adult-onset
hunter. This video can be viewed, here.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://projectupland.com/hunting-videos/never-too-late-an-
adult-onset-hunter-story-2/.*
* Editor's note: the video is retained in Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
National Youth Leadership Council
Today, I want to tell you about what we are doing as an
organization to ensure that there are passionate people in the field of
conservation into the future. In 2006, PF & QF began a new endeavor to
work with and provide education for the next generation of conservation
leaders through our National Youth Leadership Council. This group has
historically included about twenty-five high school students from
across the country who are interested in being leaders within their age
group and providing inspiration, education, and advocacy for our
organization's mission.
Our group of talented youth have made the trip to Washington, D.C.
to see first-hand, how important the legislative and administrative
processes are in our great Country. They develop their professionalism
and learn how to be leaders for the conservation values we share. Many
of these students report back years later, sharing the impact just one
trip to Washington, D.C. had on their career path.
Many of these young adults have since chosen a career path in
conservation or agriculture, and as such, have become leaders among
their peers in college and careers. Additionally, some of our students
have shown their leadership skills by serving our country in the
military. All of them will be--and have been--future leaders in
conservation, either professionally, or in their personal lives as
supporters and volunteers in their communities.
Through our National Youth Leadership Council and the
organization's growth in conservation leaders, we had the ability to
evaluate and refocus our efforts and grow this program to include
hundreds of students who want to make a difference in their communities
and beyond. We will do this as we transition our National Youth
Leadership Council into Journey to Conservation Careers--a program
designed for high school students who have an interest in a career in
conservation.
Journey to Conservation Careers
This exciting new addition is currently in its pilot phase and is
aimed toward reaching a larger, more diverse audience of students. We
recognize the importance of meeting students and participants where
they are at, to help break down barriers in participation and work
toward building an inclusive community and workforce.
To do this, we have partnered with Bellevue University (Bellevue,
NE) to develop a self-paced, online curriculum where students will
cover three unique modules: Conservation Past, Present, and Future;
Upland Bird Biology and Ecology; and Conservation Responsibility.
During the third module, students will have the opportunity to gain
hands-on experience and start learning how to network and build their
community through a job shadowing opportunity with those in the
conservation field within Pheasants Forever, Quail Forever, the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service, and hopefully other Federal and state
agencies, and conservation organizations.
Monthly virtual webinars will take place as part of this program,
where students will have the opportunity to ``meet'' conservation
career professionals and leaders from across the country. Through these
sessions, students will have the chance to ask questions and learn what
tools and resources are available to set them up for success.
Additionally, Journey to Conservation Careers will offer
scholarship opportunities for students in our efforts and priority to
reach historically underrepresented communities and break down barriers
to participation in the program. We will do this by reaching out and
working directly with high school teachers and counselors,
environmental education associations within each state, marketing and
outreach efforts, and with the help from many of our partners.
Pheasants Forever and Quail Forever, like many other sectors, are
recognizing a downward trend of resumes and applications for open
positions. We know that our partners with Federal and state agencies
are experiencing the same phenomenon. To elevate our efforts, the
organization partnered with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to host
its first Conservation College and Virtual Career Fair, as part of our
Journey to Conservation Careers efforts, in February of 2022.
This pilot event focused on ten ``virtual'' booths which included
nine of our partners from Federal to state agencies, universities, and
nonprofit organizations. With minimal promotion and effort, the event
had over 160 registrations with an 82% attendance rate on the day of
the event. Additionally, over 34 states were represented in attendance.
The event was open to the public in an effort to gauge interest in
this type of event. The participants' education and experience levels
ranged from high school to post-doctorate students and career
professions. High school teachers logged on with classrooms to provide
an educational experience for their students throughout the day.
Every year, Pheasants Forever and Quail Forever hosts National
Pheasant Fest and Quail Classic, which historically brings in over
30,000 attendees, as well as state, Federal, and nonprofit partners.
Our vision for the future with Journey to Conservation Careers is to
host a Natural Resources Conference for these students on the front end
of Pheasant Fest and Quail Classic. With students arriving ahead of the
show, they will have an opportunity to meet leaders and inspiring
speakers, connect with like-minded students, and start building their
own conservation community.
Closing Statement
I want to emphasize that the success of these programs and efforts
would not be possible without the numerous partnerships that we have
with the governmental and non-governmental entities, including the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
state fish and wildlife agencies, the National Fish and Wildlife
Foundation, and other national, state, and local agencies and
organizations.
We also need sound conservation policy, science, and adequate
support to ensure that conservation programs are effectively
implemented. We need to ensure that the next generation of conservation
leaders have the education and experience to become champions of our
natural resources.
Finally, we all know the importance of inspiring the next
generation of conservation leaders and land stewards, and with the
partnerships and resources we have developed, we can provide the tools
and guidance necessary to help these students begin their journey with
the right foot forward. Journey to Conservation Careers can deliver
these resources and guidance, to meet students where they are at.
Thank you and I look forward to answering any questions you may
have.

The Chair. Thank you so very much.
And at this time I will yield to Ranking Member LaMalfa to
introduce our sixth and final witness.
Mr. LaMalfa. Well, thank you again, Madam Chair. As I
mentioned, Tracy Schohr is someone I have known for many years,
her and her family here in the same county I live in here in
northern California. She is currently on the University of
California Cooperative Extension with the livestock and natural
resources as an advisor for Butte, Plumas, and Sierra Counties
here in northern California. In this role, she provides
conservation technical support to ranchers, land managers, and
agencies regarding livestock production and conservation. Tracy
conducts research in the region focused on irrigated pasture,
invasive species, predators in mountain meadows. Recent
catastrophic fires, the Camp Fire, in 2018, the Walker Fire in
2019, the North Complex Fire in 2020, Dixie Fire in 2021 have
led her to work with producers on disaster preparedness,
livestock shelter management, and the research on fire
implications to natural resources. Tracy is also a managing
partner in her family's ranch, the Schohr Ranch, a
multigenerational family farm which raises rice, walnuts,
registered Hereford cattle, and commercial cattle. She has a
master's degree in horticulture and agronomy from the
University of California at Davis and a bachelor of science
from California State University at Chico.
So with that, Tracy, take it away. Thanks for joining us
today. I yield back, Madam Chairman.
The Chair. Ms. Schohr, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TRACY K. SCHOHR, LIVESTOCK AND NATURAL RESOURCE
ADVISOR, AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL
RESOURCES, COOPERATIVE EXTENSION, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA;
PARTNER, SCHOHR RANCH, GRIDLEY, CA

Ms. Schohr. Perfect, thank you all. And good afternoon,
Chair Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa, and Members of the
Subcommittee. And thank you for hosting this hearing
recognizing the importance of supporting careers in
conservation.
My name is Tracy Schohr, and I am excited to be here in
three capacities. As Representative LaMalfa said, I am
University of California Cooperative Extension Livestock and
Natural Resources Advisor serving in three counties, Plumas,
Butte, and Sierra, which is within the First Congressional
District in California. In this position, I conduct research
and bring science-based information into the hands of ranchers,
land managers, and community members. Second, I am a managing
partner of Schohr Ranch, a fifth-generation family farm that
grows rice, walnuts, and raises cattle. And last and most
importantly, I am a product of career technical education. I
grew up as an active member in the West Gridley 4-H Club and
Gridley FFA. Mr. Dillabo and Mr. Risso's high school
agricultural classes gave me the foundation for my career.
After attending Chico State, I worked in the policy arena
building bridges between the environmental community and
ranchers. This inspiring work led me back to UC Davis to earn a
master's degree so that I can offer greater help to farmers,
ranchers, and land managers to meet contemporary and emerging
issues.
Congress needs to support programs that train the workforce
for exciting careers and conservation. How can this be
accomplished? One is to make investment where it counts.
Examples that I am passionate about include 4-H Youth
Development that was created by the Smith-Lever Act of 1914 as
part of the Federal-state-local partnership in the land-grant
university system. 4-H Youth Development is in both urban and
rural areas, bringing hands-on experiential learning in areas
such as agriculture, STEM, robotics, computer coding, and
natural resources management. 4-H members build confidence and
leadership skills and are exposed to a variety of potential
careers.
Another is the National FFA Program, federally funded under
Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Technical Education Act. FFA
programs across the nation are training the future workforce in
every spectrum of careers in sustainable agriculture, data
science, resource conservation, forest health, while building
professional skills such as public speaking, critical thinking,
and research. These two programs expose youth of all
backgrounds and ethnicities to the breadth of careers and
conservation.
And number two, Congress needs to support continued
investments in research and extension funding. I am proud to be
an extension agent, continuing a 130 year tradition of
connecting research and outreach important to local communities
at the intersection of long-term agricultural sustainability
and public-good benefits such as clean water, healthy soils,
working landscapes, and wildlife conservation.
As an extension advisor, I help ranchers overcome
challenges they face such as animal health, irrigated pasture,
predators, regulatory compliance, applying for Federal farm
bill programs, and managing landscapes in the aftermath of the
Camp Fire, North Complex Fire, and Dixie Fire. An example is
personally leading the first study on water quality post-Camp
Fire that informed downstream ranchers that water flowing
through their private range lands was safe for cattle to drink.
And then the picture behind me here today is on that working
ranch where one of those research sites took place.
And for three generations my grandfather, dad, and brother
have called on our local extension agents for advice on rice
diseases, water management, and invasive weeds to improve our
family farm. We even lend our fields to UC for research trials
where the results help our entire industry, the environment,
and improves the sushi rice you eat. Extension provides
critical people power, research talent, and enables states to
connect the power of local universities with people on the
ground. Together, we must train and educate a workforce that is
adapting to our changing environment: weeds, pests, drought,
and the aftermath of catastrophic fires. We must train on the
evolution of land management, including the need to actively
manage our forests, recognizing livestock grazing can be a
sustainable land management tool and look at agriculture as a
solution, not the problem.
In closing, the demand for future job opportunities and
conservation are endless. As the Committee writes the next farm
bill, I encourage you to invest in training for more
practitioners like myself who work hand-in-hand with farmers,
ranchers, and natural resource managers to make conservation
happen while supporting healthy landscapes, protecting
watersheds, and enhancing profitable agricultural businesses.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify before the
Committee, and I am happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schohr follows:]

Prepared Statement of Tracy K. Schohr, Livestock and Natural Resource
Advisor, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Cooperative Extension,
University of California; Partner, Schohr Ranch, Gridley, CA
Good afternoon, Chair Spanberger, Ranking Member LaMalfa and
Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for hosting this hearing today
recognizing the importance of ``Supporting Careers in Conservation.'' I
am pleased to be here to offer testimony before the Subcommittee.

My name is Tracy Schohr and I am here today in three capacities--

I am a University of California Cooperative Extension Livestock and
Natural Resources Advisor serving three counties in Northern
California--Butte, Plumas, and Sierra, which happens to be within Rep.
LaMalfa's Congressional district. My role as a cooperative extension
advisor is to conduct research and bring science-based information into
the hands of ranchers, land managers, and community members.
Second, I am a managing partner of Schohr Ranch, a 5th generation
family farm that grows rice, walnuts, and raises cattle.
Last, and most importantly, I am a product of career technical
education. I grew up as an active member in the West Gridley 4-H Club
and Gridley FFA. Mr. Dillabo's & Mr. Risso's high school agricultural
classes exposed to me livestock grazing management, genetics,
agricultural business management, and plant identification--giving me
the building blocks necessary for my career.
After attending California State University, Chico, I worked in the
policy arena where I had the opportunity to build bridges between the
environmental community and ranchers. This inspiring work led me to go
back to college to earn a Master's in Horticulture and Agronomy at
University of California, Davis so that I could become a cooperative
extension advisor, also known as an extension agent in other states.
I chose this career path because, farmers and ranchers, along with
land management agencies, need a trained workforce that can help them
meet contemporary and emerging issues. Climate resiliency, wildfire
mitigation, drought, producing a safe, abundant, and affordable food
supply, all require a workforce that is highly trained.
Congress needs to support programs that train the next generation
for exciting careers in conservation. How can this be accomplished . .

1.  Make investments where it counts, examples I am passionate about
include:

4-H Youth Development that was created by the Smith-Lever Act
of 1914 as part of a Federal-state-local partnership and
the land-grant university system. In California, 4-H Youth
Development is in both urban and rural areas--bringing
hands-on, experiential learning in areas such as
agriculture, STEM, robotics, computer coding, and natural
resources management, to name a few. 4-H members build
confidence and leadership skills and are exposed to a
variety of potential careers.
Another is the National FFA Program federally funded under Carl
D. Perkins Vocational and Technical Education Act. FFA
programs across the nation are training the future
workforce in every spectrum of careers in sustainable
agriculture--data science, natural resources conservation
and forest health, while building professional development
skills such as public speaking, critical thinking, and
research.
These two programs expose youth of all backgrounds and
ethnicities to the breadth of careers in conservation.

2.  Support continued investments in research and extension funding.
I am proud to be part of the [land-grant] partnership that
was developed between states and the Federal Government
with the 1862 Morrill Act, the 1887 Hatch Act and the
previously mentioned 1914 Smith-Lever Act.

For over 130 years extension agents have conducted research and
outreach important to our local communities at the
intersection of long-term agricultural sustainability and
public good benefits such as clean water, healthy soils,
working rangelands, resilient forests and wildlife
conservation.
My colleagues and I work and live in the communities we serve
and have formed long-standing and trusted relationships.
Cooperative extension is a boundary spanning organization
working with diverse stakeholders such as, Tribal,
environmental, agricultural, and all levels of government.
As an extension advisor, I help ranchers overcome challenges
they face on topics such as animal health, irrigated
pasture, predators, regulatory compliance, applying for
Federal farm bill programs and managing landscapes in the
aftermath of the 2018 Camp Fire, the 2019 Walker Fire, the
2020 North Complex Fire, and the 2021 Dixie Fire. I
personally led research on fire implications including the
first study on water quality post Camp Fire that informed
downstream ranchers that water flowing through their
private landscapes was safe for cattle to drink. Last week
I launched a research project, working closely with
ranchers and the Plumas National Forest. We are using GPS
collars on cows to investigate how catastrophic fires that
burn dense forests change landscape vegetation, which
impacts livestock grazing. Data collected from the GPS
collars will inform future post-fire grazing practices.
When disaster strikes, ranchers and emergency services call on
cooperative extension. During the North Complex Fires when
the Plumas Sheriff Department and Animal Control needed
help evacuating cattle, they knew I had strong
relationships in the community and could quickly call on
people to bring their personal cattle trailers to help move
a large herd out of harm's way. During the Dixie Fire, for
weeks, I worked with Incident Command Teams serving as a
liaison to ranchers needing to move, care and treat animals
behind evacuation lines. I mention this because it is a
prime example of how cooperative extension advisors are
valued members of the community and that our relationships
are grounded in trust. It is what makes us effective in all
aspects of our work.
For three generations--my grandfather, dad, and brother--have
called on our local extension agents on issues such as rice
disease, water management, and invasive weeds. Our family
has immense trust with UC's Cooperative Extension services,
which provides critical advice that helps us improve our
multi-generational family farm. Our family farm also lends
our fields to UC for research trials, where the results
help our entire industry, the environment, and, in the case
of our rice crops, improves the sushi rice you eat!

3.  We must train and educate a workforce that is adapting to our
changing environment--weeds, pests, drought, and the
aftermath from catastrophic fires. We must train on the
evolution of land management, including the need to
actively manage our forests, recognize that grazing can be
a sustainable land management tool, and look at agriculture
as a solution--not the problem. Last, we must train a
workforce skilled in emerging technology that can assist
with conservation and farming needs. For example, there is
exciting work being done to consider ways to put artificial
intelligence tools to work on the farm reducing pesticide
use and to help decipher copious amounts of data to
minimize nitrogen applications, improving agricultural
sustainability while maintaining productivity.
Conclusion
In closing, the demand and future job opportunities are endless . .

Reflecting back to the family farm, we are working with USDA
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) staff with conservation
careers to implement farm bill programs for irrigation efficiency, soil
health, pollinators, air quality and wildlife habitat.
There is a need for a skilled workforce to put money on the ground
managing our forests to create more fire resilient landscapes. UC
Cooperative Extension is actively working to build and train this
workforce, but there is a strong need to make sure that USDA programs
continue to be funded. This will ensure that there will be resources to
train the next generation of conservation professionals who can assist
farmers to stay at the cutting edge of research and farm practices.
The Federal investment into the Smith-Lever Act, for example, is
one way the Federal Government through the USDA provides critical
``people power'' and research talent to enable states to connect local
issues with the power of university research. This Federal investment
in cooperative extension is heavily leveraged by state, county, and
local support--a high return on the Federal Government's investment.
There is a strong need for additional funding to be provided to
ensure that our nation will have a conservation workforce that can
serve agricultural needs into the future. For example, there is a need
to hire more researchers like myself, who work hand-in-hand with
farmers, ranchers, and natural resource managers, who benefit from
cooperative extension--to make conservation happen, while supporting
healthy landscapes, protecting watersheds, and enhancing profitable
agricultural businesses.
As the Committee writes that next farm bill, I encourage Congress
to continue to invest in the programs that support the creation of a
strong conservation workforce. Doing so will help to ensure farmers and
ranchers and the agriculture sector can continue to thrive and provide
food for our nation using sustainable management practices. Thank you
again for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee. I am
happy to answer any questions.

The Chair. Thank you so very much for your opening
statements. Thank you for your testimony.
So at this time we will go into Member questions. Members
will be recognized for questions in the order of seniority,
alternating between Majority and Minority Members. You will be
recognized for 5 minutes each, in order to allow us to get in
as many questions as possible. Please keep your microphones
muted until you are recognized in order to minimize background
noise.
And I will begin by recognizing myself for 5 minutes. So I
just want to say thank you again to our witnesses for being
here. I have so many questions I would love to ask. But Dr.
Holzer, I would like to begin with you. I have three children
in K through 12 who have a real interest and curiosity in
natural spaces and in the land around them, and so I found your
testimony to be particularly interesting. In the long-range
planning, how might partnerships with NRCS or state agencies
and public land-grant universities help bolster the curriculum
that you discussed in your testimony, especially as we look
towards career development later in a child's educational
career, and how can we ensure that educators, that they have
the tools to ensure that students understand the litany of
prospective jobs that are available to them into their future,
be it just a few years away, or for some a decade or more?
Dr. Holzer. Thank you very much for that question, Chair
Spanberger, fabulous question. And my initial thought is
communication. I think what needs to happen is that the K-12
audience needs to know what is available and what is out there.
You don't know what you don't know. And if a teacher has made
their way into the classroom without having any kind of
experience in any of the fields that we discussed today--and I
was just so inspired by all the speakers--if they don't know
that, how are they going to introduce that to our children?
They might have a curricula that introduces it to them. There
might be a module or something, but I am wondering if locally
that there can be some forms of communication between entities,
between the school districts and the extension offices.
I know we have the Soil Conservation District in our state,
and I used to tout them in meetings and get soil conservation
books. Before you can get everything online, I would have them
come visit my students. They have this beautiful model and
these wonderful books where students can identify the soil that
is in their backyard. But I knew to do that, and if a teacher
doesn't know to do that--so outreach is the key.
One of the things that we are doing right now with the
support of NRCS is we are developing a model for soil
scientists to use to do outreach. And we are visiting Tennessee
first in Memphis, at a location in Memphis, and we are going to
give it a dry run. And then over the summer we are going to
iterate on the success of that. We have an evaluator that is
looking at our program, and we are going to do it again in
Chicago, totally different entities in which we are running it.
And then after that, we are going to be coming out with this
model of professional development, full day professional
development for teachers. Everything is going to be ready for
them. We will have slide decks, we will have activities,
everything that they would possibly need. That is one small
piece, but I know my friends and colleagues that are on this
call today, they may have other ways of sneaking into that K-12
pathway. Maybe it is through their kids, maybe it is through
just celebrating what they do to the greater audience.
The Chair. So, Dr. Holzer, I am going to follow up with you
with questions for the record, so written questions. I think
you mentioned a variety of different resources in your opening
testimony, but just to even be able to provide back to my local
community, I would be interested in if there are any other
organizations that some of our school districts could be
looking to for advice. I am intensely interested in this
question, but I am going to try to move onto one more kind of
tangentially related. And Mr. Crowder or Ms. Jensen, I will
point this one over to you. What more do you think that NRCS
could be doing to leverage the work of outside organizations
that outside organizations are already doing to create a
pipeline?
Mr. Crowder. Chair Spanberger, one of the important things
that I would always come back to is making sure that the
conservation operations fund is there. All the conservation
technical assistance comes through that. So much of NRCS staff
programs come through that. As you know, all of the
conservation agricultural programs, all that work is funded
through CTA right up until the farm bill programs are there, so
all of--not all of NACD's work but a lot of our partnerships
with NRCS come from that conservation operations fund, so it is
vitally important that we get that.
The Chair. Thank you very much. And in my remaining 19
seconds I am going to go to Mr. O'Neill. Would you have any
other comments related to K through 12 education?
Mr. O'Neill. Thank you for the question, Representative
Spanberger. One of the big things for K-12 is really targeting
kids before they start setting their career pathways. One of
the areas that we are really targeting is middle school area,
the 6th, 7th, 8th grade where they are mature enough to be
thinking about their future but they are still early enough on
before they set their pathways going into high school, so
really targeting the outreach into the guidance counselors
especially because guidance counselors in the middle school
area are typically much more hands-on with the kids and much
more in that developmental stage, much more engaging as opposed
to in high school where it is not the same level of engagement
with the student. And so really inspiring young people in that
middle school area to be interested in forest-based careers and
whether that be in the wood side of it, in the utilization side
of it, in the conservation components of it, but just to be
interested in it.
The Chair. Thank you, Mr. O'Neill. And I am now going to
recognize Mr. LaMalfa for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you. I wanted to come back to Tracy
Schohr here once again. Let's talk a little bit about the
issues of fire emergencies, especially in our forested areas.
We have seen some really devastating effects on one particular
cattle ranch right here in Butte County and we know that story
extremely well locally here with [inaudible] up in the
foothills [inaudible], Tracy. And this year we already have--
the National Interagency Fire Center has reported 1.7 million
acres having burned in the West already, and so there will be
much recovery work involved with that, with the previous fires
that we listed a little while ago.
So would you emphasize a little bit more on the fire work
that you have done, whether it is during a fire or fire
emergency and certainly the post-fire recovery that is so
important as we drive around northern California and see mile
after mile of blackened, dead trees and what used to be
mountainous forest. It will look like high-elevation rolling
hills once those trees all either topple by themselves as they
tend to on Federal lands or maybe the work can get done.
So would you talk a little bit more, please, about fire
emergency and post-fire recovery work and why more people in
this field, especially with the challenges we have with numbers
of personnel, why would that be important?
Ms. Schohr. Yes, Doug, so I think numbers are a big one,
number of people, but also the funds and the flexibility. And
so during disasters, I have been called on by emergency
services personnel specifically in Plumas County by the
sheriff's department to help evacuate cattle, having those
relationships within my community, being able to get cattle out
of the fire's path. During the Dixie Fire, I spent 3 weeks with
incident command serving as a liaison to make sure agricultural
producers can continue their operations behind fire lines,
evacuate cattle, treat them, and also continue business
operations, shipping them as part of their marketing and
production strategies.
Getting onto the ground side of it on natural resources,
during the Camp Fire, Cooperative Extension and myself and some
colleagues were able to initiate rapid response. I mentioned
the water quality study. We also had a forage study looking at
the ash that was falling on the forage. Was it safe for
livestock to eat? And we are able to get answers in the hands
of producers right away and let them know that we didn't find
anything working with the Department of Food and Ag at our
laboratory on campus at UC Davis.
During the fires, I have gone out multiple times with
colleagues to be on the ground as the flames were still burning
around us to work with producers on how to restore their meadow
after a dozer line to fix it for re-seeding, to relay the sod,
to prevent erosion before the first rains came.
And so I think the key message that I would have, and it
really goes back to a seminar we had 2 weeks ago on post-
wildfire working with colleagues at community colleges and our
local RCDs in the Forest Service. The message that came across
is after a fire we must act now. Otherwise, it is going to be
too late. For example, replanting success really happens in the
first year. We know that meadows have to be fixed right away
before the first rains. And we can't wait for funding to come
months down the road. And so I think that is important for NRCS
to be able to join hand-in-hand with resource conservation
districts and Cooperative Extension to get practices on the
ground during these disasters to help mitigate long, ongoing
concerns but also for our Farm Service Agency to be able to get
funds and relief in producers' hands that have been impacted by
the fire to continue business continuity because we know these
disasters take not only an ecological toll, a financial toll,
but an emotional toll on the ranchers and farmers that are in
their path.
Mr. LaMalfa. Tracy, let's talk a little bit about--I
imagine, as the ones you just mentioned, they have a pretty
good working relationship. Don't they run into a wall with
trying to get this work done when we are talking about people
that are neighboring Federal lands, for example? How is the
relationship with Federal lands on accomplishing things in a
landscape format that actually does some good? If people are
doing it on their private land but the Forest Service is moving
sloth-like on theirs, how does that play out?
Ms. Schohr. I think they are moving sloth-like because
there is not enough of them, and I think the challenges that
they are facing--so we are able to get action done on the
ground on private lands really quick, but if we could have more
resources and expertise and skilled workforce and more hands or
boots on the ground could really help us improve our forests
after the catastrophic fires that we faced.
Mr. LaMalfa. Good, okay. And let's get more personnel. And
we are certainly working on the pay scale side of things to try
and be more attractive there as well. So Tracy Schohr, thank
you very much, and, Madam Chair, I will yield back.
The Chair. All right. The chair now recognizes Ms. Pingree
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I am very
pleased to have this hearing today, and thank you for holding
it. And we are so happy to have our colleague in Maine, Mr.
O'Neill, here to talk to us, so thank you for joining us, and
thank you for the beautiful picture of the Maine forest behind
you. Some people don't know that Maine is a 90 percent forested
state, so these issues are critical to us, and you did a really
good job of outlining that.
A couple things I would love to hear you talk more about
one thing just briefly, the EDA grant that Maine got to start
the Forest Opportunity Roadmap I think has been really
critical, and you kind of laid that out, for our state being
able to project the enormous transition going on in the forest
products industry, what the future looks like, and the topic
you are talking about today is really how to predict our
workforce. And I just say to my colleagues that is not
necessarily a topic of this hearing, but just to have that
ability in the state or to have Federal support for states that
want to do that without these projections, I think it leaves us
much more vulnerable.
But if you want to talk a little bit about how you have
been doing these productions--it also, by the way, created your
position, which is I think particularly good because having you
there helps us a lot. But you talked about some of the
challenges in workforce recruitment, and one of them you
mentioned was placemaking. Again, we don't often talk about
that, but because we are often talking about people coming or
living in rural communities where I am sure like Maine there
are huge housing shortages, sometimes the local hospital is a
long ways away, those seem to be barriers at time to
recruitment, particularly for the higher tech jobs you are
talking about that are sort of the industries of the future. So
I have already talked too much. I will let you go forth.
Mr. O'Neill. Thank you very much, Representative Pingree.
Definitely one of the big challenges about attracting people to
work within a sector or within a location is not only just the
jobs but the components around that job, the community that you
are coming into, the services that are available. People don't
necessarily want to just live in a bubble where they just go to
work and they come home. There are all the other things like
you had mentioned, that housing is affordable, broadband
access, just to be in touch with family and friends around the
world. The access to healthcare that is good quality
healthcare, the ability to move freely, these are all things
that people look for in communities. What is the community
itself like?
And so one of the things with this EDA funding that we
received through 2016, the FOR/Maine construction, was this
community building component where we are working directly with
municipalities and communities on positioning themselves to be
attractive not only for business attraction and development but
also for the citizens within their communities to want to
retain those workforce, current and future. If you don't have
amenities in your community, it is very tough to keep people in
that community. And so setting that placemaking aspect of it is
critically important. It is not like in the old days where if
there is a job, people are going to show up. You need all the
other stuff along with it.
Ms. Pingree. Yes, thank you so much for that answer. And I
know we can't fix all of those things with this Committee, but
certainly for the Agriculture Committee, broadband has been one
of our big considerations moving forward.
I don't have a lot of time but let me do a couple quick
things here. So, Mr. Olander, I won't get a chance to ask you a
question, but I just want to say I really appreciated your
testimony because I think one of the things we hear often about
is that people who work in some of the NRCS and other agencies
often don't have this background in the future of agriculture,
so for you to talk about training young people at a community
college in tillage methods and the value of cover crops so they
can see it firsthand, I think it is really valuable. And I want
you to know this is from Staples, Minnesota. And even though I
am a hard-core Mainer, I spent a lot of my summers in Brainerd
so not too far away, or near Brainerd, one of those many
beautiful lakes in Minnesota.
And, Dr. Holzer, I am not going to get a chance to ask you
a question either, but I just also want to say I really
appreciated your testimony. I think it was very comprehensive.
I am a certified soil geek myself, so I think it is just so
critically important we approach this from that perspective.
And also, I have a background in environmental sciences, and I
think often we don't teach people anything about the soil when
we are teaching them about weather patterns and the ocean and
all kinds of other things related to the environment, so I
really think that is so important that you and others on this
panel are promoting that and how we get that into earlier and
earlier grades in school, so kids who are desperately
interested to learn more about climate change and about the
environment understand the really important role of
agriculture.
So I will yield back the time I don't have, and thank you
very much, Madam Chair, and to all of the panelists. You were
all great.
The Chair. Thank you, Ms. Pingree. The chair now recognizes
Representative Moore for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, Madam Chair. I appreciate everyone
having this Committee and obviously attendance and our
witnesses. So I want to lead out with a question for Ms.
Jensen. You mentioned earlier in your testimony the importance
of partnerships with both government and nongovernmental
entities. What kinds of new partnerships do you envision
[inaudible]----
The Chair. Mr. Moore, we are losing our ability to hear
you.
Mr. Moore. I apologize, Madam Chair. [inaudible] Can you
hear me now okay? [inaudible].
The Chair. Mr. Moore, if you want to try and--chair
decision here. If you want to try and turn off your camera and
hold it your ear, that might help us hear you better. I think
that would be acceptable under these circumstances. We have
already seen you on camera.
Mr. Moore. Okay. Is that any better?
The Chair. That is better.
Mr. Moore. Oh, great, great. I am glad to hear it. Sorry
about that. We have some bad weather in Alabama today. It is
kind of thunderstorms moving through, so we can hear okay
sometimes, sometimes we can't.
So, Madam Chair, I have a question for Ms. Jensen. She
mentioned earlier in her testimony the importance of
partnerships with both government and nongovernmental entities.
What kinds of new partnerships do you envision and with who,
and how might they help to support careers in conservation?
Ms. Jensen. Thank you, Representative Moore. That is a
wonderful question. Our organization, as I mentioned in my
testimony, just knows firsthand the partner of partnership.
Simply put, we couldn't do what we do without the help from all
the incredible partners that we have. And so, we really want to
look towards the future, and we are excited for the future to
welcome anyone and everyone who wants to be a part of this
program because we know that we can make a much larger impact
the more help that we get. So anyone that is interested, we
would love to hear more from you. And, my contact information
is in my written testimony, and I would love to have the
opportunity to discuss this further with others.
And, as far as your question as it relates to what that
might look like, as we continue to grow this curriculum, we
continue to grow resource professionals that we can connect
with for job shadowing opportunities and to serve as
conservation leaders for these kids, the more individuals that
we partner with, the larger reach that we have, so we really
are excited for that opportunity in the future.
Mr. Moore. Okay, thank you. And let me say, Madam Chair
also, as a graduate of a land-grant university, we sure
appreciate folks working with land-grant universities. And my
background is actually science in this part of the world, but
we do some environmental remediation projects, so we are always
open to anything we can do to help train the future workforce
to come in. And so we are going to continue to do that. And
with that, Madam Chair, I am going to yield back just because
the weather is something crazy out here. And so thank you all
so much for participating. And with that, I will yield back.
The Chair. Mr. Moore, please stay safe. Thank you for
joining us, and certainly thank you for bringing your
perspective to the hearing and the Committee.
Mr. Moore. Thank you.
The Chair. The chair now recognizes Ms. Schrier for 5
minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to thank you
for holding this hearing. This is a really vital issue in my
district. I also want to thank all of our witnesses and give an
especially warm welcome to my fellow Washingtonian, Mr. Michael
Crowder, who I will have some questions for in a minute.
Michael is such a smart, trusted leader in our state and in my
office on conservation issues and frankly trusted throughout
the country, so I am really glad to see him here today.
As mentioned, this is an incredibly important topic. I
can't tell you how many conversations I have had with farmers
and forest landowners in my district about the need to increase
the capacity for on-the-ground technical assistance in order to
meet the demand for conservation work. And I just want to
highlight that part again and put added emphasis that demand
far, far outstrips capacity for conservation programs. Our farm
owners and our landowners are responsible stewards of the
lands, and they want to participate in Federal and state
programs, and they just need help to do it.
I got some great feedback from Pierce County Conservation
District in my Congressional district and also Washington State
University that I just want to share with the Committee today.
Both pointed to expanding the definition of what we define as a
conservation job, and we have heard some of this today. For
example, more conservation is happening in urban areas, and
touching on fields like engineering and sociology, urban
studies. And agricultural sciences, often led by our wonderful
land-grant universities like Washington State University are
really changing the way that conservation work is being done.
Another key issue that they mentioned is that we need to
expand training opportunities to allow people to transition
into the workforce or learn new skills who are already in other
jobs and beyond engaging youth and college students, workforce
development, and worker retraining needs to include
conservation.
Mr. Crowder, I have a question for you. In your testimony,
you noted several NACD efforts to bolster the conservation
workforce pipeline. And I want to ask you, as this definition
of a conservation worker is changing and expanding, what is
happening on the ground in Washington State to recruit and
train a diverse, skilled conservation workforce? And also, how
are those efforts incorporating the need for expertise in urban
agriculture and engineering and other areas that aren't
necessarily thought of as conservation fields?
Mr. Crowder. Thank you, Representative Schrier. Good to see
you again, and it is great to be with self-proclaimed soil
geeks and duck folks and nerds like that. I love being around
folks like that. So I am part of an organization just like all
my other witnesses. We love what we do. And I have to shout out
to my partners in Washington State. Roylene Comes At Night, she
is our State Conservationist to Chris Pettit, Executive
Director for the Washington State Conservation Commission. You
have Tom Salzer, the Executive Director for WACD.
So 20 years ago, conservation districts were primarily for
agriculture and farming families. Now, districts are more in
suburban and urban areas, so we are transitioning. Our
supervisors are transitioning. Our clients are transitioning
into these more urban areas. NACD has given 25 urban technical
assistance grants to Washington State for $1.1 million to 18
districts, and that includes your districts in Pierce,
Thurston, and Snohomish Counties, so a lot of technical
assistance is going into that.
Washington State Conservation Commission is bolstering
regional engineering teams in the districts. Executive Director
Pettit is looking to hire an ag engineer to steer the program.
As you know, we have Voluntary Stewardship Program in
Washington. The legislature has appropriated $2.7 million a
year for engineering, and we are working on the Sustainable
Farms and Fields, so so much is going on at the local level to
make sure that we have a broad representation and that we bring
in those underrepresented, nontraditional supervisors and
clients for our districts, and can't be happier with the work
that we are doing.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, in my 4 seconds, just for helping
farmers manage extreme heat and prepare for those challenges in
the future. Thanks for being here today. I yield back.
The Chair. Thank you very much, Ms. Schrier. The chair now
recognizes Mr. Panetta for 5 minutes.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thanks to all of our witnesses for being here. And thank you
for being a part of this what I believe, especially coming from
the Central Coast here in California, is a very, very important
topic, so I appreciate your time and your discussion today.
I think clearly it is obviously very important and it is
critical that we continue to talk about workforce development
and all of the programs that are taking place, be it at the
USDA or other conservation organizations that are out there.
There is no doubt that these programs are vital to protecting
our farmlands and developing effective conservation practices
that have serious implications for Americans on and off the
farm. And one of the many things that we are seeing especially
here in my district on the Central Coast though is that
electronic enrollment platforms are really evolving, and
technology is becoming more and more accessible and prevalent,
which is a good thing. That is one of the reasons why it is
critical for the NRCS to be ready to deliver technical
assistance to private landowners working to implement and
design conservation programs.
Now, please know and realize that many of my colleagues and
I are committed to investing in essential technical experts,
especially when it comes to working with the 2023 Farm Bill. It
is going to take a wide range of solutions. I think we
understand that when it comes to executing our conservation
goals and bringing in the Federal dollars to our rural
communities, our farmers, and our ranchers who are working hard
to implement conservation programs and programs on their own
lands.
But we can also do this as we better manage our forests,
too, from the increasing threats of wildfires that we see out
here on the Central Coast, and that is why I introduced the
Save Our Forest Act (H.R. 5341), the bill that would help deal
with the staffing shortages in National Forests and Grasslands
and provide for natural resource managers and other
conservation experts.
Now, as we look to protect our environment, farmers have a
big role to play, but so does our government, and I think we
understand that and that is why we are having this important
hearing. We have to make sure that we provide the resources and
the critical support to our farmers, to our ranchers, to our
foresters, and all those impacted by the threats of climate
change and environmental degradation.
Now, on another note, it is important that we train the
next generation of the conservation workforce. That is why in
December I cofounded with another Agriculture Committee Member
the bipartisan Congressional FFA Caucus to help fund FFA and
other similar organizations through the Carl D. Perkins
Vocational and Technical Education Act. Our blue jackets do
more than just raise livestock, we know that. FFA is training
the future of the conservation workforce across all spectrums
of the agricultural industry from hard sciences to STEM career
pathways and the natural resource planning and conservation
that is so important to us, and then providing obviously those
public speaking skills and critical thinking skills and also
community engagement, which is important.
So I want to hit on Ms. Schohr if I could. In your
testimony you mentioned that the education that you received
through your FFA experience and high school agricultural
education classes really laid the foundation for your career.
Do me a favor and speak more to your experience as a member of
FFA and how it impacted your journey to the seat that you are
sitting in today and also how can we in Congress ensure that
urban and suburban students have more access to these types of
programs which can really, to be frank, enlighten them to the
work that our farmers and our foresters are doing?
Ms. Schohr. Switch that up a little bit. Thank you for that
question. So I think the first line, how do we get more urban
people involved is one of them is just getting more ag in urban
classrooms. And so I think what is really exciting about a lot
of the FFA courses now, I have a lot of friends that decided to
go back into ag teaching. Most of their classes actually cross-
count for college education, and so I think that is really
exciting is that there are dual options in enrollment.
And so how did FFA really inspire me? So sitting in Mr.
Dillabo's and Mr. Risso's classrooms, that is where I started
learning about invasive weeds and plant ID and how do you
manage those weeds using the whole toolbox with integrated
management, with grazing or herbicide use. I learned about
genetics. And one of the research projects I am working on
right now with the Forest Service and colleagues at University
of Arizona is actually GPS tracking cattle and looking at their
DNA to see if they have genetic markers that make them hill
climbers so they can do a better job of managing our forests
and the grasslands to reduce the threat of catastrophic fire.
And so those lessons learned a couple years ago in those
classes really were an inspiration, and they got me out of
Gridley to go experience the state, participate in national FFA
conferences and contests around the country. So I am forever
indebted to my ag teachers who gave up a lot of their weekends
and evenings as amazing teachers to help me get to where I am
today.
Mr. Panetta. Outstanding. And it is nothing too bad with
staying in Gridley, but I understand your point, especially
being from the Central Coast rather than the Central Valley,
but obviously looking forward to working with you and others
from the Central Valley and all across our country to make sure
that we support our conservation efforts.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I yield back.
The Chair. The chair now recognizes Mr. Correa if he is
there. I saw him on camera earlier. Mr. Correa, are you there?
He is not.
Mr. Correa. Yes, I am.
The Chair. Oh, you are.
Mr. Correa. I was trying to hit that button there.
Madam Chair, and I want to thank all of you for holding
this important hearing, and listening to your comments about
constituents that have lawns in my district, we have very few
lawns. We have a lot of condominiums. We have probably one of
the densest populations in the State of California. And the
challenge is, as you have all put it, how do you get these
young people to understand the value of agriculture, the
outdoors, and I am trying to figure out how can we get that
experience, how do we get some of these kids to go out and
spend a week or 2 of the summer in Mr. LaMalfa's district to
know what it is to be a farmer, to grow some rice, to get an
appreciation of good public policy when it comes to
agriculture? Because at the end of the day public policy really
is dependent on us as individuals knowing what the agriculture
industry really needs and the environmental challenges that we
have.
So I guess my question, thoughts, comment, elicited a
comment from the folks here as our guests is how do we get our
kids to go out in the outdoors and spend a few weeks out there,
student exchange, summer exchange, get them out there, roll up
their sleeves and do some good work? Thank you very much.
Comment, question?
Ms. Schohr. Well, I will answer that really quick. It just
brought to my mind an opportunity that we have in California is
actually as a 6th grader in our very rural agricultural
community, they sent every 6th grader for a week to an outdoor
environmental camp. And so we go camping, learn about forestry
and forest health. We are there learning about where our food
comes also, but the bugs and the trees and the water system,
and so I think that was something also I had great experiences
in both 4-H and FFA, but that weeklong of being there I know
inspired some of my classmates to choose careers to go back
into teaching and education and found inspiration in that week.
And that is a program that is still continuing on to this day
in our community.
Mr. Correa. I think I need that program, too. When I was in
the state senate with Mr. LaMalfa, I think I spent a week out
in Shasta County out in the forest and got a heck of an
appreciation for the forestry, the lumber industry, and ag.
What I learned, though, I am trying to figure out how we bring
back that kind of experience to our inner-city youth, get them
out. So any ideas how to multiply those kind of experiences? I
would love to hear from you. Thank you very much. And thank
you, Madam Chair, for holding this hearing.
Mr. Crowder. Representative Correa, we all love to brag on
what we know, and my local conservation districts, the Benton
and Franklin Conservation Districts, we have programs like
Salmon in the Classroom, and we reach 4,500 students and 22
schools in our local district. We have Wheat Week that we talk
about wheat with the help of the Washington Grain Commission,
and we teach them about farming and Drain Rangers. There is so
much that we can do, just to get folks outside and then find
those ones that are interested and love that and then let's
find mentors to do that. We have lots of programs at NACD, but
we have to get the kids interested and then mentor them to get
them outside and into conservation careers.
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Dr. Holzer. I will pipe in just quickly. Here in New Jersey
most sixth-graders are going to go away for a few days into the
forest. We do have forested places here in New Jersey, I swear
we do, and they spend the 3 days just working with each other
in team-building, but they also are there to do water quality
testing. They will do all kinds of little conservation
activities and enjoy themselves. So that is one small step. But
I also think there are a ton of programs out there that it has
to be--the message about those programs needs to get to the
right people. And so if it is getting to the teacher, getting
to a science supervisor in a school district to get the word
out to the students, and I think we can get the kids out there,
especially for, as you mentioned, Representative Correa,
especially our kids that are in the city. They need to know
that they can get out and that there are tons of activities out
there for them or opportunities out there for them to try.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. And just one last comment for you.
Two weeks ago, my staffers went out to visit an urban garden in
my district, 1,200\2\. Thank you very much.
With that, Madam Chair, I yield. Thank you.
The Chair. Excellent. Well, before we adjourn today, I
invite Ranking Member LaMalfa to share any closing comments
that he may have.
Mr. LaMalfa. I have to get that technology turned on. Well,
Madam Chair, I appreciate again the opportunity to talk about
how we do need to stock up our ability to get people to enjoy
the outdoors, appreciate my colleague Mr. Correa's comments on
the enlightenment he got from being here in northern California
and the great efforts our forest industry will do to bring
people. And so let's lean on that some more because I think
most people love the great outdoors, and what could be better
than a job in them helping to manage our resources, whether it
is for water, for wildlife, for better forest management so we
don't burn a million acres every year with the lousy air
quality and all the things that go with it. So I would like
that so we can help move this in this direction and incorporate
some of these things into the farm bill.
Tracy's comments on more flexibility, please talk to us and
help us put that on paper and put it into action and make these
work just a bit better. I think there was a certain willingness
to have these various programs that we have talked about for
conservation, and we have had great success by and large, and
we need to just keep expanding and keep making sure there are
no barriers for their success.
So with that, Madam Chair, thank you again, and I will
yield back.
The Chair. Thank you very much, Mr. LaMalfa. And in
closing, I again want to thank all of our witnesses for being
here today. Certainly, I think that the whole Committee is in
agreement that truly technical assistance is incredibly
important, be it at NRCS helping out in our communities but
that the pipelines that are utilized to get us to this
tremendous resource across our communities is incredibly
important.
I truly appreciated Mr. O'Neill's comments related to
following up specifically on Dr. Holzer's comments related to
middle schoolers and recognizing that at times we do a lot of
work perhaps in career and technical programs and community
colleges and land-grant universities, but sometimes it is just
planting that seed at the middle school age, and we have heard
about a couple different states' specific programs where
students even recognize that this is an option, that this is a
career path being in the outdoors, focusing on conservation,
that that is an option they could even pursue.
Certainly, I have been working on trying to ensure
[inaudible] more funding for [inaudible], but I want to thank
you for the tremendous insight that you all have provided into
your work. Your emphasis on how important it is to have a well-
trained conservation workforce that works closely with
producers and foresters to achieve desired resource
conservation on their lands I think is a clear point that you
all have made through your answers to our questions today. The
thoughts that you have shared will certainly enable us to
develop policies that will help improve today's conservation
workforce and build a sustainable pipeline of employees.
Certainly, your written testimony is valuable. I am
grateful for the questions that you answered today but
certainly your written testimony is particularly valuable as we
are spending time really thinking towards that 2023 Farm Bill
and across the country when we are looking at how is it that we
administer and deliver successful and meaningful conservation
programs, especially when some of them have grown increasingly
complex over the years. Your thoughts have been very helpful to
us. Certainly, the forces acting on our soil, our water, our
air are becoming more extreme, and we are seeing more frequent
and intense impacts as a result of the climate crisis, frequent
storms, flooding, extreme weather, hurricanes in the Southeast,
extreme weather variations, fluctuations, and of course
historic wildfires in the West and notably in Mr. LaMalfa's
district and region and state.
Certainly, these changes further underscore the need for
greater investment in our conservation workforce and the
challenges facing them, but it is not just about the workforce,
it is not just about the conservation. It is truly about
creating jobs into the future where people are focused on the
health of a community, the agricultural and economic drivers of
a community, so I truly appreciate the very different
viewpoints, though everyone is in general agreement, but the
different perspectives to this conversation today. So
hopefully, as we look towards the 2023 Farm Bill, I look
forward to all of the Committee Members working together to
focus on opportunities to grow our workforce and really ensure
that producers have the support that they need to implement on-
farm conservation programs and that the future in our schools,
elementary, middle, high school and on up, recognize the
incredible breadth an opportunity that exists in these fields.
So again, I thank you so much for your time.
And under the Rules of the Committee, the record of today's
hearing will remain open for 10 calendar days to receive
additional material and supplemental written responses from the
witnesses to any question posed by a Member.
This hearing of the Subcommittee on Conservation and
Forestry is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:33 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
