- VOLUNTARY CARBON MARKETS IN AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

VOLUNTARY CARBON MARKETS IN
AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 23, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-16

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
48-427 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Chairman

JIM COSTA, California                GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania,
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts     Ranking Minority Member
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina, Vice  ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
Chair                                Arkansas
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York            DOUG LaMALFA, California
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine               RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
Northern Mariana Islands             TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         DON BACON, Nebraska
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois               DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York       JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              CHRIS JACOBS, New York
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
RO KHANNA, California                MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida              TRACEY MANN, Kansas
J. LUIS CORREA, California           RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
JOSH HARDER, California              BARRY MOORE, Alabama
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   KAT CAMMACK, Florida
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California            JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia

______

Anne Simmons, Staff Director

Parish Braden, Minority Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Bustos, Hon. Cheri, a Representative in Congress from Illinois,
submitted news release.........................................   125
Schrier, Hon. Kim, a Representative in Congress from Washington,
prepared statement.............................................     6
Scott, Hon. David, a Representative in Congress from Georgia,
opening statement..............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Submitted comment letter; authored by Greg Morris, Senior
Vice President and President, Ag Services and Oilseeds,
Archer Daniels Midland.....................................    85
Submitted letters on behalf of:
Gallo, Sarah, Vice President, Agriculture and
Environment, Biotechnology Innovation Organization.....    90
Hovsepian, Ronald W., President, Chief Executive Officer
& Board Member, Indigo Agriculture, Inc................    92
Parisa, Zack, Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
Natural Capital Exchange...............................    96
Submitted statements on behalf of:
Dyson, Caryn Senior Policy Advisor, Akin Gump Strauss
Hauer & Feld LLP.......................................    98
Glenn, Ph.D., Barbara P., Chief Executive Officer,
National Association of State Departments of
Agriculture............................................   106
Hite, Rita, Executive Vice President, External Relations
and Policy, American Forest Foundation.................   107
Smith, Brent, Vice President, Marketing, Sustainability &
Proprietary Products, Nutrien..........................   110
Farmer's Business Network, Inc. and Gradable.............   113
Spanberger, Hon. Abigail Davis, a Representative in Congress from
Virginia, submitted material...................................   127
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
Pennsylvania, opening statement................................     3

Witnesses

Reed, Debbie, Executive Director and Member, Board of Directors,
Ecosystem Services Market Consortium and Ecosystems Market
Research Consortium, Washington, D.C...........................     8
Prepared statement...........................................    10
Supplementary material.......................................   128
Submitted question...........................................   142
Bastos, Leonardo, Senior Vice President--Head of Global
Commercial Ecosystems, Bayer Crop Science, St. Louis, MO.......    16
Prepared statement...........................................    17
Submitted questions..........................................   142
Luoma, Brian, President and Chief Executive Officer, The
Westervelt Company, Tuscaloosa, AL; on behalf of National
Alliance of Forest Owners......................................    19
Prepared statement...........................................    20
Supplementary material.......................................   128
Submitted questions..........................................   143
Antonioli, David, Chief Executive Officer, Verra, Washington,
D.C............................................................    25
Prepared statement...........................................    26
Supplementary material.......................................   131
Submitted questions..........................................   145
Eideberg, J.D., Callie, Director, Government Relations,
Environmental Defense Fund, Washington, D.C....................    31
Prepared statement...........................................    32
Submitted questions..........................................   146
Milligan, David, President, National Association of Wheat
Growers, Washington, D.C.......................................    35
Prepared statement...........................................    37
Submitted question...........................................   147
Merrill, Jeanne, Policy Director, California Climate and
Agriculture Network, Alameda, CA...............................    41
Prepared statement...........................................    42
Submitted question...........................................   148

Submitted Material

Earthjustice, submitted letter...................................   135

VOLUNTARY CARBON MARKETS IN AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY

----------

THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2021

House of Representatives,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., via
Zoom, Hon. David Scott of Georgia [Chairman of the Committee]
presiding.
Members present: Representatives David Scott of Georgia,
Adams, Spanberger, Hayes, Delgado, Pingree, Sablan, Kuster,
Bustos, Plaskett, O'Halleran, Carbajal, Khanna, Lawson, Craig,
Harder, Axne, Schrier, Panetta, Bishop, Thompson, Austin Scott
of Georgia, Crawford, DesJarlais, Hartzler, LaMalfa, Allen,
Rouzer, Bacon, Johnson, Baird, Jacobs, Balderson, Cloud, Mann,
Feenstra, Miller, Moore, Cammack, Fischbach, and Letlow.
Staff present: Lyron Blum-Evitts, Jacqueline Emanuel, Josh
Lobert, Kelcy Schaunaman, Anne Simmons, Ashley Smith, Josh
Maxwell, Patricia Straughn, Erin Wilson, and Dana Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DAVID SCOTT, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM GEORGIA

The Chairman. The Committee will now come to order.
First, I want to welcome and I want to thank all of you for
joining us today. We have a very distinguished, knowledgeable
group of witnesses that are coming to help us deal with climate
change and the important role that we in agriculture must
fulfill.
Let me say at the outset that my concern in putting this
hearing together rests with this. It is most important that
agriculture, our industry, be at the point of the spear in
dealing with climate change. Why? Nobody, no entity on Earth,
is more dependent on the climate than agriculture. Our food
production, the water we drink, our shelter from our forestry,
textiles, our clothing. We can do without a lot of things, but
we cannot do without food, water, our clothing, our shelter
coming from our forestry.
And so, this Committee hearing is most important, and I
want to thank our distinguished panelists for being with us.
And so, first of all, I want to get a few housekeeping
matters out of the way.
First of all, after giving brief opening remarks, Members
will definitely receive testimony from our outstanding
witnesses today, and then the hearing will be open for
questions. Members will be recognized in order of seniority,
alternating between Majority and Minority Members, and in order
of arrival for those Members who have joined us after the
hearing was called to order. When you are recognized you will
be asked to unmute your microphone, and you will have 5 minutes
to ask your questions or make your comment.
And now, I really want to emphasize, Members, please,
please keep your phones muted if you are not speaking. As you
can hear right now, there is a Member that is not doing that,
and we have to be respectful, and I am laying down the law. I
will just announce you are not participating. These are some
outstanding and gifted witnesses, and I want this Committee to
show them the respect that they deserve. And it is important
that we hear every word of what our Committee Members are
saying. We have to respect one another. So, when you are not
speaking, turn that microphone off. Thank you for doing that.
Now, Members will be recognized in order of seniority,
alternating between Majority and Minority Members, and in order
of arrival for those Members who are joining us late. And as I
said, when you are asked to mute your microphone, please do so,
so that if not speaking you will remain muted in order to keep
the background noise out.
And in order to get as many questions as possible, the
timer will stay consistently visible on your screen. I am going
to be very punctual with good discipline here to keep Members
to your 5 minutes.
The other thing I want to say is this. This is about
climate change, the most pressing issue that is facing us
today, and nobody is more impacted than us, agriculture. So,
for those Members who have in mind to bring up any other
subject other than what we are here to do, will not be
recognized. All right? We are here to deal with climate change,
nothing else. I want to make that clear.
All right. Now, just a few brief remarks from me on this.
As I said at the outset, this is our most important hearing,
folks. We are the leaders in Congress that must deal with
climate change, and the way that we are functioning on that is
through what is referred to as carbon credits, carbon markets.
That is the process and the tool that we have, and we have a
variety of firms who are engaged in carbon markets, carbon
credits, and each of these are working and developing working
partnerships with our farmers to determine the way to do it.
There is a variation in some of our companies how they are
engaging our farmers and agriculture interests. Bayer, for
example, is working with our farmers, but they are compensating
their partnership based upon the farmers doing natural things
like cover crops, no-till farming, and then there are others
who are doing it by the amount of carbon that our farmers
sequester. But we have problems in verification, weaknesses in
the technology that is used here, the impact of our farmers not
having access readily to the internet. These present awesome
problems, so we have to really deal with those issues.
Second, in bringing and engaging our farmers in helping us
with climate change and what we are doing, to what degree does
that take them from doing what we need so badly to do, and that
is maintaining our excellent food supply. We have some serious
questions that we have to deal with.
I am very excited about this hearing. I want to thank you
all for it, and now, let us go forward and have a tremendous
hearing. The eyes and ears of the nation are on this hearing
this day. Let us make them very proud that this House
Agriculture Committee is securing our role being at the top of
the point of the spear when it comes to dealing with our
Federal policy, Congressional policy. It has to, first of all,
come through agriculture. This is the goal here, and let us
proceed.
[The prepared statement of Mr. David Scott follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Ecosystem service markets, including carbon markets, provide an
interesting value proposition to producers, business interests, and the
public at large. These markets have the potential to create new
economic opportunities while also tackling the greatest challenge of
our time--climate change. At my very first hearing as Chairman, I
pledged to explore every opportunity to mitigate climate change and the
significant risks to agricultural production--and that's what we're
going to do here today. By rewarding farmers, ranchers, and foresters
for implementing practices that sequester carbon, markets can create an
opportunity for producers to capture a new income stream.
According to the latest data available, 2019 marked a record year
for transactions across the global, voluntary carbon marketplace. More
than 100 metric tons of carbon offsets were sold in 2019 at a total
value of over $300 million. Renewable energy projects accounted for 42%
of these transactions, with forestry and land use projects responsible
for another 37% of transactions.
In addition to their economic potential, voluntary carbon markets
could help to capture the significant mitigation potential available
within the agriculture and forestry sectors. To capitalize on these
opportunities, carbon markets must rest upon a transparent and reliable
accounting and verification framework to ensure they are delivering
true economic and climate benefits. However, given the significant
variation that exists in today's markets, serious questions remain over
the quality of some of the carbon credits that are currently generated.
Likewise, many questions remain about producer participation in
markets--including how to fairly compensate producers, the ability of
small farms to participate, and how to reward existing stewardship,
among others.
These concerns merit attention from policymakers and consideration
of whether Federal policymaking can help to fill the gaps and provide
the certainty and confidence needed to produce high-quality carbon
credits. This Committee has previously engaged on the topic of
ecosystem service markets. The 2008 Farm Bill included a provision
directing USDA to establish guidelines that could quantify and
communicate the value of conservation practices. It is my hope that we
can build on that effort here today, as well as draw on the input the
Committee has received through stakeholder briefings this year.
Additionally, I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge our farm
bill conservation programs in this conversation. These programs play a
leading role in improving farm productivity, profitability, and
environmental stewardship. It is my hope that we can explore how carbon
markets can work alongside these programs in the effort to further
mitigate climate change.
In closing, I would like to thank all of our witnesses here today.
We look forward to your testimony. With that, I recognize Ranking
Member Glenn Thompson for any opening remarks he may have.

The Chairman. And with that, I will turn it over to our
distinguished Ranking Member for his opening remarks.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GLENN THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. Thank you
for holding this hearing to review carbon markets, and my
appreciation to the distinguished panel of witnesses that we
have. I am really looking forward to that.
Mr. Chairman, I do want to say, and I encourage all of our
Members on both sides of the aisle to focus on this incredibly
important issue. Although I do want to say, in my previous role
as Vice Chair of this Committee, I had tolerated a lot of
diatribes from Members across the aisle who inserted issues
that weren't really relevant or germane to the hearings and the
things we were talking about, so I don't think in any way, we
should run this according to procedure, and I appreciate how
you do that. But I don't think we should be ever stepping on
the rights and the privileges that every one of our Members
have to exercise their voice.
This is an incredibly important topic today. I approach it
from--and as we explore this, I look at this in a spirit of
optimism. The fact that we know that natural land-based
solutions, which is agriculture, it is all forms of
agriculture, including forestry. As I like to tell my friends,
like Mr. Rouzer and Mr. Scott, including trees, whether we free
range them like I do in Pennsylvania, or you all line them up--
you are very organized in certain states with your trees. And
the fact that we know that the data shows that we sequester 6.1
gigatons of carbon annually at this point, and as I like to
say, I have no idea how big a gigaton is, but to put it in
perspective, at the end of the day the data also shows that we
sequester over ten percent more carbon than what we produce on
those lands, leading to the conclusion by a third party, the
number one thing that we can do to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions around the world is for American farmers, ranchers,
and foresters to produce more and export it overseas. Largely
because of our productivity, it has increased 287 percent in 40
years. Pretty impressive.
So, I look at this not as doom and gloom in this
discussion, but in optimism because it is the American farmer,
rancher, and forester that is leading on climate and doing the
right things, and we know that it is what we do in American
agriculture--science, technology and innovation, so that means
we can always do it better, and we should push ourselves to
even increase those numbers.
In July, I requested this hearing along with legislative
hearings on several proposed climate bills within our
jurisdiction, and unfortunately, it seems like many Members and
stakeholders feel rushed to move legislation on carbon markets
without Congress thoroughly vetting the issue. And that is why
I am thankful for this hearing today. That is what we are
doing. We are vetting today. Honestly, I would have preferred a
hearing on the many issues the Committee should be addressing,
such as the farm bill implementation, the oversight of COVID
relief, or simply a general audience with the Secretary of
Agriculture or other USDA officials. But having said that, I
support the private marketplace and feel comfortable to let it
potentially grow into a means of supporting farmers' journeys
to more sustainable practices, or let it fail if the economics
don't work for the farmers and ranchers.
But with the Senate's insistence on instituting what is
essentially a new regulatory regime through the Growing Climate
Solutions Act (S. 1251), that body is forcing the House to
evaluate the efficacy of these markets now. Now, without
government intervention, the marketplace could answer questions
of permanence, science, or fairness to the markets, and if we
provide market information through a USDA website, as the
Growing Climate Solutions Act requires, the government becomes
a certifier of the middle men. Now, we need to be more diligent
in our oversight of these markets and its players now, before
we legislate in this space.
As farm groups across the spectrum have lavished praise on
these markets, we only now are hearing from participants about
the enormous length and complexity of contracts, and the meager
prices farmers receive through these markets. The markets are
woefully inadequate in covering even the basic implementation
costs of carbon sequestering practices.
One example presented in the recent report by the National
Sustainable Agriculture Coalition is especially telling. The
Natural Resources Conversation Service will pay a producer
$53.41 an acre over 5 years to implement cover crops through
EQIP. Still, the current price in the Indigo Agriculture carbon
market is $3.30 per acre, by passing the Growing Climate
Solutions Act Congress is implicitly supporting these minuscule
prices.
Additionally, there has been very little discussion on the
effect of these markets on the socially disadvantaged
community. Most carbon markets prioritize large operations,
large acreage to gain the economies-of-scale. It is
understandable. Again, it is noted in the NSAC's report, NORI
requires a minimum of 1,000 acres enrolled to qualify. Now,
giving more resources to the largest and most innovative farms
seems regressive when Congress and the Administrations are
trying to ensure socially disadvantaged farmers who
overwhelmingly operate small farms and small acreage are
treated fairly.
Another problem I see is stakeholders, including the Food
and Agriculture Climate Alliance, continue to suggest policy
proposals to make up for the inequities of the carbon markets,
that is incredibly small compared to our current farm bill
conservation programs. Policy suggestions such as payments for
early adopters, a carbon bank to increase the price and demand
of credits, and a carbon bank to help with other racial,
regional, and economic disparities again illustrate the need to
evaluate these markets.
Now, I recognize the landscape of this subject has changed
over the past decade, but I think it behooves us to remember
that during the 111th Congress, we debated cap and trade. At
first, farmers and ranchers were sold on the opportunity to
find new markets from trading sequestered carbon. When we all
saw how that could have ended, with minimal opportunity for row
crops, and a rise of the cost of inputs.
Now, I sincerely wish USDA was here to testify, as
Republicans suggested to the Majority, to answer questions on
these markets. If they were invited to testify today, USDA
would tell us the top three barriers to entry for agriculture
producers participating in private carbon markets are a lack of
demand, confusion in the marketplace, and high transaction
costs with very little benefits for farmers. We would hear from
2013 through June 2020, just less than 140 million carbon
credits were verified across all industries in the United
States. Of those credits, about 2.5 million, less than two
percent, came from the agriculture sector. So, here we are,
discussing a market that provides a few million dollars a year
to U.S. producers that do not cover the cost of their
activities, compared to the current farm bill conservation
programs that provide nearly $6 billion per year in incentives
and cost-shares. I think we are both very proud of the fact of
what that farm bill conservation title does.
Now, I ask my colleagues, do we understand the complicated
process landowners have to go through to generate and become
profitable in a carbon market? Do we have a sense of what is
happening in the private-sector and the markets currently? Why
is there so much focus on carbon sequestration and not on other
environmental service markets? Why should USDA resources be
diverted from proven conservation programs to stand-up carbon
markets as proposed in related legislation?
Now, I really do want to thank the Chairman for allowing
witnesses with diverse opinions to testify in these markets,
unlike the Senate Agriculture Committee who only permitted
witnesses favorable to the Growing Climate Solutions Act,
ensuring the narrative of no concerns with these markets was
upheld. I look forward to a more robust conversation and I am
really looking forward to the testimony of all of our
witnesses, and their perspective and experiences. But again, I
want to make clear this subject and the related legislation
deserve much more scrutiny than one hearing.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Chairman, I have a point
of order.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member----
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Chairman, I have a point
of order. Mr. Chairman, I have a point of order.
The Chairman. The chair would request that other Members
submit their opening statements for the record so witnesses may
begin their testimony, and to ensure that there is ample time
for questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Schrier follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Kim Schrier, a Representative in Congress
from Washington
Farmers and ranchers are at the front lines of the climate crisis.
Across the country, droughts, fires, and floods are affecting their
livelihoods. Carbon markets are one tool we have to address and
mitigate the growing threat of climate change. Carbon markets have the
potential to make an impact and have garnered broad bipartisan support.
But they do need to be implemented thoughtfully to ensure that they
result in long-lasting carbon sequestration.
I first want to talk about forests, which have enormous potential
to sequester carbon. As conventional agriculture works to develop and
implement regenerative practices and carbon markets, forests have
greater carbon storage potential in the near-term. Increasing carbon
sequestration through forestry is simple--it is grounded in science-
based forest management.
While there are often high barriers to entry into these markets, we
know what the right practices are: hazardous fuels management,
reforestation, and supporting an active wood products industry.
In addition to the carbon storage benefits, implementing these
practices, both on public and private lands, also has the potential to
reduce the frequency and severity of wildfires. It also provides
ecological benefits, such as improved wildlife habitat. Traditional
threats to forests like wildfire still pose risks to the forestry
carbon market. And disease can rapidly erase years of progress.
Therefore, active and aggressive forest management is key to mitigate
these risks and make our forests more resilient.
We need an all hands-on-deck approach to forest management, which
is why I introduced the National Prescribed Fire Act (H.R. 3442) to
increase Federal investment in prescribed burning as a pre-season
wildfire mitigation strategy. I also helped secure $60 million in this
year's budget for the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program (CFLRP) and am working with local stakeholders in my district
to bring a small diameter sawmill to central Washington
I also want to note that private companies interested in offsetting
their carbon footprint understand the potential forests hold and are
driving demand for carbon credits from forests. Not only do these
companies want to invest in forests, they want to invest in forests
domestically.
While these markets represent great potential in both forestry and
conventional agriculture, they are not the only way to offset carbon
emissions and are currently ill equipped to support the small and
medium farmers, such as specialty crop farmers and orchardists in my
district. That is why it is so important that these markets are
voluntary. We need to ensure the incentives promoting climate-smart
agriculture are not just rewarding big farms, corporations, and those
with the resources to benefit from these programs.
We need to support programs such as the Sustainable Farms and
Fields program that was recently signed into law in Washington State.
This bipartisan, voluntary program supports farmers in the
implementation of practices that increase agricultural carbon
sequestration. The program is particularly suitable for small- and
medium-sized farms because farmers do not have to enter a carbon market
to be compensated for sequestering carbon.
It crucially gives farmers different options for participation. For
example, funds can be used for site-specific consultations, the
purchase of goods such as seed for cover cropping, the purchase of
shared-use equipment such as no-till seed drills, and direct payments
for contracted carbon storage. It also supports first-time, low-income,
and minority farmers by providing technical and financial assistance
through conservation districts.
I sent a letter to Secretary Vilsack in March highlighting the
potential of this program and asking for its consideration as a
demonstration project for future Federal programs that incentivize
farmers to sequester carbon and improve soil health on their land. I
look forward to continuing to work with USDA and my colleagues on this
Committee to ensure we incentivize all farmers and ranchers to adopt
climate friendly practices.

Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Chairman, I have a point
of order that is timely.
The Chairman. Our witnesses today are the following. Ms.
Debbie Reed, Executive----
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Chairman, I have a point
of order that is timely. Mr. Chairman, my point----
The Chairman. Mr. Scott, you are out of order.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. No, sir----
The Chairman. This hearing goes forward.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. With all due respect,
Chairman, you are out of order. I have a point of order that is
timely. I made a point of order that is timely.
The Chairman. Mr. Scott, I am tired of your shenanigans. I
am tired of your disrespect, and if you do not change what you
are doing----
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I have a point of order that
is timely, Mr. Chairman. My question is where in the rules does
the chair get to dictate what a Member can and cannot discuss?
We have always, regardless of who was in charge----
The Chairman. I remind the Members to be respectful.
Now, Mr. Scott, you have used every single meeting we have
had, you have disrespected the blueberry bill, which was there
for a very good industry, you have disrespected other Members'
bills. Every meeting, you have tried to hijack this Committee--
--
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. That is not true, Mr.
Chairman.
The Chairman.--and here we are--yes, it is.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. It is not true.
The Chairman. So, with that, I am moving this hearing on. I
am not going to allow you to disrespect these witnesses with
your selfishness and your disrespect.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Mr. Chairman, I have a simple
question.
The Chairman. The hearing goes forward.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. I asked you a simple question.
Where in the rules do you have the----
The Chairman. The hearing goes forward.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia.--authority to tell a Member
what they can and cannot ask?
The Chairman. Our witnesses today are Ms. Debbie Reed,
Executive Director of the Ecosystem Services Market Consortium.
We have Mr. Leo Bastos, Senior Vice President, Head of Global
Commercial Ecosystems at Bayer. We also have Mr. Brian Luoma,
President and Chief Executive Officer at The Westervelt Company
on behalf of National Alliance of Forest Owners. We also have
Mr. David Antonioli, Chief Executive Officer at Verra. We also
have Ms. Callie Eideberg, Director of Government Relations at
Environmental Defense Fund, and we also have Mr. David
Milligan, President of the National Association of Wheat
Growers, and we also have Ms. Jeanne Merrill, Policy Director
at the California Climate and Agriculture Network, on behalf of
National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition. What a wonderful
and distinguished group of witnesses we have, and I am so
pleased to have each of you here with us.
The process for you witnesses will proceed as follows. Each
of you, when you are called upon, will have 5 minutes. There is
a timer that should be visible to you on your screen, and will
count down to zero, at which point your time has expired.
So, Ms. Reed, let us begin with you when you are ready, and
welcome, Ms. Reed.

STATEMENT OF DEBBIE REED, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND MEMBER, BOARD
OF DIRECTORS, ECOSYSTEM SERVICES MARKET CONSORTIUM AND
ECOSYSTEMS MARKET
RESEARCH CONSORTIUM, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Reed. Good morning, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Committee Members. Thank you for
the opportunity to appear before you today. I am Debbie Reed,
the Executive Director of the Ecosystem Services Market
Consortium, and our research arm, the Ecosystem Services Market
Research Consortium.
With 25 years' experience working in private voluntary
carbon and ecosystem service markets with an exclusive focus on
agriculture, I am delighted to see the strong and growing
interest in the value of natural climate solutions from working
ag lands.
ESMC is a member-based, nonprofit organization with over 80
members across the agricultural supply chain and value chain.
Our members have co-invested with us in a national scale
science-based voluntary ecosystem service market program,
devoted exclusively to agriculture. We generate multiple
stacked environmental credits from farms and ranches. Our
members include a wide range of food and beverage companies,
agribusinesses, farmer-led associations, farmer check-offs and
cooperatives, conservation NGOs, and land-grant universities.
Our innovative program generates multiple credits in high
demand from corporates as well as from municipalities and
government agencies, all of whom are currently engaged in our
products across the country as buyers of these credits.
ESMC's mission is to scale soil health and beneficial
impacts from agriculture. That success requires that we
adequately compensate farmers and ranchers for their services
that are in such high demand, and provide them the tools to be
successful in these markets. While we can operate in
traditional carbon markets, right now we are not. To meet our
members' highest needs, we are operating in a new market
context across agricultural supply chains. Private-sector
action is the reason there is a new and significant demand for
natural climate solutions and ecosystem services markets. Our
member corporations in the food and beverage sector and ag
value chain are investing millions of dollars to reduce their
environmental footprint from food and agriculture. ESMC is an
enabling program to leverage those private-sector investments
and ensure these organizations are successful at scale.
This new market is different than traditional carbon offset
markets, and can provide additional income streams to farmers
and ranchers.
When private-sector corporations calculate their greenhouse
gas inventory and commit to reduce that inventory, they
calculate their direct greenhouse gas emissions from their
facilities and operations, and their indirect emissions from
their supply chains. Corporations can purchase carbon offsets
to help reduce their direct greenhouse gas emissions, but
market standards and accounting rules prohibit the purchase of
offset credits to reduce indirect supply chain emissions.
Companies have to actively generate emission reductions from
the farms and the ranches they produce products from and
purchase those products from, and they file annual reports
quantifying the environmental impacts achieved.
Those supply chain emission reductions are referred to as
insets. They are not the same as carbon offsets. They are not
tradable assets like carbon offsets, and they can't be
generated, claimed, or sold to anyone outside the ag supply
chain. Up to 90 percent of the total greenhouse gas footprint
for many food and beverage companies is from their indirect
agricultural supply chain. That means the majority of their
actions and investment have to come from farmers and ranchers
in their supply chain. It is costly and resource-intensive for
every company to do that individually across their entire
supply chain for all their purchased commodities, and it is
hard to reach farmers and ranchers across the country.
ESMC's program enables collective action across our
members, which include buyers and sellers in the same supply
chains and on-the-ground partners like The Nature Conservancy
and farm organizations. Ours is a collective team effort. Our
model allows multiple members to co-invest in projects and
share costs. ESMC ensures the protocols we use are standard-
based, science-based, transparent, and validated by global
standard bodies, and we undertake the role of quantification.
We work with independent verifiers, and we issue high quality
credits that corporations buy. We then pay the farmers and
ranchers whose actions create the value. We can stack and sell
the credits in a bundle, or disaggregate and sell them
separately.
Our member corporations, including companies like General
Mills, ADM, Nestle, and McDonald's, for instance, are buying
the carbon inset credits, and in some cases, the water quality
credits from these projects as well. We have municipalities and
state agencies such as the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment Corps purchasing the water quality credits, and we
recently launched our first cropland project, which includes
buyer diversity credits as well, to be purchased by the
Missouri Department of Conservation.
I would like to publicly thank our members and funders for
their partnership, their collaboration, and ongoing
contributions. I appreciate the opportunity to appear here
today to discuss how these markets work and how they can
benefit farmers and ranchers.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Reed follows:]

Prepared Statement of Debbie Reed, Executive Director and Member, Board
of Directors, Ecosystem Services Market Consortium and Ecosystems
Market Research Consortium, Washington, D.C.
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and other distinguished
Members of the House Agriculture Committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today to discuss voluntary carbon markets for
agriculture and forestry. My name is Debbie Reed and I am the Executive
Director of the Ecosystem Services Market Consortium (ESMC), a member-
based, not-for-profit organization launching a national scale ecosystem
services market for agriculture to recognize and reward farmers and
ranchers for their environmental services to society. We appreciate the
opportunity to provide feedback to the Committee on how these markets
work and how they can benefit our American farmers, ranchers and
foresters and I look forward to answering your questions today.
The Ecosystem Services Market Consortium (ESMC)
ESMC is a nonprofit organization, and a public-private partnership.
We have raised and are investing to date approximately $23 million in
our voluntary, private market program, leveraging Federal and private-
sector funds. We operate in the pre-competitive space to enable
collective action and collective success across the agricultural supply
chain and value chain.
ESMC's mission is to scale beneficial environmental outcomes from
agriculture, using private voluntary markets as the mechanism. We
operate a market exclusively for generating ecosystem services credits
from the agricultural sector. Our innovative program, business model
and protocols were designed to overcome the challenges and failures of
past and current markets to accommodate agricultural projects, and to
account for and stack the many benefits of agricultural systems
outcomes--not just carbon or greenhouse gases (GHG). Our projects
generate credits for increased soil carbon, reduced GHG outcomes,
improved water quality, water use conservation, and biodiversity. By
stacking multiple credits, we ensure that all the beneficial impacts to
society are quantified and verified; and by selling them separately or
in a bundle we ensure that farmers and ranchers are paid for each of
these services, all of which are currently in high demand.
ESMC's value proposition to members is a national scale, harmonized
standardized market program that streamlines and lowers the burden on
farmers and ranchers, and ensures our science-based, standards-based
market program and all credits generated by our program are credible
and have the highest integrity. This credibility is important to buyers
and investors in carbon and ecosystem credits--whether corporate,
municipal, or local government buyers--to ensure the outcomes they pay
for are real and verified. These credits are intangible assets--they
represent products that often cannot be seen or sold in a store. For
this reason, we must ensure the proper quantification, verification,
and certification of these credits to prevent buyers and agricultural
producers who sell credits to avoid charges of green-washing or green-
wishing.
With corporations now facing the prospect of mandatory financial
disclosures and Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings of
their climate risk and mitigation plans, as well as their annual ESG
reports, credibility and integrity of their mitigation plans and
strategies and documentation of progress will take on an entirely new
requirement, with potential regulatory and additional financial risks
if these plans are deemed insufficient or inaccurate.
Ecosystem Services Market Research Consortium (ESMRC)
ESMC operates its market program and a separate research program,
[ESMRC]. ESMRC is the business incubator for ESMC in which we are
investing in technologically advanced infrastructure, tools,
technologies and an innovative market design to overcome past and
current challenges in these markets--particularly challenges to
agricultural participation.
ESMC's Next Generation Market Program for Agriculture
ESMC has engaged in due diligence to develop this program. Planning
began in 2017 with a series of multi-stakeholder roundtable discussion
to assess interest and need for a new market program. The stakeholder
discussions arrived at consensus agreement that a fit-for-purpose
national scale, next generation ecosystems market for agriculture was
desired. In 2018 we developed our first-generation innovative,
integrated multi-credit protocols and our innovative market design.
In 2019, with the generous funding and support of a $10.3 million
grant from the Foundation for Food and Agriculture Research (FFAR), we
launched our member-based consortium, in which we are leveraging
another $10.3 million in private-sector investments from members to
match the FFAR grant. Together with these funds and additional funds
from philanthropic and other private-sector contributions, our member-
based consortium is co-investing $23 million in the build-out of a
national scale, harmonized, dedicated program to ensure success of all
our partners in the agricultural supply chain and value chain in
realizing improved and sustainable outcomes from the agricultural
sector.
ESMC has over 80 members across the agricultural supply chain and
value chain. Figure 1 below depicts our current members and funders who
are collaborators and co-investors in our unique market program.
Figure 1: ESMC/ESMRC Members and Funders

ESMC/ESMRC: Enabling Collective Success
Since 2015, private-sector corporations have taken on new and
increased commitments to reduce their carbon and GHG footprints, reduce
their consumptive water use, improve impacts to water quality, and
protect natural resource and biodiversity outcomes within their
operations and supply chain operations. These commitments have
increased exponentially since 2018 as the world's scientists have
agreed not only that we must utilize all tools to combat climate change
and associated impacts, but that every sector must play a decisive role
in the same.
The programmatic and infrastructure investments ESMC and ESMRC are
making overcome the need for every company to make these investments
themselves. ESMC/ESMRC is an enabling platform for collective
investments, collective action, and shared collective benefits.
Corporations in our membership are investing millions of dollars a
year each on regenerative and sustainable agricultural outcomes. In
many cases they are struggling to effect change within their
agricultural supply chain, and to appropriately quantify and document
the outcomes of actions agricultural producers in their supply chain
have undertaken to reduce their environmental footprints.
Private corporations will find it hard to justify continue
investments in these activities if they cannot show with certainty and
credibility that the outcomes they are achieving result in real,
quantified, verified improvements in soil carbon, reduced GHG
emissions, and improved water and biodiversity impacts. They must show
impacts to make valid claims for these outcomes in the annual ESG
reports they file.
ESMC's collective enabling program ensures they are successful. We
take on not just the programmatic infrastructure development burden,
but are having our projects, protocols, quantification and verification
approaches approved and validated by appropriate third party standards.
In our case, we are working with Gold Standard and SustainCERT to
achieve this work.
A successful market requires not just that we meet the needs of
buyers, but sellers as well. ESMC/ESMRC's model is dependent on
ensuring that the farmers and ranchers who work in partnership with us
and with the corporations to achieve improved environmental footprints
are adequately compensated for their actions and have all the tools and
technologies necessary to be successful as well. For these markets to
work, we need to ensure we are generating enough supply to meet the
growing buyer demand. Farmers and ranchers are the supply side in this
market program, and our goal is to arm them with the resources they
need to supply the credits in high demand. Farmers and ranchers are
farming and ranching first and foremost, and if these markets don't
work for them and contribute also to their success, we cannot hope to
succeed.
ESMC operates a Producer Circle of 34 farmers and ranchers from
across the country. The Producer Circle is an advisory body that
provides grower insights to our program, reviews and provides feedback
to materials and the program operations, and in general ensures that
the voices of farmers and ranchers are represented in our operations.
The Producer Circle is in addition to the many growers involved in our
projects across the country, and the many national and state level
producer groups represented in our membership whose valuable voices
also help guide program development and operations.
ESMC/ESMRC's Program and Current Deployment
ESMC/ESMRC is concluding year 2 of our 3 year market program
infrastructure build-out in which we have been pressure testing the
entire program and refining it in preparation for a full market launch
in September 2022. Our pre-market soft launch has enabled us to test
the program in multiple regions and all major agricultural production
systems, and we are constantly launching new projects. This year we are
launching full dairy operation projects in two regions of the country,
an almond project in California, and an animal feed production project
in the Southeast. We are also able to operate scaled projects beginning
in January 2022 based on the program refinements accorded by our
project activities to date.
ESMC is selling credits in our projects currently and paying
producers for the credits. For instance, checks are currently going out
to wheat growers for a Kansas project in which General Mills Inc. is
purchasing supply chain carbon assets and the Kansas Department of
Health and Environment are purchasing water quality credits from the
same project.
For our national scale launch in September 2022, we are refining
program contracts to ensure the program operates smoothly at scale. We
are also completing sensitivity analyses across the program to reduce
data collection requirements and producer burdens, while ensuring we
still meet buyer needs and market standards to generate verified,
certified credits.
We would like to publicly thank our members and funders for their
partnership, collaboration and contributions in building this
innovative market program. Together we have built out and tested our
program with our members and collaborators to ensure it meets
everyone's needs. Our program currently covers all major crop and
livestock systems across about 75% of the U.S. We generate quantified
and verified credits for soil carbon increases, total greenhouse gas
emissions, water quality improvements, water use conservation (where
there is demand), and have just launched our first project in Missouri
soy and corn systems that will generate and sell biodiversity credits
as well.
Figure 2: ESMC/ESMRC Program Coverage in 2022: all major crop and
livestock systems

Private Voluntary Ecosystem Services Markets: The Genesis of Carbon
Markets
Successful markets link supply and demand for goods and services.
In carbon markets, the original demand started approximately 25 years
ago with the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), when
countries committed to reduce their GHG inventories each year to try to
head off dangerous impacts of global climate change. Under the UNFCCC,
each country calculated their total GHG inventories, and developed
plans to reduce GHG emissions over time. The U.S., as a signatory to
the UNFCCC, reports its annual GHG inventory and progress in meeting
emissions reductions every year, as do all other countries who are
signatories.
The greatest source of GHG emissions for most industrialized
countries, including the U.S., has historically been the energy,
transportation, buildings and manufacturing sectors. As such early
efforts in the U.S. and globally focused on reducing emissions from
these sectors. These are capital intensive sectors with long investment
and capital turnover times--so emissions reductions approaches tend to
be costly and offer greater medium- to long-term emissions reductions
opportunities than shorter-term, cost-effective ones.
It was recognized that other sectors could provide more immediate
and less costly GHG emissions reductions at far less cost than these
sectors. This was the original genesis for carbon markets. The intent
was for a given period of time to allow the GHG-intensive, capital-
intensive sectors to purchase emissions reductions from these other
sectors while capital turnover and long-horizon investments in GHG
emissions reductions technologies were made.
From the early days, agriculture and forestry have been viewed as
sectors with great potential to provide offset credits for other
sectors in these carbon markets. Since forestry credits are relatively
easier to develop than agricultural credits, forestry projects have
proliferated in these markets and have become fairly well established
as a sector for carbon-intensive sectors to purchase credits from.
Agricultural projects proved harder to scale, for many reasons, and
have never really take off in these markets to date. But that is
changing.
The Sudden Growth and Interest in Carbon and Ecosystem Services Markets
Since their genesis 25 years ago, carbon markets have made slow but
steady growth. Compliance markets, which are those created by
legislation or a regulatory requirement, generally operate within a
certain government jurisdiction. Examples of compliance market programs
include California's cap-and-trade market, the European Union's
Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), and the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative (RGGI), comprised of eleven states operating the first
regional cap-and-trade program. In a compliance market a regulatory
body establishes annual ``caps'' or upper limits of GHG emissions in a
given jurisdiction and designates which high emitting sectors are
subject to these ``caps''. Regulators then establish annual emission
reduction targets for the jurisdiction and for capped sectors in the
jurisdiction. Typically, capped sectors are given some percentage
amount of their emissions reductions that they can achieve by buying
credits from others--in the form of carbon offset credits. Besides
purchasing offset credits, the capped sectors must devise ways to
reduce their GHG footprints within their own operations--through energy
efficiency measures, for instance, or by devising means to operate with
new technologies that do not emit GHG or that emit fewer GHG emissions.
Voluntary carbon markets, by contrast, operate without regulatory
or legislative mandates for emissions reductions to be achieved.
Voluntary markets have been market venues for corporates who have made
voluntary commitments to reduce their GHG inventories. They operate
like compliance carbon markets, but without legislative or regulatory
mandates or total caps on GHG emissions.
What has changed and created a sudden uptick of activity and demand
in these markets? It is not compliance market or regulatory market
activity, but rather voluntary action by the private-sector. When the
Paris Agreement was reached in 2015 under the UNFCCC, many private-
sector corporations and multinationals made either new robust
voluntary, commitments to reduce their GHG, and some who had existing
commitments doubled down and took on more stringent emissions reduction
commitments. These corporates are doing what governments had previously
done to stimulate these markets in the first place. They are assessing
their total GHG inventories, and then developing concrete plans to
reduce their GHG emissions on an annual basis. Since 2015, the number
of industries and companies in the private-sector who have taken on
emissions reductions commitments has rapidly escalated. We have all
seen the drumbeat of new commitments from private-sector corporations
as well as many government jurisdictions--from national to local--to
become climate neutral, achieve net zero GHG emissions, or become
climate positive.
In addition to reducing just their own direct GHG footprints,
however, these corporations are also looking at their indirect supply
chain GHG footprints and striving to reduce these footprints as well.
Supply chain activity from private corporations is what is new and
different and creating a robust new demand for carbon credits. But
these credits are not what we traditionally think of when we think of
carbon offset credits. Actions that reduce GHG emissions within a
supply chain are sometimes referred to as carbon insets, rather than
offsets. They have a different purpose and serve a different
requirement for reporting companies. Companies cannot utilize carbon
offsets to make claims within their supply chain inventories.
What is a carbon offset credit?
What is a carbon offset credit? Carbon markets are global in
nature, and carbon credits have an accepted representation in these
markets. One carbon credit represents 1 ton of carbon removed from the
atmosphere (in the case of soil carbon sequestration, for example,
which removes carbon from the atmosphere and stores it in soil), or 1
ton of GHG emissions reductions, which can include reduced nitrous
oxide (N
2
O) emissions or reduced methane (CH
4
),
as well as carbon dioxide from reduced fossil fuel utilization. The
credits are generally expressed as carbon dioxide equivalents
(CO
2
e), which allows different GHG with different global
warming potentials to be compared on an equivalent basis.
A carbon offset credit is generated and can be sold when a protocol
that has been approved by a carbon market registry is used to create
credits that are quantified, verified and certified to carbon offset
market standards.
Carbon Insets, or Supply Chain GHG Emission Reductions
Not only have carbon market demands increased, but the demand
includes a new type of credit--for carbon ``insets'', or credits that
can account for emissions reductions achieved by the corporate sector
within their supply chains. ESMC is the first organization to apply a
market approach to supply chain emissions reduction reporting. These
markets are new and additional to traditional carbon offset markets.
How are ``carbon offset'' credits different than supply chain carbon
``insets''?
Carbon Offset credits represent a `trade' of greenhouse gas
credits. For example, Party A generates carbon credits by developing
projects that quantify, verify and certify carbon credits according to
market standards. Party B pays Party A for those carbon credits, and
Party B can claim they have `reduced' their emissions by the amount of
credits they purchase. Party A can no longer make those emissions
reductions claims, since they sold the credits and the rights to those
claims to Party B.
Offset credits can originate from any sector and be sold to any
other sector. The reduction claim, then, is transferable from any
sector to another. That becomes problematic when trying to account for
how much emissions reductions have been achieved in any given sector--
particularly if that sector has sold credits to another as offset
credits. It is also problematic when, for instance, trying to account
for emissions reductions achieved within a supply chain. If emissions
reductions have been sold to another sector as offset credits, they
cannot be counted towards efforts to reduce indirect supply chain
emissions. Offset credits, then, can compete with a corporations'
commitments and obligations to achieve emissions reductions within its
supply chain. Emissions reductions achieved for one cannot be claimed
for the other--since that would create double-counting.
Supply Chain GHG Emissions Reductions: ``carbon insets''
Carbon ``Insets'' refer to emissions reductions achieved within a
sector's supply chain. Carbon insets are emissions reductions for which
the claims, and the right to count the emissions reductions, remain
within that supply chain: they are not transferable to another sector.
Insets then, are emissions reductions that remain within the sector,
and cannot be sold to other sectors or claimed by them.
So for ESMC, for instance, with a focus exclusively in agriculture,
we aim to help agricultural supply chain partners such as corporate
organizations in the food and beverage sector, to reduce their supply
chain emissions reductions within their agricultural supply chains.
Corporate insetting efforts and claims, then, are more of a team effort
within the supply chain.
In ESMC's program, and in agricultural supply chain programs,
carbon insets that represent 1 ton of increased soil carbon or 1 ton of
reduced GHG emissions are impacts and claims that that are `retained'
within the ag supply chain: they are not attributable elsewhere, and
thus are not `tradable' assets
These carbon insets can be co-claimed by different organizations in
the supply chain, however, which enables collective action to generate
and share in their claims. So for instance, if a rancher in Texas
generates a carbon inset credit on her ranch, and sells the beef to
Party A, who processes the beef and sells half of it to Party B and
half of it to Party C, all of these actors in that supply chain can
share in the emissions reductions claims. This allows multiple partners
to collectively invest in projects, working with the Texas rancher and
with each other.
This collective investment reduces these corporations' costs, but
done right, the `stacked' investments of these corporates can ensure
that the rancher is paid enough to make it worthwhile to change
practices on her ranch that lead to increased soil carbon and/or
reduced GHG.
What about other Ecosystem Services Market Credits?
Increasingly, these same private-sector corporations who are making
voluntary carbon and GHG emissions reduction commitments are also
taking on commitments to reduce their water quality footprints and
their water use, and to improve their biodiversity impacts. ESMC's
market program was set up to generate not just increased soil carbon
credits, but also reduced net GHG emissions, improved water quality and
water use conservation.
In all of our projects we are generating soil carbon, GHG and water
quality credits. An almond pilot and a dairy pilot that we are
launching this year with partners--both in California--will also
generate water quantity credits. We have also just launched our first
project in Missouri in which we are also generating biodiversity
credits--in addition to the soil carbon, GHG and water quality
credits--on soy and corn cropping systems.
How ESMC's Market Program Meets Corporate ``Carbon Inset'' Needs
The entirety of ESMC's program focus right now is working with the
food and beverage sector and the agricultural supply chain to generate
stacked credits to meet corporate needs and demands in the agricultural
supply chain. We have found that in some projects--such as our Kansas
and Missouri projects--we have different buyers for different credits.
In our Kansas wheat project General Mills is buying the supply chain
carbon inset credits, and the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment is buying the water quality credits.
Why the Sudden Interest in Agricultural Offset and Inset Credits?
During the 2015 Paris Accord, the worlds' scientists indicated that
we are seeing extreme weather events and other anticipated consequences
of unmitigated climate change, and to stabilize the climate we must
only not stop emitting more GHG, but actively remove GHG from the
atmosphere. Also, it was agreed that every sector has to reduce GHG
emissions--we can no longer afford to pick and choose from various GHG
emissions reductions pathways if we are to prevent continued dangerous
climate disruptions. The only currently available opportunities for
cost-effective carbon removals at scale are from biological systems:
increased soil carbon sequestration, and forestry sequestration.
There are industrial carbon removal technologies in development but
they tend to be incredibly expensive, not operational at scale, and
largely pre-commercial. Agricultural and forestry carbon removals and
reductions can occur now, more cost-effectively than many other
options, and at scale. The health and welfare of our food production
systems and ecosystems and human populations depend on these outcomes.
The actions that improve soil carbon sequestration and reduce GHG
emissions from agriculture and forestry not only combat climate change,
they make those natural and managed ecosystems more resilient to
climate change. These natural climate solutions benefit everyone, and
not surprisingly, are in high demand from corporations as well as
consumers and society.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and look forward to
answering your questions.
Sincerely,

Debbie Reed,
Executive Director,
Ecosystem Services Market Consortium LLC (ESMC).

The Chairman. Thank you so very much, Ms. Reed, for your
excellent testimony.
And now, I will turn next to Mr. Bastos. You are now
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF LEONARDO BASTOS, SENIOR VICE
PRESIDENT--HEAD OF GLOBAL COMMERCIAL ECOSYSTEMS, BAYER CROP
SCIENCE, ST. LOUIS, MO

Mr. Bastos. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the Committee. Thank you for holding
this important hearing today and for inviting me to testify.
My name is Leo Bastos, and I am the Senior Vice President
of Global Commercial Ecosystems at Bayer Crop Science. Bayer
Crop Science is a division of Bayer that works with farmers to
provide them with seeds, traits, crop protection products, and
additional farming products to American farmers.
Bayer is committed to de-carbonize the agriculture sector
and remove greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere to reduce
the impacts of climate change. We are also committed to
research and innovation to increase agriculture's resiliency to
climate change impacts that are actually reduced and farmers
are already experiencing.
Agriculture can be part of the solution for climate change.
By helping farmers produce more while removing greenhouse gases
and storing carbon deep into the soil. Carbon markets are an
economically efficient way to reduce greenhouse gases by
incentivizing adoption of agronomic practices that contribute
to healthier soils, enhancing yield, while ensuring growers
they can turn their soil into a big part of their farming
business.
More than a year ago, Bayer began enrolling farmers in a
carbon program that pays them to adopt agronomic practices
primarily in no-till and cover crops, and these farmers do not
have be part of the Bayer customer base. They don't have to buy
Bayer seed. They don't have to buy Bayer crop inputs to
participate in the program.
There are a couple of things that make us a little bit
different. One is we eliminate the risk for farmers
economically because they have typically to invest up front,
they have to measure, and then get paid. What we actually do is
pay up front so farmers can make an economic decision and have
the opportunity to participate in carbon marketplace.
The second thing--and it still is in development--is a low-
touch, low-cost verification and quantification of carbon
sequestration, so there is more money available as a revenue
stream for farmers. We are harnessing the power of farm data,
digital technologies, and imagery to verify, quantify, and
validate the carbon stored into the soil. As carbon prices
actually go up, farmers actually benefit from higher payments
as well.
Soil carbon standards are evolving and are being worked on
by multiple global standard organizations, leading to still
numerous questions and uncertainty. We hear from farmers every
day that this uncertainty reduces their willingness to
participate in carbon markets, whether they can be sure whether
their investment is going to create a verifiable carbon credit.
In order to move carbon markets forward, we must tackle
this uncertainty and the resulting confusion by having common
standards. This Committee can help voluntary markets scale up
faster and provide more certainty for farmers in this rapidly
evolving space. One way is to consider the Growing Climate
Solutions Act, which provides a foundation for assisting
farmers in navigating a complex system. Another is to work with
the USDA on clarifying the concept of the carbon bank. Farmers
and companies are expecting more clarity to make investments
and decisions.
Bayer's carbon program in the U.S. is just the beginning.
We are enabling and incentivizing farmers to adopt climate-
smart practices to capture and sequester carbon in their
fields. Similar programs are now live in Brazil, Argentina,
India, and some select European countries. That is a good
proposition for growers, consumers, and our planet.
With the 2018 Farm Bill, this Committee made historic
investments in on-farm conservation. Once again, this Committee
is in the position to shape the future of American agriculture
and ensure that farmers can participate and benefit from the
growing demand for sustainably produced foods.
We look forward to helping you and our farmer customers
make the most of this exciting, new opportunity. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bastos follows:]

Prepared Statement of Leonardo Bastos, Senior Vice President--Head of
Global Commercial Ecosystems, Bayer Crop Science, St. Louis, MO
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for holding this important hearing and for
inviting me to testify. I am Leo Bastos and I am Senior Vice President
and Head of Global Commercial Ecosystems for Bayer Crop Science, the
agriculture division of Bayer that provides seeds, traits, chemistry,
and digital products to American farmers. I am responsible for
developing farmer-focused low-cost carbon solutions, including the
carbon program we launched in the U.S. last year.
Bayer is committed to helping de-carbonize the agriculture sector
and remove greenhouse gases already in the atmosphere in order to
reduce the impacts of climate change. We are also committed to research
and innovating new ways to increase agriculture's resiliency to the
climate change impacts farmers are already experiencing.
When it comes to climate change, agriculture is a contributor to
greenhouse gas emissions, and we must cut emissions in our sector to
keep global warming below 2 Celsius. But agriculture can also be part
of the climate change solution if we help farmers draw down greenhouse
gases already in the atmosphere and store it deep in the soil. The
science tells us that this is possible. But agriculture is complex.
Differences in crops grown, soils, regional climates, pest and disease
pressure, and historical practices all impact how a farmer might grow
their crop each season. So there will be varied solutions for farmers
all over the country. But today we are focusing on the underlying
driver of action and innovation: trading carbon on voluntary markets.
Carbon markets are an economically efficient way to reduce greenhouse
gases by incentivizing rapid large-scale adoption of climate-smart
agronomic practices that help benefit growers' soil health, potentially
enhancing yield, while ensuring growers can turn soil carbon into a
part of their farm business.
The recent boom in carbon credit markets has been driven by
consumer demand for and corporate interest in sustainability, combined
with farmers looking to generate another revenue stream from their
lands and their interest mitigating climate change through on-farm
conservation practices. As an agriculture and technology company, we
see Bayer as optimally positioned to help line up all these factors and
deliver a climate-smart revenue stream for farmers.
More than a year ago, Bayer began enrolling farmers in a carbon
program that pays them to adopt agronomic practices--primarily no-till
and cover crop planting--to sequester carbon in the soil of their
fields. These farmers do not have to grow Bayer seeds nor use Bayer
crop inputs to participate. There are a couple of things that make our
program different. First, we eliminate the economic risk for farmers
who typically must invest in climate-smart farming, measure the carbon
stored, and then get a payment. Instead, we pay farmers for the
practices up front so they can easily make an economic decision and
enter the carbon marketplace. We've made it simple to enroll. Farmers
choose the practices and fields they want to enroll and payments are
generated independent of carbon stored.
The second thing that we are doing that is different is low-cost,
low-touch verification of carbon sequestration so that there is enough
money left for a revenue stream for farmers. We do this by harnessing
farm data, digital technologies and imaging to verify and validate the
carbon stored in the soil. Finally, we are committed to helping farmers
get the value of a carbon credit by ensuring future carbon credit value
increases are shared.
On the other side of the carbon market, we work with supply chain
partners to link demand for carbon storage with the supply that farmers
can provide. When it comes to the agriculture and the food value chain,
large seed and input suppliers such as Bayer have the closest
connection to farmers through our retail networks. This relationship to
farmers along with our climate commitments create the opportunity for
us to partner with other members of the value chain to help meet their
own commitments to sustainable food systems.
Our work to link the demand for carbon storage to farmers has
taught us how complex voluntary carbon markets are. A carbon credit
that is tradable on a marketplace requires verified, audited carbon
removals that meet the science-based standards set by organizations and
registries that regulate carbon markets. But carbon standards for soils
are constantly evolving and are being worked on by multiple global
standards organizations leading to numerous standards and confusion
about what will ultimately be considered a carbon credit. We hear from
farmers that this confusion reduces their ability to participate in
carbon markets when they can't be sure they are making a capital
investment that will ultimately produce a verified carbon credit.
In order to move carbon markets forward we must tackle this
uncertainty and the resulting confusion. We must recognize that while
U.S. agriculture is diverse, we need consistent standards to accurately
measure, track, and evaluate de-carbonization over the long-term.
Consistent standards will allow farmers to participate profitably by
giving them predictability, a return on early investments, and enabling
monetary and technical support to ensure farmers can participate in
this climate-sustainable market.
This Committee can help voluntary carbon markets scale up faster
and provide more certainty for farmers in this rapidly evolving space.
One way the Committee can help is by passing the Growing Climate
Solutions Act, which provides a foundation for assisting farmers
navigating a complicated system so that they have confidence in their
information about enter the carbon business. I also urge the Committee
to work with USDA to eliminate the confusion created by a lack of
information about the carbon bank concept. Farmers and companies are
waiting to make investments and decisions until we know what the carbon
bank is.
Innovations in agriculture are transforming farms to not only
reduce their emissions, but also pull carbon out of the atmosphere.
This is the insight behind Bayer's Carbon Program in the U.S., which
enables and incentivizes farmers to adopt climate-smart practices that
capture and store carbon in their fields. Similar programs are now live
in Brazil, Argentina and select European countries. By simultaneously
prioritizing soil health, farmers' livelihoods and our climate, this
global initiative is laying strong foundations for a net-zero carbon
emissions future. That's good for growers, consumers and our planet.
With the 2018 Farm Bill, this Committee made historic investments
in on-farm conservation. Once again, this Committee is in the position
to shape the future of American agriculture and ensure that farmers can
participate and benefit from the consumer demand for climate
sustainable foods. We look forward to helping you and our farmer
customers make the most of this exciting new opportunity.

The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Bastos.
And now, our next witness is Mr. Luoma.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN LUOMA, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, THE WESTERVELT COMPANY,
TUSCALOOSA, AL; ON BEHALF OF NATIONAL ALLIANCE OF FOREST OWNERS

Mr. Luoma. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the House Agriculture
Committee. We thank you for the opportunity to testify. Thank
you also to all the bipartisan Working Forest Caucus Members
who serve on this Committee, including Ranking Member Thompson
and Caucus Co-Chair Sanford Bishop.
I am Brian Luoma, the President and CEO of The Westervelt
Company headquartered in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. The Westervelt
Company was founded in 1884 and is currently under its fourth
generation of family leadership. Westervelt is an industry
leader in land management and wood products manufacturing, as
well as environmental mitigation. We own and manage more than
\1/2\ million acres, and we believe that sustainability is both
our responsibility and our legacy.
Our nation's forests are our most important carbon asset.
They sequester and store billions of tons of carbon through
tree growth, and they store billions more tons of carbon in
wood products. Together, forest and wood products already
offset 15 percent of the U.S. industrial carbon emissions each
year. 70 percent of working forests in the U.S. are privately
owned by families, businesses, and investors. Private working
forests are sustainably managed to supply 90 percent of the
wood and fiber for the forest products we use every day.
At the same time, these forests account for nearly \3/4\ of
our gross forest carbon sequestration, enough to offset
greenhouse gas emissions from all passenger vehicles in the
U.S. each year. But that is not all. Private forests also store
an additional 83 billion metric tons of carbon, more than all
other forests combined.
Wood is 50 percent carbon by weight, so we continue to
store carbon in long-lived wood products like the wood we use
in building construction. Today, wood products store more than
10 billion tons of carbon. That is nearly three times the
amount stored in all of our National Parks combined.
Strong traditional forest product markets are the key to
these carbon benefits. New voluntary markets for forest carbon
and increased wood use in mass timber construction offer new
opportunities for even greater carbon benefits. Forest carbon
projects that sequester and store more atmospheric carbon are
rapidly attracting customers in voluntary markets seeking to
reduce their carbon footprints. To date, the volume of forest
carbon purchased has increased by over 240 percent over 2020
levels, but mostly in Asia. Even though we have an abundance of
forests in the U.S. and North America, forest carbon markets
here are relatively small and maturing, particularly in the
voluntary markets.
We have learned much from the first generation of forest
carbon projects through the contributions of carbon registries
like Verra, that do exceptionally good work to help verify
carbon benefits. We see two clear opportunities.
First, we can increase market participation among private
forest owners in the voluntary markets with improved protocols
and reducing unnecessary costs and complexity.
Second, we can increase confidence in the high-quality
forest carbon among carbon purchasers and voluntary markets
through improved data analysis, measurement, and verification.
USDA operates the Forest Inventory Analysis Program, the
world's most comprehensive forest census. Further improvement
to the carbon data and analysis provided through FIA will help
scale projects more quickly and reliably. Congress is also
working to address these challenges. The Growing Climate
Solutions Act, which passed the Senate 92-8, provides a
template. Increased use of wood in the built environment, such
as using advance engineered wood products like mass timber,
significantly reduce the amount of energy required for building
construction, while storing vast amounts of carbon in the
completed structure. Mass timber markets will benefit
significantly from improved data analysis via life cycle
assessments. Reduction of the carbon footprint in public and
private buildings will also further wood utilization.
Recently, I joined 42 of my fellow CEOs and counterparts at
the Environmental Defense Fund and The Nature Conservancy to
adopt a set of principles outlining how private forests can
provide market and incentive-based climate solutions. We also
worked closely with the Forest Climate Working Group and the
Food and Agriculture Climate Alliance. These collaborations are
helping us find common ground that help pave the way for smart
policy. My colleagues at the National Alliance of Forest Owners
have put together a data visualization of Forest Service and
EPA data available at forestcarbondataviz.org. We urge you to
use this information to recognize and advance the vital role
private forests can play.
Thank you again for conducting this hearing. The Westervelt
Company and the National Alliance of Forest Owners stand ready
as willing partners. I will welcome your questions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Luoma follows:]

Prepared Statement of Brian Luoma, President and Chief Executive
Officer, The Westervelt Company, Tuscaloosa, AL; on Behalf of National
Alliance of Forest Owners
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the House Agriculture Committee, on behalf of The Westervelt
Company, thank you for the opportunity to testify on private working
forests and the important role they can play as a natural climate
solution, including through voluntary carbon markets.
Introduction
I am the President & CEO of The Westervelt Company, a privately
held company headquartered in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. The Westervelt
Company was founded in 1884 and is currently under the fourth
generation of family leadership. Westervelt is an industry leader in
land management, wood products manufacturing, and environmental
mitigation. We own and manage more than half a million acres of land--
growing trees and producing high quality Southern yellow pine lumber is
the foundation of our business.
At The Westervelt Company, we are stewards of the land. We believe
that sustainability is both our responsibility and our legacy. Our
company is recognized for excellence in sustainable forest management,
responsibly sourced forest products and services, natural resource
stewardship, and ecosystem conservation.
Private working forests provide clean air and water, wildlife
habitat, and jobs through market demand for forest products. Today, I'd
like to focus on how forestry businesses like Westervelt can use this
formula to support climate objectives by the nature of what we do--
growing trees that sequester and store carbon and making long-lived
wood products that store carbon and displace more carbon intensive
alternatives. With the right market signals, we can do even more.
Voluntary carbon markets for forests are increasingly important to our
sector and are poised to grow significantly.
Importance of Private Working Forests & Wood Products to the Climate
Climate mitigation from our nation's forests includes two important
elements: forest carbon sequestration and storage, and carbon storage
in long-lived wood products. Together, sustainably managed working
forests and the forest products they produce are already one of our
nation's greatest assets for achieving our climate goals: U.S. forests
and forest products offset 15% of U.S. industrial carbon emissions
every year.
More than \1/3\ of the United States is covered by forests, and 47%
of U.S. forests are privately owned working forests--forests owned by
families, businesses, and investors. These forests are sustainably
managed to supply a steady, renewable supply of wood for lumber,
energy, paper, and packaging, providing more than 5,000 items that
consumers use every day. They are the source of 2.5 million well-paying
American jobs, mainly in rural communities.
Approximately 90% of the wood and fiber used to make forest
products in the U.S. comes from private working forests. At the same
time, these forests account for 72% of our gross forest carbon
sequestration, enough to offset greenhouse gas emissions from all
passenger vehicles in the U.S. each year. Private working forests in
the U.S. also store an additional 82 billion metric tons of carbon.
That amount is more than all other forest types combined. By providing
a continuing cycle of growing, harvesting, and replanting, sustainable
forest management optimizes the capacity of private working forests to
sequester and store carbon and improves their health and resilience.
Because wood is fifty percent stored carbon by weight, long-lived
wood products also store vast amounts of carbon. Each year, wood
products add an additional 100 million metric tons of carbon to the
nearly 10 billion tons of carbon stored in wood products--that's nearly
three times the carbon stored in all national parks combined. Advanced
engineered wood products like mass timber present an enormous
opportunity to lower the carbon footprint in the built environment.
Sustainably managed private working forests are more than capable
of meeting any additional demand for wood in the built environment.
Each year we harvest about 2% of our working forest land base; we also
reforest 2% of our working forests land base each year through planting
or natural regeneration. According to the USDA,\1\ from 1953 to 2011,
in a time of expanding population and increasing demand for homes,
paper products, and energy, the total volume of trees grown in the U.S.
increased by 60%.\2\ Today, private forest owners are growing 43% more
wood than they remove.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fs.fed.us/research/publications/gtr/gtr_wo87.pdf.
\2\ https://www.fs.usda.gov/treesearch/pubs/57903.
\3\ https://nafoalliance.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/
Forest2Market_Inventory_and_Har
vest_Trends_05-24-2019.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to climate mitigation, there are other important
environmental benefits to keeping working forests working. Water
supplies for communities around the country come through forested
watersheds, where forests act as a natural filtration system for nearly
30% of the water we drink.\4\ Private working forests also play an
important role in conserving at-risk and declining species. Access to
these forests is vital to wildlife conservation, as 60% of our nation's
at-risk species rely on private forestland for survival. Collaborative
conservation efforts such as the National Alliance of Forest Owners'
Wildlife Conservation Initiative \5\ can benefit species while keeping
private working forests intact.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.fs.fed.us/managing-land/private-land.
\5\ https://nafoalliance.org/issues/wildlife/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I am proud that private working forest owners like Westervelt are
leading the way in pursuing natural climate solutions. Recently, I
joined the CEOs of 42 other leading U.S. forest-owning companies, the
National Alliance of Forest Owners, The Nature Conservancy, the
Environmental Defense Fund, American Forests, and the American Forest
Foundation to adopt a unique set of Principles on Private Working
Forests as a Natural Climate Solution.\6\ These ``CEO Principles''
express our common vision for increasing the climate mitigation of
sustainably managed private working forests and sustainably produced
solid wood products through market and incentive-based approaches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://nafoalliance.org/ceo-principles/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Over the past few years, the National Alliance of Forest Owners has
worked closely with a broad community of stakeholder organizations to
advance the climate mitigation benefits of private working forests and
solid wood products. One of these is the Forest-Climate Working Group,
which provides a unified voice within the forestry community for
advancing forest climate policy. NAFO is also a founding member of the
Food and Agriculture Climate Alliance, which works across the working
lands community to advance broader climate mitigation solutions. These
collaborations are helping us find common ground that can pave the way
for smart, impactful policy.
Forest Carbon Markets
Strong forest product markets are the economic force behind our
nation's private working forests and the many public benefits they
provide. These markets will remain the bedrock of our sector. At the
same time, new carbon mitigation opportunities are creating options for
private working forest owners to increase climate benefits. Among
these, voluntary forest carbon markets are a rapidly growing catalyst
to scale natural climate solutions while providing important income
potential for forest landowners. While there are compliance carbon
markets in places like California, today I will focus on voluntary
markets.
How they work
There are three main types of forest carbon projects. Afforestation
and reforestation involve converting non-forest land to forestland.
Avoided conversion protects forestland at high risk of being turned
into other land uses. Improved forest management leverages proven
forest management techniques to increase carbon sequestration on
existing forest land.
Each project type is underpinned by three critical requirements:
(1) additionality, meaning increased carbon sequestration above a
baseline; (2) permanence, ensuring the carbon is stored for an
appropriate duration, often 40, 60 or 100 years; and (3) preventing
``leakage,'' which occurs when increasing sequestration or storage in
one location causes a corresponding reduction in sequestration or
storage in another location.
Significant investment is required to participate in forest carbon
markets. A forest owner must establish a carbon baseline for their land
and then ensure the additional carbon sequestered or stored on their
land is appropriately measured and verified. Forest owners typically
use sophisticated models to project the amount of additional carbon
they can sequester on their land over time to determine how much
additional carbon they can sell. This process must comply with the
protocols of one of several available carbon registries for a
landowner's carbon to be viable in the marketplace. Once that carbon
enters the marketplace, the landowner must be able to measure and
verify that they achieve the projected level of sequestration over
time. The registries track which carbon has been purchased, what
remains available, and so on. It is a time consuming, complex, and
expensive process.
The opportunity: Scaling up natural climate solutions in private
working forests
Voluntary carbon markets are a valuable tool for increasing carbon
sequestration and storage in privately owned working forests. The
customers for these markets are primarily companies seeking to reduce
their carbon footprints in a variety of ways, including by investing in
natural carbon removals, like forest carbon sequestration. Demand for
carbon sequestration via the voluntary market is growing rapidly, with
forest carbon experiencing the highest increase in demand. According to
Ecosystem Marketplace,\7\ the volume of forest credits purchased grew
over 30% worldwide between 2019 and 2020, and by over 240% between 2020
and 2021, year to date. Yet, the U.S. occupies a relatively small
portion of these markets: Asia comprises most of the market, while
North America, with its significant forest resources, is only beginning
to emerge. We have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to change that
dynamic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.ecosystemmarketplace.com/publications/state-of-the-
voluntary-carbon-markets-2021/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The challenge: Increasing participation and confidence in forest carbon
markets
The urgency of climate change and the need to scale natural climate
solutions is driving unprecedented investor interest in carbon markets
at a time when those markets are still maturing. The first generation
of forest carbon projects has taught us much that we can use to improve
market dynamics and the quality of carbon outcomes. I want to emphasize
that this first generation has delivered significant carbon value--but
we can and should take the opportunity to make real improvements for
even better outcomes for the climate.
Today, forest carbon markets face two key challenges which we must
address to harness their potential to deliver scalable carbon
mitigation: removing barriers to participation and increasing
confidence in the quality of delivered carbon.
First, participating as a landowner in carbon markets is a lengthy
and expensive process. Collecting the data and following the protocols
to enroll lands in registries costs, at minimum, several hundred
thousand dollars in addition to the cost of ongoing forest management
activities for enrolled land. There is also a high degree of
variability, unpredictability, and complexity in the requirements of
voluntary and compliance protocols, which adds additional and often
unnecessary costs and inefficiencies to carbon projects. These
unintended barriers to entry in forest carbon protocols keep private
working forest participation too low, leaving a large amount of climate
mitigation potential untapped.
Second, concerns among purchasers about the integrity of delivered
carbon exist because of shortcomings in data and analysis, the design
of some first-generation projects, and the requirements of existing
protocols. These concerns will undermine investor confidence and
sideline significant amounts of capital until they are addressed.
The solution: Improvements to data and protocol design can increase
confidence and participation
These challenges reveal two clear needs: improved data collection,
analysis, and information transfer, and improved protocol design to
increase efficiency and reduce cost.
First, robust carbon data and analysis are the foundation of high-
quality carbon projects and underpin the scalability of forest carbon
mitigation strategies. We need more and better data. USDA operates the
Forest Inventory & Analysis (FIA) program, the world's premiere forest
data collection and reporting system. FIA is used for an increasing
number of public- and private-sector purposes, including carbon
projects in voluntary carbon markets. USDA's carbon data collection is
advanced in the forestry space compared to agricultural lands and soil
carbon, but across the board, there is room for improvement. We need
comprehensive, nationwide data that is more useful to end-users.
To help improve the credibility of forest carbon outcomes, data
must be accessible, accurate, current, and relevant. This requires an
ever-improving combination of field data collection, financial
accountability, technology, and user-driven analysis to increase the
scope, quality, and usefulness of data. Increased investments in FIA
will help improve field work and the use of technology to collect and
analyze forest carbon data. USDA is also well positioned to improve the
use of technology and reporting methods to make carbon data more
accessible and more useful for carbon projects and aggregate carbon
reporting. As the needs and uses of carbon expand, we must expand FIA's
carbon capability while maintaining existing program delivery that is
vital to forest management decisions.
Second, protocols can be improved to be even more reliable, high-
quality, and predictable. Innovation in the voluntary marketplace
provides a wealth of new ideas and new approaches but can lead to
inconsistencies or problems in protocols, project design, and project
execution. We need to bolster confidence among carbon purchasers,
financial institutions, government, landowners, and other stakeholders
that voluntary markets have addressed these challenges and are truly,
and with great consistency, removing additional carbon from the
atmosphere. This could be addressed in a variety of ways, but it's
clear that the lack of a common approach to what ``good'' looks like in
this space is a gap we must fill.
These challenges are interwoven, and they are well within our
ability to address. More available data and analysis makes carbon
markets more accessible and creates confidence in the marketplace.
Having a common approach to what ``good'' looks like shores up
stakeholder buy-in and makes investment in carbon markets less risky
from a landowner perspective. We can improve protocols to make them
more accessible while maintaining and even improving credibility.
Congress is already addressing some of these challenges. The
Growing Climate Solutions Act, recently passed by the Senate, would
help private forest owners of all sizes deliver carbon mitigation
benefits at scale. The National Alliance of Forest Owners supports
working with USDA to address cost and technology barriers to
participation in forest carbon markets while maintaining the rigor
needed for high quality carbon outcomes.
Wood Products Markets
Increased demand for wood in the built environment is another
significant climate mitigation opportunity that is as important as
forest carbon markets. Increased market demand for wood utilization
coupled with increased demand for forest carbon can optimize mitigation
outcomes.
The opportunity: Reducing the carbon footprint of the built environment
through mass timber and other advanced engineered wood products
The United Nations reports \8\ that 10% of global greenhouse gas
emissions come from building construction materials. Advanced
engineered wood products, like mass timber, require significantly less
energy to produce than alternative building products. Wood used for
construction also stores significant amounts of carbon (typically
referred to as ``embedded carbon'') for long periods of time, further
expanding the mitigation benefit. With the introduction of mass timber
in the nation's preeminent model building code, wood is now approved as
a structural material for buildings up to 18 stories tall,\9\ a height
that encompasses the vast majority of buildings in the U.S.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://globalabc.org/sites/default/files/inline-files/
2020%20Buildings%20GSR_FULL%20
REPORT.pdf.
\9\ https://www.woodworks.org/wp-content/uploads/
wood_solution_paper-TALL-WOOD.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The solution: Improving life cycle assessment (LCA) data and analysis
and setting the tone for reducing the carbon footprint of the
built environment
Improved data and analysis are fundamental to capturing the carbon
benefits of increased wood utilization in the built environment. The
USDA Forest Products Lab is engaged in life cycle assessment research
on building materials, such as mass timber. Increased funding for such
research can inform and foster more vigorous marketplace innovation by
enabling project developers to more easily compare the embodied and
embedded carbon of mass timber with that of alternative building
products.
Federal infrastructure and procurement policies can set the tone
for private-sector investment by establishing a preference for reduced
carbon building materials that help transform the built environment
from an emissions source into an emissions reduction tool. Federal
policy can also foster marketplace innovation through significantly
increased investments in the Wood Innovation Grant program, with
increased emphasis on advanced engineered wood products and technology
transfer.
Conclusion
The true scale of our forests' climate impact is hard to fathom. My
colleagues at the National Alliance of Forest Owners have put together
a forest carbon data visualization--available at
ForestCarbonDataViz.org--that uses publicly available EPA and USDA's
Forest Service data to demonstrate the enormous carbon contributions of
private working forests and solid wood products.
In the data visualization, you will see the scale of the
opportunity for carbon sequestration and storage in U.S. forests. For
perspective, you may have seen a recent story \10\ heralding the
opening of the new largest direct-air carbon capture (DCC) plant in the
world earlier this month. Located in Iceland, the new plant is expected
to sequester up to 4,000 tons of CO
2
per year. For that
technology to match the annual gross sequestering power of U.S.
forests, they would need to build almost 400,000 more of those DCC
plants. We need all the negative-emissions technology we can get, but
this anecdote underscores how important our forests and forest products
are to climate mitigation. Forests and forest products are already the
most powerful carbon-capturing technology on [E]arth.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.axios.com/co2-sequestration-iceland-climeworks-
carbfix-74ac0180-e668-4848-939a-0e55a6b70686.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The recommendations given today are designed to provide climate
mitigation solutions that support good paying jobs and economic
prosperity in rural forested communities across the country. As the
Committee considers policy options for natural climate solutions, we
urge Committee Members to recognize the unmatched mitigation benefits
our forests and forest products are already providing and their
potential to do even more. Encouraging participation and increasing
confidence in voluntary carbon markets is key to maximizing our
forests' ability to deliver the climate solutions our country needs.
Thank you again for conducting this hearing. The right climate
solutions can enable private forest owners to invest further in
sustainable management that enhances forest carbon sequestration and
storage, water quality, wildlife habitat, and good paying rural jobs.
The Westervelt Company and the National Alliance of Forest Owners stand
ready as a resource to this Committee as it addresses the important
challenge of climate change, and the solutions private working forests
can offer.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Luoma, for your
excellent testimony.
And now, I recognize Mr. Antonioli, please. You are
recognized for 5 minutes. Pardon me if I didn't get all the
syllables in your name correct.

STATEMENT OF DAVID ANTONIOLI, CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER, VERRA,
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Antonioli. That is okay. Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Thompson, distinguished Members, my name is David Antonioli. I
am the Chief Executive Officer of Verra, a nonprofit
organization based in Washington, D.C. Thank you for the
invitation to speak at today's hearing.
Verra manages the world's leading greenhouse or carbon
crediting program, the Verified Carbon Standard, or VCS
Program. Since 2007, we have issued 760 million credits from
over 1,700 projects worldwide, including 28 million credits
from over 80 projects in the United States.
Today, I share three messages. First, how carbon crediting
programs operate; second, how voluntary carbon markets are
evolving at home and abroad; third, how participating in
voluntary carbon markets can benefit the American agriculture
and forestry sectors.
Let me begin with how our program works. A project
proponent, such as a farmer or forest owner, proposes an
activity to reduce or remove greenhouse gases from the
atmosphere. For example, shifting to cover cropping or planting
trees. They prepare a document describing their activity, how
it meets all of the relevant VCS program requirements, and
demonstrate how the activity will cut emissions beyond what
they would have been in the absence of the project. The
document is posted for public comment, and is assessed by
independent auditors whose work we oversee. Verra conducts a
final assessment and formally registers the project if find
that the project meets all of our requirements. The proponent
must then implement their project, monitor emissions over time,
and calculate its emissions impacts. Once again, they provide
documents for assessment by independent auditors and then by
us. Assuming we find the emission reductions meet all of our
requirements, we then issue carbon credits, one carbon credit
per ton of carbon dioxide equivalent that was reduced or
removed.
Credits can be used for various purposes. Most commonly,
corporations use them to voluntarily compensate for their
emissions and declare this in their annual or sustainability
reports. Once used, a carbon credit is removed from the market
and cannot be used by anyone else.
High integrity carbon crediting programs possess several
attributes to ensure the integrity of the credits they issue.
First, they rely on scientifically sound methodologies or
protocols to quantify the emission reductions. Currently, Verra
has approved six methodologies in the agricultural sector, and
14 in the forestry sector.
Second, they rely on independent auditing. Expert
independent auditors assess projects and credits at all stages
against the requirements of the relevant carbon crediting
program. For their part, carbon crediting programs need to
ensure that the auditors working under their programs are
trained and accredited properly.
And third, they rely on a publicly accessible registry.
Credits are uniquely identified, linked to project records, and
tracked to prohibit double counting.
My second message is that voluntary markets are evolving
globally. To address the climate emergency, nearly 27 billion
tons of emission equivalents worldwide must be reduced or
removed. Voluntary carbon markets, which could generate 2 to 3
billion tons of this annual reduction, remain a small but
important part of the solution, especially because they have
the infrastructure and capacity to scale up quickly.
This growth has already begun. Demand is escalating
rapidly, fueled primarily by corporations seeking to fulfill
net-zero or zero emissions pledges, including major American
and international corporations. When demand grows, supply grows
too. Verra issued 141 million credits last year, and we
anticipate that doubling this year.
This takes me to my third and final message. Participating
in voluntary carbon markets can benefit the American
agriculture and forestry sectors, and I say this for a few
reasons. The first is that nature-based solutions can reduce
emissions in the near-term, versus technological solutions that
are still very expensive and will require time to scale up. The
second is that nature-based solutions deliver many beyond
carbon benefits. They improve water quality, they prevent
erosion, and they protect biodiversity. The third is that
finance from carbon credits can lead to important innovations,
such as supporting the transition to regenerative agriculture,
and the ongoing development of science and technology to
measure soil carbon. Fourth and finally, high integrity carbon
crediting programs provide American farmers and forest owners
the ability to secure finances that will help them implement
farming and forest management practices that benefit both them
and the climate.
Thank you very much for the opportunity. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Antonioli follows:]

Prepared Statement of David Antonioli, Chief Executive Officer, Verra,
Washington, D.C.
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the Committee:

Thank you for the opportunity to provide testimony for the hearing
``Voluntary Carbon Markets in Agriculture and Forestry''.
My name is David Antonioli, and I am the Chief Executive Officer of
Verra, a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the District of
Columbia and a tax-exempt organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the
U.S. Internal Revenue Code.
Founded in 2007, Verra certifies the impacts of environmental and
social activities. We manage the world's largest voluntary carbon
crediting program: the Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) Program.
To date, the VCS Program has issued 760 million carbon credits from
1,733 projects in over 80 countries. This includes 28.1 million carbon
credits from 93 projects in the United States of America. Each of these
carbon credits represents 1 tonne of greenhouse gas that has been
reduced or removed from the atmosphere.
In providing this testimony, I aim to convey three messages. The
first is to explain how high-integrity carbon crediting programs
operate. The second is to outline how voluntary carbon markets are
evolving in the United States and globally. The third is to identify
specifically how participation in voluntary carbon markets can benefit
the American agriculture and forestry sectors.
1. High-integrity carbon crediting programs
A high-integrity carbon crediting program, such as the VCS Program,
involves multiple processes aimed at ensuring that the carbon credits
it creates represent real emission reductions or removals. In this
testimony I focus on two of these processes.
The first is registration. In this process, one or more entities
propose the implementation of an activity, known as a ``project'', to
reduce or remove emissions from the atmosphere. These project
proponents must describe what this project will undertake, and this
project can be in almost any sector of the economy and involve almost
any type of activity--for example, planting trees or changing an
agricultural practice. They must also identify what emissions would be
in the absence of this project--in other words, the baseline level of
emissions under a business-as-usual scenario. Finally, they must
calculate the projected difference between the baseline emissions and
the estimated emissions.
The project proponents must submit a document setting out how the
project meets the VCS Program requirements to an accredited,
independent auditor, who scrutinizes the document to ensure that the
project meets all program rules, which are developed with extensive
scientific input and thorough public consultations. If the auditor
approves, Verra then conducts an additional review and, if Verra also
approves, the project can be formally registered.
All that said, registration alone is insufficient to create carbon
credits. To create carbon credits, a second process, known as issuance,
must be completed.
In the issuance process, and provided that the project has been
successfully registered, the project proponents must actually implement
their project: they must plant the trees, or they must change the
agricultural practice that they committed to. The project proponents
must also measure the emissions that they are reducing or removing as a
result of their project activities.
Once again, the project proponents must submit their findings, in
the form of a monitoring report, to an accredited, independent auditor,
who scrutinizes the report to ensure that the project, again, meets all
rules of the VCS Program. If the auditor approves, Verra then conducts
an additional review and, if Verra also approves, Verra will create, or
``issue'', carbon credits corresponding to these emissions reductions
and removals.
Graphic 1: Project cycle

Upon issuance, carbon credits have many possible uses. The most
common use of carbon credits issued by the VCS Program (``Verified
Carbon Units'' or ``VCUs'') is the retirement of these units by
corporations that wish to compensate for their corporate emissions
(e.g., for travel, or for electricity consumption that cannot be
provided by renewables) voluntarily and report this compensation in
their annual and/or sustainability reports. VCUs can also be retired to
satisfy compliance obligations in jurisdictions where they are
accepted. Retiring a carbon credit means it is removed from the market
and cannot be used anymore by anyone other than the retiring entity.
I describe the above processes because I wish to clarify the
attributes that we believe are crucial in ensuring the high integrity
of carbon credits. These include:

Accounting Methodologies: Projects and carbon credits must
be assessed using a technically sound methodology to accurately
quantify emission reductions and removals.

In the agriculture sector, Verra has approved six (6)
methodologies that quantify changes in soil organic carbon
stocks and nitrous oxide and methane emissions. Management
practices covered by these methodologies include improved
cropland and grassland management such as reduced tillage,
cover cropping, and rotational grazing. Our most recent
methodology covers most of these practices and was
developed with the support of U.S. company Indigo Ag. We
also recently approved an accounting methodology that
quantifies reductions in methane emissions through the use
of a food additive that helps inhibit the microbes in a
cow's stomach.

In the forestry sector, Verra has approved fourteen
(14) methodologies that span improved forest management,
conservation, reforestation, and avoided deforestation. We
are working with various U.S. public and private entities
on a new methodology that uses fuel treatments (thinning,
prescribed fire, and managed natural fire) to reduce the
risk of large-scale stand-replacing wildfires, and increase
forest resiliency to withstand increased threats.

Independent Auditing: Carbon credits must come from projects
that have been assessed by qualified independent third parties,
with a second check applied by the crediting program, to ensure
that standards are met and that methodologies are correctly
applied. This takes place initially at project registration and
then upon every instance of credit issuance. Verra works with
the ANSI National Accreditation Board (ANAB) to accredit U.S.
and internationally-based auditors. We currently have six
auditors accredited for the VCS Program based in the United
States and have accredited a total of 27 auditors around the
world. This accreditation is done against International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards for
accreditation for GHG auditing organizations to ISO 14065 We
work with national auditing bodies such as the Standards
Council of Canada, the Mexican Accreditation Entity EMA, and
other anchor partners in Colombia and South Africa, which will
soon be complemented with partners in Europe, Asia and South
Asia.

Registry: Registrations and issuances must be tracked to
ensure transparency and to prohibit the double-counting of
carbon credits. Verra operates a registry, which records
projects at all stages of the registration process, records
every carbon credit that has been issued, and records how these
carbon credits are transferred and ultimately used (i.e.,
retired). To obtain an account in the Verra registry, we apply
robust Know Your Customer checks.
Graphic 2: Components of the VCS Program

In short, carbon credits issued by Verra under the VCS Program
follow a rigorous assessment process to be certified. They originate
from projects in various sectors, with agriculture and forestry being
the largest. Crucially, they must adhere to transparent and robust
methodological standards, be independently audited, and be tracked in a
publicly accessible, secure registry.
2. Evolution of voluntary carbon markets
Before outlining how voluntary carbon markets are evolving in the
United States and globally, I wish to express a critical reminder.
The world is facing a climate emergency. Under our current
emissions trajectory, global temperatures are expected to rise to 2.7
Celsius above pre-industrial levels by the end of the century, with
devastating consequences including rising sea levels, devastating
floods caused by severe rainfall, and destructive wildfires fueled by
extended periods of drought, all of which put communities at risk,
including here in the United States. To avert this calamity, we must do
all that we can to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 Celsius above
pre-industrial levels.
In practice, this means cutting global emissions by \1/2\ by 2030,
and then eliminating remaining global emissions to zero by 2050. In
numerical terms, that means cutting over 27 billion tons of carbon
dioxide, or its equivalent in other greenhouse gases, in the next 9
years.
To date, the quantity of emissions that have been reduced or
removed through voluntary carbon markets is a small portion of that
amount. Yet voluntary carbon markets provide built-out, ready-made
infrastructure for identifying opportunities to cut emissions and to
quantify the impacts of these opportunities. It can be scaled up
rapidly to meet the demand that has finally arrived. For this reason,
it is widely argued that voluntary carbon markets must scale up rapidly
over the coming decade. The Taskforce on Scaling Voluntary Carbon
Markets (TSVCM), led by United Nations Special Envoy on Climate Action
and Finance Mark Carney, who is also the former Governor of the Banks
of Canada and England, argues that voluntary carbon markets must be
scaled up fifteen-fold by 2030.
At Verra, we are seeing this growth already starting to take place.
Corporations around the world are increasingly recognizing the
importance of cutting their emissions. Many are reducing their carbon
footprints through energy efficiency, purchasing of renewable energy
and other measures. Quite often, however, these entities cannot meet
their targets or eliminate their carbon footprints altogether, at least
in the near term, with internal reductions alone. They need a flexible
mechanism to achieve these aspirational goals. By using voluntary
carbon markets, corporations can complement internal reductions and
neutralize or offset their emissions by retiring carbon credits
generated by projects that reduce emissions elsewhere.
Today's voluntary carbon market is a robust and effective means to
tackle climate change with the international validation provided by
international certification bodies like Verra, strong corporate
awareness, and market growth. Leading scientists, private
practitioners, community members, landowners, and decision-makers from
all corners of the world have engaged in voluntary carbon markets,
mainstreaming this increasingly robust and accepted tool for driving
finance to reducing emissions.
As an example of this mainstreaming, consider that the
infrastructure provided by voluntary carbon markets is increasingly
being used to support jurisdictional efforts to address climate change.
Taxes established in Colombia in 2016 and South Africa in 2020 permit
the use of high-integrity carbon credits, such as those issued by
Verra's VCS Program, to meet compliance obligations. Specifically,
companies in those countries can retire eligible carbon credits (such
as VCUs) instead of paying the carbon tax. The International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) established the Carbon Offsetting and
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA), a global market-
based mechanism in which airlines and other aircraft operators will
offset any growth in their CO
2
emissions above 2020 levels
with the use of carbon credits generated by organizations like Verra
Governments have also supported the use of voluntary carbon markets
as a means to help companies achieve ambitious non-regulatory climate
targets while also helping to drive finance towards climate action. For
example, Australia manages the National Carbon Offset Standard (NCOS)
which sets minimum requirements for calculating, auditing and
offsetting the carbon footprint of an organization or product to
achieve 'carbon neutrality', and provides guidance on what is a
genuine, additional voluntary carbon credit.
I express the above viewpoints to illustrate that the voluntary
carbon market is evolving rapidly, is entering the mainstream, and is
emerging as the instrument of choice for helping corporations and
increasingly governments around the world to address greenhouse gas
emissions.
3. Benefits for American agriculture and forestry sectors
From Verra's perspective, there is a significant opportunity for
scaling up the supply of carbon credits from the American agriculture
and forestry sectors in order to meet corporate demand, both at home
and abroad. We base this statement on the following observations.
The first is that nature-based solutions, such as agriculture and
forestry, represent a unique opportunity to reduce emissions in the
near term. Technological solutions such as carbon capture and use or
sequestration (CCUS), or direct air capture (DAC), hold significant
promise, and at Verra we are directing considerable time and effort to
facilitating their growth. However, the reality is that these solutions
are currently very expensive to operate, and they will take
considerable time to scale up.
The second is that nature-based solutions provide multiple other
benefits. To begin, they can provide additional income to those on the
front-lines of climate action, such as farmers and forest owners who
can use the voluntary carbon market to help them cover the costs
associated with new practices. In addition, nature-based solutions can
improve water quality, prevent erosion, and strengthen biodiversity.
These additional benefits are increasingly quantified and verified, and
they can help meet environmental justice and other local priorities.
The third is that there is considerable scope for innovation in
agriculture and forestry. For example, Verra recently launched a public
comment period for a methodology being developed to quantify emissions
reductions and removals via biochar in soils as well as non-
agricultural applications like asphalt and cement. Verra is also in
conversations with agricultural technology companies about supporting
the use of innovative fungal inoculants and other probiotics to reduce
synthetic fertilizer needs, thereby reducing nitrous oxide
(N
2
O) emissions, another potent greenhouse gas. The
voluntary carbon market provides a mechanism for driving private
finance to climate action projects that would otherwise not get off the
ground due to cost or technological limitations.
The fourth is that the voluntary carbon market provides a route-to-
market for American farmers and forest owners. Given the scaling of
global demand, the time is ripe to facilitate their access to ready-
made infrastructure to reward them for cutting emissions and to enable
them to sell these credits to markets at home and abroad, and high-
integrity carbon crediting programs such as Verra's VCS Program can
help to provide this opportunity.
Thank you for your consideration of my testimony, and I look
forward to your questions.

The Chairman. Thank you very much for your excellent
testimony.
And now, Ms. Eideberg, please begin when you are ready for
your 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF CALLIE EIDEBERG, J.D., DIRECTOR,
GOVERNMENT RELATIONS, ENVIRONMENTAL DEFENSE FUND, WASHINGTON,
D.C.

Ms. Eideberg. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Member Thompson, and all of the Members of this
Committee for the opportunity and the invitation to participate
in today's hearing.
The topic of voluntary carbon markets is extremely timely,
and it is of significant importance to farmers in all of our
shared environment. I am here to represent the Environmental
Defense Fund, an international nonprofit organization that
creates transformational solutions to the most serious
environmental problems. We link science, economics, law, and
innovative private-sector partnerships to accomplish this goal.
At EDF, we collaborate with farmers, farm organizations,
and businesses throughout the supply chain to ensure a climate
resilient and profitable future for U.S. agriculture. Our
Farmer Advisory Board is made up of large-scale conventional
farmers from many of the districts represented in this room,
and that Farmer Advisory Board is instrumental in shaping our
agricultural policy and our research priorities.
EDF has also helped to found the Food and Agriculture
Climate Alliance, along with some of the leading agricultural
and commodity groups. We want to build support for climate
solutions and innovative approaches, including voluntary carbon
markets, and we want to build them across party lines.
These voluntary markets, although currently in their
infancy, have the potential to reward producers for management
practices that reduce greenhouse gas emissions while also
improving the resilience of farmers and our rural communities.
I have included a number of EDF's policy recommendations
that can maximize this potential in my written testimony, but
in my comments today, I will emphasize three important
considerations for this Committee that will foster efficient
and effective voluntary markets.
First of all, there are a number of ways that working lands
can contribute to and profit from climate solutions. While
storing carbon in soil is one of those options, it is also one
of the more difficult ways to reduce emissions, and we still
have a lot to learn about its true potential. Therefore,
policies and incentives should prioritize practices that are
now shovel ready and enjoy high confidence in terms of
greenhouse gas reductions. These would include avoided
emissions, avoiding emissions of methane and nitrous oxide
specifically.
Second, because the science and data on soil sequestration
is not yet fully mature, voluntary markets should remain the
focus of policy makers, and I stress the word voluntary. Until
we have a higher level of confidence in environmental outcomes,
carbon credits should not be allowed to satisfy current or
future compliance obligations, either for companies or for
farmers.
And third, the private-sector is already engaging in the
voluntary greenhouse gas marketplace, and farmers are already
being paid for their environmental outcomes. However, our
approaches to accounting for these environmental benefits are
all over the map. There is no referee on the playing field to
ensure consistency in the measurement, the reporting, or the
verification of those emissions reductions. So, without better
standards or any type of standardization, we may very well see
these markets fail.
So now, I appreciate the Committee having this hearing. Now
is precisely the time for Congress to step in, provide some
direction, and provide some guidance. America's working lands
can be an important climate solution provider by reducing
emissions and building resilience to climate impacts that we
are already seeing on the land. Voluntary markets have the
potential to increase investment in these solutions and deliver
durable benefits for the climate and for farmers and ranchers
and foresters. To help realize that potential, Congress and
USDA should promote equitable access to financial incentives,
technical assistance, and to research that will help accelerate
and reward agriculture and forestry's climate contributions.
EDF looks forward to working with this Committee to tackle
these issues, and I appreciate having this conversation with
you all today. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Eideberg follows:]

Prepared Statement of Callie Eideberg, J.D., Director, Government
Relations, Environmental Defense Fund, Washington, D.C.
Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and all the
Members of this Committee for the opportunity to provide testimony
about the role of agriculture in voluntary carbon markets. I am honored
to share Environmental Defense Fund's perspective.
EDF is a leading international nonprofit organization that creates
transformational solutions to the most serious environmental problems
by linking science, economics, law and innovative private-sector
partnerships. With more than 2.5 million members and a global staff of
750 scientists, economists, policy experts and other professionals,
we're one of the world's largest environmental organizations.
At EDF, we are also proud to collaborate with farmers, farmer
organizations, land-grant universities and businesses throughout the
supply chain to ensure a climate-resilient and profitable future for
U.S. agriculture. EDF's farmer advisory board is instrumental in
shaping our agricultural policy and research priorities, and EDF helped
found the Food and Agriculture Climate Alliance, along with leading
agricultural and commodity groups, to build support for agricultural
climate solutions and innovative approaches like voluntary carbon
markets.
As the Director of Government Relations, I advocate for policies
that reduce the climate impact of farming and agricultural production,
while simultaneously maintaining or improving farmer profitability.
This is a tough path to carve, but it can, and must, be done.
Farmers, foresters and landowners are squarely at the intersection
of climate adaptation and mitigation. Domestic farming operations
contribute approximately 10% to overall U.S. greenhouse gas emissions
and are also at high risk from climate-induced stressors such as heat,
drought and pests.
Voluntary carbon markets, although currently in their infancy, have
the potential to reward producers for practices that can reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and may sequester carbon in soil, plants and
trees, while also improving the resilience of farmsand rural
communities.
However, the U.S. voluntary carbon market currently involves
multiple carbon registries and protocols for different types of
emissions reduction and carbon removal practices, with variable
measurement and accounting approaches. For some newer credits, such as
soil carbon credits, we need standards for consistent, transparent
measurement and accounting. Otherwise, farmers, other credit developers
and purchasers risk investing in poorly quantified and potentially
reversible climate benefits.
As our understanding of long-term sequestration potential evolves,
the U.S. Department of Agriculture and Congress should support efforts
to secure emissions reductions through increased efficiency in on-farm
operations, fertilizer management and methane management. Developing
these elements of the carbon market now will provide more time to
develop high-quality credits through soil carbon sequestration.
EDF recommends a number of policy principles to help build a high-
quality carbon market that compensates farmers for putting America's
working lands to work for climate action broadly, equitably and with
strong integrity.
This testimony will focus on four areas of policy that Congress
should consider when developing voluntary carbon markets for working
lands: quality framework and assessment of protocols; research and
incentives; benefits for early adopters; and technical assistance.
1. Quality framework and assessment of protocols
The voluntary market for greenhouse gas emissions reductions or net
carbon sequestered in the agriculture and forestry sector is growing
rapidly with a wide range of differing crediting standards. Congress
can help provide clarity by establishing a framework for quality
assurance. This framework would not prescribe the use of specific
protocols but would instead set quality objectives to ensure that the
voluntary credits assessed across different climate registries are
comparable and equivalent.
EDF recently published a report comparing existing protocols used
to generate credits for soil carbon sequestration and found that the
protocols differ in the treatment of additionality, uncertainty,
permanence and reversal, leading to inconsistency of credit
quantification. This variation causes uncertainty for farmers
generating credits and for buyers purchasing credits, and makes it
difficult to determine if credits are truly delivering net climate
benefits.
The inconsistency undermines confidence in and the credibility of
voluntary agricultural carbon markets. A protocol assessment by USDA or
a neutral third party would reduce risks across markets and could
assist with moving from isolated projects to a scale that can address
reversal, additionality and permanence and make a real contribution to
the climate effort.
One possibility would be for USDA to establish an advisory group to
define criteria for greenhouse gas quantification; monitoring,
reporting and verification, or MRV; and social impact guardrails. The
advisory group deliberations would be transparent and published on the
USDA website and membership would be drawn from USDA, civil society and
carbon market experts. EDF, along with partners World Wildlife Fund and
Oko-Institut, authored a report that identified six ``quality
objectives'' for carbon credits and established specific criteria that
can be used to evaluate credits against each of these quality
objectives. This could be a starting point for the advisory process.
Once criteria are agreed upon, USDA would publish the criteria and
use them to assess, score and certify registries' methodologies and
categorize credits in accordance with their level of scientific
certainty. USDA would publish the evaluation of protocols, driving all
protocols to adhere to the quality criteria set by USDA.
2. Research and incentives
Congress should direct USDA to prioritize scientific and economic
research about voluntary markets and the agricultural practices that
are most likely to provide a return on investment and reduce emissions.
This practice-based research should increase the use of climate-smart
practices on farms, while also improving the rigor and transparency of
climate models and measurements to support the efforts of voluntary
carbon markets.
Connecting the extensive agricultural research community to USDA's
vast agricultural datasets is a critical strategy to quickly and
efficiently answer key research questions about the multiple benefits
of climate-smart agricultural practices. USDA should engage trusted
research partners to advance USDA research priorities by developing and
testing tools for farmers and university researchers to access and
standardize anonymized USDA datasets.
The scale and scope of the agricultural research investments needed
to prepare farmers for climate impacts and adaptation can be
accomplished through partnerships with land-grant universities,
commodity groups and other trusted partners. Researchers and
corporations should be encouraged to share their data within this
anonymized data framework. USDA should also establish and maintain
shared public research data repositories to allow all users to benefit
equally from data that improves ecosystem quantification methodologies,
such as process models.
Creating channels to clearly communicate how producer data is being
used, allowing producers to opt in or out of research projects, and
communicating the results of research that producers opted in to can
build farmer and ranchers' trust that their data is being used
responsibly and effectively to generate knowledge that will ultimately
benefit their operations.
USDA should expand knowledge of regional climate impacts and
climate-smart agricultural practices and invest in researching new
practices to engage the full diversity of U.S. farmers, ranchers and
production systems in conservation and climate solutions.
There is a strong body of existing knowledge about the long-term
financial and environmental benefits of common conservation practices,
such as cover cropping and no till, in major row cropping systems that
can be used to expand adoption of those practices today. However,
research should also develop new strategies and practices, particularly
for other crops, animal operations and smaller operations with
different economic constraints. This includes developing additional
tools to measure and manage the major sources of emissions from
livestock and nitrogen application, and to harness bioenergy from
crops, food processing, livestock waste management and on-farm energy
use.
3. Benefits for early adopters
Congress should carefully consider how best to incorporate the
successful practices of early adopters. Federal policy should recognize
and reward early adopters' efforts, ensure additionality, and protect
against the risk of practice reversal as producers aim to set their
baseline.
As part of EDF's work with the Food and Agriculture Climate
Alliance, we recommended that early adopters be eligible for a one-time
bonus payment contingent upon participation in a new or existing
conservation program. This one-time payment would motivate producers
who have already adopted conservation practices to maintain or increase
enrollment in voluntary conservation programs to ensure continued
sequestration efforts and promote additionality. This would also assist
producers in the transition from participating in practice-based
programs to outcomes-based programs.
4. Technical assistance
USDA and Congress should prioritize and skillfully implement
technical assistance to enable equitable access to voluntary markets
for all potential participants and to help farmers and ranchers plan
their climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. Technical assistance
from trusted partners and on-the-ground support is critical to help
farmers and ranchers overcome knowledge and administrative barriers
that impede the adoption of climate-smart practices.
Recommendations for technical assistance include data collection
and dissemination, increased investments in conservation programs and
ensuring equitable access for all participants.

Collecting and publishing market data. In coordination with
the Environmental Protection Agency and State Department, USDA
should report yearly on the status of voluntary carbon markets,
including where voluntary reductions credits are being used in
compliance markets, such as California's Air Resource Board
Emissions Trading Program. Reporting should be similar to
USDA's published commodity reports.

Collecting and analyzing data on landscape levels. Data
collection and analysis at landscape scales would reduce the
risks associated with additionality, permanence and leakage,
while also decreasing measurement, reporting and verification
costs. For example, USDA Agricultural Statistical Districts
could be used to aggregate climate contributions from farms
with similar soil and climate types, allowing for USDA or
another entity to conduct landscape-scale monitoring of both
areas with carbon sequestration projects and areas without
projects. This monitoring, analogous to the jurisdictional
approaches proposed for high-quality REDD+ tropical forest
carbon credits or for national emissions inventories, would
facilitate full carbon accounting, reducing issues associated
with additionality, permanence and leakage and reducing the
potential for double-counting. USDA could similarly categorize,
research and update potential credits from crops, livestock and
forestry as more is learned.

Ensuring equitable access to markets. USDA should engage
with socially disadvantaged farmers, including organizations
representing Black farmers and small-scale farmers, directly to
hear what their producers need to be successful and to have
equitable access to USDA conservation programs and voluntary
carbon markets. This should occur very early in USDA's
engagement with private, voluntary carbon markets. Based on
this engagement, USDA may choose to treat socially
disadvantaged farmers differently than other categories of
farmers to promote equitable outcomes. Large farming
operations, for example, have different economies of scale,
face lower prices for inputs, have better access to finance and
can more easily engage in climate-smart activities relative to
many smaller farm operations. USDA policy that accounts for
these differences and applies appropriate administrative
processes and incentives based on farm size should help smaller
farms and historically underrepresented producers participate
in voluntary markets.

Ensuring environmental injustices are addressed. As the
agricultural sector works to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
from livestock production, it must also engage with
environmental justice communities and remedy localized harms
such as dust, odor and spray from manure lagoons reaching
nearby resident's homes, community buildings and schools. USDA
must prioritize the most vulnerable communities and coordinate
efforts to ensure local impacts from farming, such as harmful
air and water quality and the associated public health risks,
are remediated. USDA should work with the private-sector to
research, develop and bring new technologies to scale that can
address these externalities alongside emission reductions.

Increase conservation program investments. Congress should
set aside significant funding from mandatory farm bill
conservation programs and fund a technical assistance
initiative focused on increasing climate resilience and
reducing net greenhouse emissions. Funds could be used to
recruit and train additional technical assistance providers and
staff who would provide the on-the-ground support needed to
implement soil health and climate stewardship practices.

Agriculture and forestry are essential to climate solutions,
including cutting greenhouse gas emissions, storing carbon and building
resilience to climate-fueled impacts like droughts and floods.
Voluntary carbon markets have the potential to increase investment in
these climate solutions and deliver durable benefits for the climate,
farmers, ranchers and foresters.
To fully tap into that potential, Congress and USDA must promote
equitable access to the financial incentives, technical assistance and
research advancements that will help accelerate, and reward,
agriculture and forestry's climate contributions.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Eideberg, for your
excellent testimony.
And now, Mr. Milligan, we will turn to you. Please begin
when you are ready.

STATEMENT OF DAVID MILLIGAN, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
WHEAT GROWERS, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Mr. Milligan. Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and
Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. I am David Milligan, President of the National
Association of Wheat Growers. I raise wheat, corn, soybeans,
and dry edible beans with my son on our farm in Cass City,
Michigan.
On our farm, wheat planting time is from September to
October. We are harvesting dry edible beans followed by seeding
wheat with over one million seeds per acre. Soon, the ground
will be covered with growing wheat with active roots, providing
a cover all winter. We will harvest the wheat in July. That can
be followed by a cover crop like clover, or perhaps a double
crop of soybeans in areas with longer growing seasons.
Wheat is produced in 42 states, from Washington State to
Pennsylvania, and from Montana to Texas. Each area has a
different climate, soil, rotations, and planting dates for
spring and winter wheat. The typical rainfall in wheat
production regions can range dramatically from 6" to 35". In
certain regions, winter wheat can be added to a corn-soy
rotation. By adding wheat to this rotation, we can add
additional benefits such as reducing weed pressure, decreasing
disease, and providing a cover. Any carbon market has to take
this rotation into consideration. Additionally, there are some
geographical regions in the United States where wheat is the
only major food commodity that can be grown.
Wheat growers need additional technical assistance to be
able to balance the economics of their operation with the
uncertainty of undertaking different management systems as the
concept of carbon markets come to develop. The drier, arid
regions where growing spring wheat have limited the use of
cover crops due to the lack of moisture. They are using carbon-
saving practice like residue, no-till, and reduced-till to
conserve moisture for the wheat crop.
Many producers already practice excellent environmental
stewardship that sequesters carbon and should be treated
equally with new adopters under new carbon markets. Excluding
early adapters does not take into consideration the long-term
management and ongoing investments in environmental benefits to
maintaining conservation systems, such as no-till.
Wheat producers have a high rate of adoption of reduced
tillage, with 67 percent of wheat growers adopting conservation
tillage. Carbon markets should not discourage production of
wheat for harvest. In production agriculture, we talk a great
deal about value-added products. The grain that we grow in the
field goes on to a different product where processing and
packaging add value along the supply chain. That $3 loaf of
bread includes just pennies paid to the farmer for their wheat.
The carbon credit will be generated on the farm. The farmer
needs to have an equitable return as the carbon credits
increase in value.
As the Committee continues to review these issues, the
voluntary carbon markets should be in addition to and not
replace USDA programs. USDA conservation programs, funding for
wheat research, new varieties, and new technology will be
necessary. Research is essential to increasing our productivity
and continuing to produce more using less resources. Many of
the management systems will not be possible without access to a
variety of crop production tools. Conservation tillage,
protecting the growing crops, and allowing us to be the most
efficient with the land production requires crop production
tools.
NAWG members are cautiously optimistic about voluntary
carbon efforts. We see the potential to have both increasing
positive environmental impact and additional revenue stream.
However, there is still uncertainty regarding diverse rotations
and different crops in the field throughout the year, and the
impact on some practices of crop production and quality. An
added complexity of winter wheat production is a unique system
of planting in the fall, providing a root system over the
winter, with harvest in the summer.
I want to thank the Chairman, the Ranking Member, and
Members of the Committee for inviting me to testify today on
this important topic. Wheat growers continue to have questions
about the transparency and clarity of requirements, costs,
measurement, and carbon pricing for the numerous voluntary
carbon efforts before our growers today.
Thank you, and I look forward to taking your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Milligan follows:]

Prepared Statement of David Milligan, President, National Association
of Wheat Growers, Washington, D.C.
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am David
Milligan, President of the National Association of Wheat Growers. I
raise wheat, corn, soybeans, and dry edible beans with my son on our
farm in Cass City Michigan. Thank you for holding this hearing today to
discuss voluntary carbon markets in agriculture and forestry. NAWG is
very interested in engaging in the policy discussions, market
development and as individual grower members--understanding the details
and weighing the options for participation in voluntary carbon
programs, protocols, and markets.
The National Association of Wheat Growers represents state wheat
grower associations and grower members in 20 states. The wheat
production in each of those states is varied, from the climate, soil,
rotations and most importantly the type of wheat and end-use markets
for the wheat produced. As a crop that is primarily destined for the
food supply the quantity and quality of the wheat we produce is equally
important. It is important to point out that there are six different
classes of wheat. The six classes of wheat have a variety of end uses--
whether it is pizza, pasta, bread, cakes, or crackers--each product has
characteristics that rely on a different type of wheat and a different
protein content in the wheat and flour. Some wheat--winter wheat--is
planted in the fall and harvested in the following summer and some--
spring wheat--is planted in the spring and harvested a few months later
in the summer.
There are several benefits of growing wheat. Wheat improves soil
quality, protects the soil from erosion and reduces weed pressure when
added to a crop rotation. Winter wheat provides living plant cover over
the winter months. The wheat straw residue left on the field provides a
durable residue cover to protect the soil from wind and water erosion.
In certain regions, winter wheat can be added to a corn-soy rotation
adding a third crop over the 2 years and providing a living cover over
winter and additional economic revenue from adding a wheat crop.
Like many areas of U.S. agriculture, wheat growers are producing
more with less. Over the last 100 years, wheat yields have increased
3\1/2\ times with about \2/3\ the acres in production. As you may know,
there is not commercially available genetically modified wheat and we
have not had the level of research and advancement in wheat research
that other crops have experienced over the last 25 years. Wheat growers
depend on different management strategies including diverse crop
rotation, conservation practices, research and breeding including new
hybrid wheat varieties, and crop protection tools. Technical assistance
from Land-Grant University wheat research programs, extension programs,
USDA and conservation district employees, and private agronomists is
needed to make these systems work and allow growers to make ongoing
improvements to their cropping systems.
I mention these production issues because they are some of the
unique characteristics that wheat growers must consider when looking at
the developing voluntary carbon market opportunities. At this point,
NAWG members probably have more questions than answers about
participation in voluntary carbon markets.
NAWG Policy
NAWG members have been discussing carbon programs and policies and
have developed several guiding statements that were approved by the
board earlier this year. NAWG believes that carbon policies and
programs should recognize the environmental benefits of agricultural
practices. Growers undertake conservation practices at their own
expense and while these practices have environmental benefits, they can
also have financial costs to install and can impact yield or reduce
acreage in production and therefore reduce the income of the farm. NAWG
supports voluntary, market-based programs and policies that provide
economic opportunities for farmers and that recognize the achievements
of growers in protecting and restoring the environment by rewarding
early adopters and adding new practices. A voluntary market-based
approach allows for growers to have that additional income stream from
adopting and maintaining different production and conservation systems.
Programs should be science-based, flexible and inclusive to include
allowances for regional, geographic, or preferential differences in
farming practices. We know very clearly that one specific approach
won't work for all the producers across the U.S., so flexibility in
addressing the diverse cropping systems will be essential.
Last year, NAWG joined the Ecosystem Service Market Consortium.
ESMC provides a forum where many grower organizations, food companies,
input supply companies and technical advisors can come together to
discuss the creation of ecosystem service protocols that could work
across the U.S. NAWG is interested in voluntary carbon market
opportunities that work for diverse wheat production systems across the
country.
Wheat Production
The opportunity to diversify income streams and quantify the
environmental benefits of conservation actions is of interest to wheat
growers. The potential for additional revenue from carbon or ecosystem
service credits must be weighted with the specific characteristics of
the farm. Growers must balance the economics of their operation with
the uncertainty of undertaking different management systems. Developing
the cropping system that works for an individual farming operation can
take many years of exploring practices and rotations adding risk to the
operation and making changes to those systems also comes with risk.
There are several issues unique to wheat production that would likely
factor into a wheat grower's decisions on potential participation in
voluntary carbon markets:

Diversity of wheat cropping systems.

Relatively high rate of conservation tillage adoption and
treatment of early adopters.

Regional climate, especially production in semi-arid
regions.

Winter wheat provides a living crop in the field over
winter.

Technical assistance is needed to understand the agronomic
and environmental impact of practices, such as nutrient use
efficiency and cover crops in semi-arid regions.

Need to maintain a high-quality wheat crop to meet market
demands.

Wheat is produced from Washington State to Pennsylvania and down
the coast to North Carolina and from Montana to Texas, with wheat
production in 42 states. As mentioned earlier, the different classes of
wheat, the timing of planting, and end markets allow producers to grow
wheat varieties that align with their local conditions and diverse
cropping systems. For example, here are a few production scenarios:

In central Kansas, a wheat grower could also be producing
corn, soybeans, sorghum, and alfalfa, practice no-till for over
15 years, and be trying out cover crops--but finding the right
mix that works for this cropping system takes time.

In Colorado, where there is an arid climate, a wheat grower
may also produce corn, cattle, and practice no-till for about
15 years, but cover crops are a challenge in the dry climate.

In Ohio, a wheat grower could also be producing corn and
soybeans, and cover crops may be used--but the winter wheat is
also in the ground over winter.

In northern Minnesota, a wheat grower may produce corn, soy,
and sugarbeets, but there is not as much no-till in this area
due to the colder, wetter climate.

In dry northern Montana, a wheat grower would also be
producing pulse crops and practice no-till for over 20 years
and trying different farming practices to conserve water but
cover crops not working--however the cropping system has the
ground covered most of the year.

In eastern Washington, a wheat grower could also produce
bluegrass seed, lentils, garbanzo beans, dry peas, and canola,
and there is more minimum-till than no-till in the area.

From these examples, you can see that wheat growers know the
importance of diversifying their cropping systems to meet the unique
growing conditions, keeping the ground covered with a growing crop to
protect the soil from wind and water erosion, managing plant pest and
weed resistance, and pursuing market opportunities by producing crops
that fit their geographic location and climate. According to USDA data,
67 percent of wheat growers have adopted conservation tillage--up from
under 40 percent in 2004. With wheat production in semi-arid regions,
growers take action to protect limited soil moisture and conservation
tillage is part of that management system. In the eastern U.S., where
there can be the opposite issue with too much moisture, wheat provides
a living cover over winter and reduces erosion and provides durable
crop residue as part of a no-till system.
Growers will need technical assistance to understand both the
agronomic and environmental impact of additional climate-smart
practices. As I mentioned, wheat growers have been adopting
conservation tillage over the last 15-20 years or more. Still,
additional technical assistance will be needed to continue to expand
and incorporate further climate-smart practices. Whether it is
additional practices to sequester carbon or nutrient use efficiency and
avoided greenhouse gas emissions, or practices that continue to benefit
water quality, growers need to understand the costs and benefits of the
practices. Technical assistance can come from different sources but
must be from a trusted source for growers to take action to change
production systems. Additionally, any recommendations and information
must be regionally appropriate given the diverse production regions for
wheat.
Regardless of the wheat production region, the most important
consideration for wheat growers will be economics. The changes to
management systems could impact the quality of the wheat crop, and that
impacts their long-term economic viability. If new market opportunities
come with costs that don't balance out, growers cannot afford to be
involved. And the current uncertainty of costs and obligations for the
growers is another layer of questions and not being able to make the
scenarios pencil out.
Wheat Production & Voluntary Carbon Efforts
In many voluntary climate efforts (programs, protocols, markets),
early adopters of conservation practices are not recognized as
potential participants, and growers cannot get credit for years of
positive environmental impacts. No-till systems must be continually
maintained, and growers must actively manage these systems. Yet many
climate efforts indicate that growers who have already adopted
conservation practices will not be eligible, or that once a practice
has been widely adopted it has become a normalized practice. This view
of early adopters does not take into consideration the long-term
management, ongoing investments and environmental benefits to
maintaining conservation systems such as no-till.
The uncertainty of the impact of certain conservation practices on
cash crops will increase growers' skepticism of participation in
voluntary carbon efforts or make participation unlikely. Wheat growers
in semi-arid regions are not likely to see the same benefits from cover
crops as those in higher rainfall areas. In the semi-arid production
regions, cover crops can use the limited soil moisture and adversely
impact the moisture available for the wheat crop and are not a
recommended practice.
No-till and cover crops are two primary practices that are
mentioned in many of the voluntary carbon programs, but these may not
be viable options to allow wheat growers to participate in the programs
because conservation tillage adoption rates are high, and cover crops
are not currently recommended for several wheat production regions.
Also, growers planting winter wheat will have a crop in the ground
during the traditional winter cover crop timing. This wheat acts as
that ``cover crop,'' providing a living cover over-winter and the same
carbon sequestration benefits.
Additional climate-smart practices that sequester carbon or avoid
greenhouse gas emissions must be fully understood by growers--both the
agronomic and environmental implications. As mentioned earlier, the
technical assistance to understand these practices and the costs and
benefits will be critical for adopting more climate-smart practices.
Regionally appropriate recommendations and understanding of site-
specific cropping systems will be necessary to ensure that wheat
systems maintain high quality wheat. Our foreign and domestic customers
source wheat and flour based on quality and U.S. wheat growers know the
importance of maintaining the supply of high quality domestically
sourced wheat. Changes to crop management systems could impact quality
that would impact the wheat growers' market and our ability to stay in
business. These agronomic impacts must be fully understood and take
time to work into a growers' farming operation. As has been outlined in
this testimony, wheat production is extremely varied across the
country, so those unique localized approaches that allow growers to
understand what works on their operation will be essential.
In production agriculture, we talk a great deal about value-added
products. The grain that we grow in the field goes on to become
different products where processing and packaging add value along the
supply chain. Wheat becomes flour that becomes that bread that you
purchase at the store. That $3 loaf of bread includes just pennies paid
to the farmer for their wheat at the beginning of the supply chain. As
voluntary carbon markets develop, growers must see a larger financial
return on carbon sequestration or avoided emissions generated on-farm.
Those carbon credits generated on farms will not change--they will
retain the same amount of carbon throughout the process to the end
purchaser. Therefore, growers must be paid substantially for the carbon
credits generated, without additional financial reductions along the
process.
In addition to these production issues, there is uncertainty about
contracts and the data, land ownership and land rental, and financial
obligations related to carbon programs. There are so many different
carbon program options. Growers must take a great deal of time and
effort to review the requirements before making any long-term
commitment. It probably will require a grower to use a lawyer to fully
understand the contract obligations and long-term implications for
their operation. A few of the questions that I am hearing from growers
are:

How is carbon measured--is there a standardized approach for
all programs?

How are baselines determined?

How are early adopters treated?

What are the data privacy issues? Data ownership?

How much does a change in practices cost--not just in terms
of seed cost, but farmer time to manage the changes, income
forgone resulting from the change in practices, or just the
uncertainty of the impact on the crop?

How easy is it to participate--data entry, time on paperwork
details?

Does a farmer need to own the land? What if there is no
long-term rental agreement?

How does a farmer get paid?

When does a farmer get paid?

How does a farmer know how much they will get paid? How do
they determine the financial risks?

What happens if crop protection tools are removed from our
toolbox during the life of the contract?

As the Committee continues to review these issues, the voluntary
carbon markets should be in addition to and not replace the USDA
programs. Wheat growers participate in and rely on the voluntary,
incentive-based conservation programs and technical assistance that
USDA provides. As outlined in this testimony, not all practices are
going to work for all wheat growing regions. Wheat production is very
diverse in geography and type of wheat grown and the crop management
systems are equally varied. USDA conservation has provided the
assistance to aid growers in making changes over the years and must
continue to do so as we learn more and expand conservation practice
adoption. In addition, USDA research funding for wheat research, new
varieties, and new technology will be necessary. Research is essential
to increasing our productivity and continuing to produce more using
less resources.
Many of the management systems would not be possible without access
to a variety of crop protection tools. Whether it is glyphosate used to
ensure there is no volunteer wheat in the field before planting that
can result in disease impacting the planted wheat crop, or to help
manage no-till systems or insecticides and fungicides used to protect
the growing crop, growers need continued access to these tools. Efforts
to restrict the use of these tools or remove products from the market
will adversely impact a grower's ability to manage these conservation
systems and could put long term management systems in jeopardy.
Conclusion
NAWG members are cautiously optimistic about voluntary carbon
efforts. We see the potential to have both increasingly positive
environmental impact and additional revenue stream for those ecosystem
services. However, there is still uncertainty if growers can
participate based on current conservation practice adoption, diverse
rotations that have different crops in the field throughout the year
and the impact of some practices on crop production and quality. An
added complexity of winter wheat production is its unique system of
planting in the fall, providing a living root system over winter with
subsequent harvest in the summer. Wheat growers also continue to have
questions about the transparency and clarity of requirements, costs,
measurement, and carbon pricing of the numerous voluntary carbon
efforts before growers today. NAWG looks forward to continuing to be
engaged in the discussions surrounding these voluntary efforts. Thank
you again for the opportunity to testify today.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Milligan. I
appreciate your excellent testimony.
And now we turn to you, Ms. Merrill, for your testimony.
You can begin now.

STATEMENT OF JEANNE MERRILL, POLICY DIRECTOR,
CALIFORNIA CLIMATE AND AGRICULTURE NETWORK,
ALAMEDA, CA

Ms. Merrill. Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the Committee. My name is Jeanne
Merrill. I am the Policy Director for the California Climate
and Agriculture Network, a coalition of the state's leading
sustainable organic agriculture organizations.
Since 2009, we have worked to advance agricultural
solutions to the climate crisis at the state and Federal
levels, working in partnership with the National Sustainable
Agriculture Coalition. Thank you for the opportunity to address
the important issue of carbon markets and their potential in
supporting farmers in mitigating and adapting to climate
change.
Today, I will speak to the California experience of the
carbon markets, and our state Climate-Smart Agriculture
programs. I will begin my remarks with an overview of the
original market efforts in this space.
Agriculture can and must be a part of the country's efforts
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase carbon sinks, and
improve resilience. Effective policy tools exist to help
farmers achieve these goals. However, since 2003, carbon
markets have proved themselves an inadequate tool to reach the
diversity of farmers and ranchers we must reach. Simply put,
carbon market approaches at the voluntary and compliance levels
have consistently failed to deliver on climate solutions in
agriculture on any meaningful scale, leaving the vast majority
of farmers without adequate resources to address the climate
crisis.
The Chicago Climate Exchange was the first national effort
to put a carbon market in place in 2003. The exchange set up a
market for offset credits generated by farmers whose practices
reduced greenhouse gas emissions, practices such as rotational
grazing, conservation tillage, prairie plantings. Companies and
local governments would buy those credits as a way of
voluntarily offsetting their own emissions. Farmer response to
the exchange was considerable. Within 2 years, the Farmers
Union had 2.6 million agriculture acres under contract with the
exchange in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Montana, and the Dakotas. The
Iowa Farm Bureau had another 600,000 acres under contract.
By 2010, the exchange had collapsed. The carbon market was
swamped with offset credits from willing farmers but didn't
have enough buyers, and as a result, the price of carbon
credits went from a high of roughly $7 to just 5  per metric
ton of CO
2
equivalent. In December 2010, the
exchange closed its doors, leaving farmers without support for
their projects.
The next significant effort to create a carbon market came
from California. In 2012 as part of its climate change law, the
state launched a cap-and-trade program, requiring large
greenhouse gas emitters to participate.
Now, 5--excuse me, 9 years later, there are still very few
ways for farmers to earn carbon credits, and they include
installing dairy digesters and taking up certain rice
management practices, both aimed at reducing methane emissions.
But with a low carbon price and high transaction costs for
farmers, only the dairy digester projects have sold carbon
credits, largely because of other state financial support for
those projects. Despite the 7 years it took to develop the rice
protocol for the carbon market, the state's rice producers have
stayed out of the California carbon market. It just doesn't
make financial sense.
Instead of relying on the carbon market, starting in 2014,
the State of California launched its first grants-based climate
change programs for farmers and ranchers. The Climate-Smart
Agriculture programs bypassed the complexities of the carbon
market, offering farmers technical and financial assistance to
develop their projects. The programs are modeled after USDA's
farm bill conservation programs.
Farmer response to the state Climate-Smart Agriculture
programs has been considerable, with application requests far
exceeding available funding. Together, these multi-benefit
Climate-Smart projects have resulted in greenhouse gas emission
reductions of more than 20 million metric tons of
CO
2
equivalent, or the equivalent of taking more
than 4.3 million cars off the road for 1 year.
To summarize, carbon markets have failed to deliver on
their promises. High transaction costs, the complexity of
developing offset protocols for compliance markets, low carbon
prices, and the inability to incentive multi-benefit projects
means few farmers can participate in the many opportunities for
agriculture to be part of the climate solution and are left
behind.
Time is ticking. According to the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, we have only until 2030 to bend the curve on
global greenhouse gas emissions to avoid the very worst of
climate change impacts. We cannot waste time on complex and
ineffective approaches. We have tried for nearly 20 years to
make carbon markets work for agriculture, and they have failed.
The good news is that we have time-tested and proven farm
bill conservation programs that can deliver the resources
farmers and ranchers need to mitigate and adapt to climate
change today, and we can do this while supporting farm
viability and profitability, reaching a diversity of producers,
including small and mid-scale producers, farmers of color, and
beginning farmers.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to address the
Committee today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Merrill follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jeanne Merrill, Policy Director, California
Climate and Agriculture Network, Alameda, CA
Thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members.
My name is Jeanne Merrill and I am the Policy Director for the
California Climate and Agriculture Network. We are a coalition of the
state's leading sustainable and organic agriculture organizations.
Since 2009, we have worked to advance agricultural solutions to the
climate crisis at the state level and at the Federal level, working in
partnership with the National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition.
Thank you for the opportunity to address the important issue of
carbon markets and their potential role in supporting farmers in
mitigating and adapting to climate change.
Today, I will speak to the California experience of the carbon
markets and our state-funded, grant-based Climate-Smart Agriculture
programs. I will begin my remarks with an overview of the original
market efforts in this space.
Farmers and ranchers have an important and unique role to play in
addressing climate change. Agriculture can and must be part of the
country's efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase carbon
sinks and become more resilient. Effective policy tools exist to help
farmers achieve these goals.
However, since 2003, carbon markets have proved themselves an
inadequate tool to reach the diversity of farmers and ranchers we must
reach. Simply put, carbon market approaches at the voluntary and
compliance levels have consistently failed to deliver on climate
solutions in agriculture on any meaningful scale, leaving the vast
majority of farmers and ranchers without adequate resources to address
the climate crisis.
The Chicago Climate Exchange
The Chicago Climate Exchange was the first national, voluntary
effort to put a carbon market in place. The Exchange set up a market
for offset credits generated by farmers and ranchers whose practices
reduced greenhouse gas emissions and increased carbon sinks \1\ on
agricultural lands--practices such as rotational grazing,\2\
conservation tillage,\3\ and prairie plantings.\4\ Companies and local
governments would buy those credits as a way of offsetting their own
greenhouse gas emissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ http://www.fao.org/soils-portal/soil-management/soil-carbon-
sequestration/en/.
\2\ https://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/national/home/
?cid=nrcs142p2_020783.
\3\ https://asi.ucdavis.edu/programs/ucsarep/about/what-is-
sustainable-agriculture/practices/conservation-tillage.
\4\ https://uwmadscience.news.wisc.edu/ecology/grasslands-among-
the-best-landscapes-to-curb-climate-change/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I was working in Wisconsin in 2006 when the state's Farmers Union
began reaching out to dairy producers and other farmers offering to pay
them for their climate-beneficial practices. The response was
considerable: Within 2 years, the Farmers Union had 2.6 million
agricultural acres \5\ under contract with the Chicago Climate Exchange
in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Montana, and the Dakotas. The Iowa Farm Bureau
had another 600,000 acres under contract.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/fedgazette/turning-
carbon-into-cash.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
But by 2010, the exchange had collapsed. The carbon market was
swamped with offset credits from willing farmers, but it didn't have
enough buyers. As a result, the price of the carbon credits went from a
high of roughly $7 to just 5  per metric ton of CO
2

equivalent. In December 2010, the Chicago Climate Exchange closed its
doors, leaving farmers and ranchers without support \6\ for their
carbon farming practices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/cwire/2011/01/03/
03climatewire-chicago-climate-exchange-closes-but-keeps-ey-
78598.html?pagewanted=all.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
California Carbon Market
The next, significant effort to create a carbon market came from
California. In 2012, as part of its climate change law, the state
launched a cap-and-trade program, requiring large greenhouse gas
emitters to participate. Now, 9 years later, there are still very few
ways for farmers to earn carbon credits, and they include installing
dairy digesters \7\  and taking up certain rice management
practices,\8\ both aimed at reducing methane emissions. But with a low
carbon price and high transaction costs for farmers, only the dairy
digester projects have sold carbon credits, largely because of other
state financial support \9\ for the projects. Despite the 7 years it
took the industry, working with environmental partners and the state,
to develop the rice protocol for the carbon market, the state's rice
producers have stayed out of the California carbon market. It just
doesn't make financial sense.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/cc/capandtrade/protocols/livestock/
livestock.htm.
\8\ https://ww3.arb.ca.gov/cc/capandtrade/protocols/
riceprotocol.htm.
\9\ https://www.cdfa.ca.gov/oefi/ddrdp/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
California's Climate-Smart Agriculture Programs
Instead of relying on the carbon market, starting in 2014, the
state of California launched its first grants-based programs to pay
farmers and ranchers who take up farm management practices that reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and increase carbon sinks. California became a
pioneer for what is now called ``Climate-Smart Agriculture'' \10\
programs. The programs bypass the complexities of the carbon market,
including price volatility, offering farmers and ranchers technical and
financial assistance to develop their climate-friendly management
projects. The programs are modeled after USDA's farm bill conservation
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ http://calclimateag.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/CSA-fact-
sheets-combined.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The first Climate-Smart Agriculture programs focused on three
areas: drought and farm resiliency, farmland protection from urban
sprawl, and the development of dairy digesters. Grant funds were made
available to farmers to improve their irrigation management systems to
save water and energy and reduce related greenhouse gas emissions.
Recognizing that protected farmland on the urban edge of our cities and
towns could reduce sprawl development and greenhouse gas emissions
associated with passenger cars, the state also invested in conservation
easements to permanently protect agricultural lands at risk of
development. Finally, looking at potent methane emissions from dairy
manure, the state launched its dairy digester program to reduce
emissions from large dairy farms.
The second wave of state investment in new Climate-Smart
Agriculture programs came in 2017 with the creation of the Healthy
Soils \11\ and the Alternative Manure Management \12\ (AMMP) programs.
Under the former, farmers and ranchers are paid to practice soil
management and farmscape practices that sequester carbon and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. The latter focuses on dry manure management
practices for dairies and other livestock operations to reduce methane
emissions, including composting manure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ http://calclimateag.org/solutions/healthysoils/.
\12\ http://calclimateag.org/ammp/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Farmer response to the state Climate-Smart Agriculture programs has
been considerable with application requests far exceeding available
funding, even during the difficult times of the pandemic. For example,
despite the shelter-in-place orders, which had greatly disrupted
agricultural markets in March 2020, more than 600 farmers and ranchers
applied for the state's Healthy Soils Program. A total of $22 million
in projects were funded, bringing the total to nearly 700 funded
Healthy Soils projects statewide.
New Voluntary Markets
Now, a private, voluntary national carbon market developed by one
ag-biotech company offers farmers $15 per metric ton of carbon
sequestered.
However, state initiatives offer a better value for farmers to meet
their basic costs in transitioning to new farming methods. For example,
one California Healthy Soils grant recipient, a farm in Butte County in
northern California, will sequester 110 metric tons of carbon and will
receive a grant worth $64,000 from the state. Under the new voluntary
carbon market program, the same farm would receive just $1,650 for
those same 110 metric tons of carbon sequestered. That is a stark
difference.
The state's program bases its funding awards on the costs of
installing or shifting to new farm management practices--e.g., the cost
of cover crop seed, compost, mulch, etc.--and the carbon market
approach is based largely on what the buyer is willing to pay for a
metric ton of carbon equivalent, even if that is well below what the
farmer may need to cover his or her costs.
Carbon Market Challenges, Farm Bill Conservation Program Opportunities
To summarize, carbon markets have failed to deliver on their
promises:

High transaction costs for project development and
verification mean small and mid-scale farmers and farmers of
color are left out of compliance and voluntary markets.

The complexities of developing offset protocols for
compliance markets, which must be additional, verifiable, and
permanent, means that it can take years to develop credible
offsets, as in the case of the rice/methane protocol in
California, which took 7 years to develop. And even now not a
single rice farmer has signed up for those carbon credits.

Low carbon prices do not come close to compensating farmers
for the true costs of their new practices, resulting in only
the largest producers participating, and often that is because
there are other sources of public and private funds, as in the
case of dairy digesters.

Carbon markets are blunt tools that cannot adequately
incentivize multi-benefit projects that address other
environmental and public health concerns, like enhanced
biodiversity, improved air, and water quality, and more.

Time is ticking. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change \13\ (IPCC), we have only until 2030 to bend the curve
on global greenhouse gas emissions to avoid the very worst of climate
change impacts. We cannot waste time on complex and ultimately
ineffective approaches like carbon markets. We have tried for nearly 20
years to make carbon markets work for agriculture and they have failed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ https://www.ipcc.ch/2018/10/08/summary-for-policymakers-of-
ipcc-special-report-on-global-warming-of-1-5c-approved-by-governments/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have time-tested and proven farm bill conservation programs that
can deliver the research, technical assistance, and financial
assistance that farmers and ranchers need to reduce their greenhouse
gas emissions, improve their carbon sinks and build their resilience to
greater weather extremes. And we can do this while supporting farm
viability and profitability, reaching a diversity of producers and
agricultural communities. We are doing that in California through our
Climate-Smart Agriculture Programs. We modeled our efforts off of
USDA's Natural Resource Conservation Service programs, adding in a
focus on climate change outcomes.
The Agriculture Resilience Act (ARA) and related legislative
efforts that focus on scaling up and refining farm bill conservation
programs to address the climate crisis can provide the necessary
resources for farmers to address climate change challenges, allowing
our agricultural industry to thrive.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Merrill.
And now, first, your testimonies were just outstanding, and
you have brought some very important information and facts to
the Committee, and we want to thank you for that.
Now, at this time, Members will be recognized for questions
in order of seniority, alternating between Majority and
Minority Members. You will be recognized for 5 minutes each in
order to allow us to get as many questions in as possible. And
again, Members, please keep your microphones muted until you
are recognized so that we can minimize the background noise.
Please remember that.
And now, I will start off the questions. I recognize myself
for my 5 minutes.
I want to put this to every one of you, and hopefully you
have time to answer it and give me your opinions.
As we are moving into this area of engaging our farmers,
our food producers, textile producers, forestry, all of the
important elements of our agriculture production process, do
any of you feel that in any way our food security production
processes, the amount of food we are producing, that any of
pulling our farmers away from doing what they naturally do,
planting the cotton, doing what is necessary to keep our
agriculture system moving? Does it in any way offer any kind of
negativism to our ability to keep our agriculture production at
the level that it needs to be if we are pulling our farmers
away to engage in partnerships dealing with these carbon
markets? Would you, any of you, just comment on that? Give us a
yes or no. It is important that the American people know that
our food security and our agriculture production will not go
down as we move farmers into engagements with carbon markets.
Mr. Milligan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. David Milligan.
I think you raise a very excellent point, and I think it is
a very important fact that we need to remember food security.
We don't have to go very far back to the pandemic when we saw
some empty shelves, and I think that is very important as we
move ahead that food security be very top priority.
And yes, I think there is a possibility that this could
become a problem to food security if some of these programs I
hear out there would be forcing reduced production. I think
that could be a concern, so I think I very much appreciate you
bringing that concern. I think it is a very important point.
The Chairman. Let me ask you, if I may, what--could you
describe, pinpoint what that concern is? How would it
negatively impact?
Mr. Milligan. There seems to be certain crops that might be
favored over others because of carbon sequester. One might be
better than the other, which might reduce supplies. There has
been some idea of idling more land. That might be an option.
The Chairman. Okay.
Mr. Milligan. That would be a real serious consideration to
the amount of production we might have.
The Chairman. Very good. I think you had a comment, ma'am?
Go right ahead.
Ms. Eideberg. Sure, Mr. Chairman. What a really important
question.
Many of the practices that are incentivized by markets and
via a lot of the conservation programs we see implemented today
also have very good co-benefits for the land by increasing soil
fertility. So, increasing soil fertility, both brings up a
farmer's yield especially over time, and decreases the negative
impacts to the environment. So, we frankly see this might, over
time, be a strong positive, especially as we are seeing
stronger storms and more extreme weather hit in more isolated
areas. We want to make sure that those farmers are as resilient
as they can be in these challenging times.
The Chairman. Thank you.
Mr. Bastos, you mentioned in your testimony that Bayer is
committed to share carbon credit value with farmers. How are
you doing that?
Mr. Bastos. Thank you, Chairman Scott.
Bayer, as a company, we actually have the focus of being a
farmer-centric organization. So, we need to work with the
farmers. Whatever we do, we need to work with the farmers.
So, what we have today is a contractual agreement with the
farmers that has, like, a specific provision in terms of
sharing the net proceeds of these credits as we actually have
them into the market, and those net proceedings and the
contractual provisions, they exist, they audit it, and there is
the disclosure mechanism that we have to make sure that we are
fulfilling our promises in sharing the most of the value to the
farmer.
The Chairman. Thank you very much. I thank both of you, all
of you, very much.
And now, Ranking Member, Mr. Thompson, I yield 5 minutes to
you. Thank you.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, thank you so much. Once again,
thanks to all the witnesses.
I want to start out, first question is for Ms. Jeanne
Merrill for the California Climate and Agriculture Network.
Ms. Merrill, I found your testimony very insightful and I
appreciate hearing about your experience with these markets. In
your testimony, you say: ``. . . since 2003, carbon markets
have proved themselves an inadequate tool to reach the
diversity of farmers and ranchers we must reach. Simply put,
carbon market approaches at the voluntary and compliance levels
have consistently failed to deliver on climate solutions in
agriculture on any meaningful scale, leaving the vast majority
of farmers and ranchers without adequate resources to address
the climate crisis.''
Can you summarize why, in your opinion, your observations,
the carbon markets have failed to deliver on their promise?
Ms. Merrill. Yes, thank you.
Two things. One is we have seen in California with our
compliance markets, we have a regulated carbon market, and as
just one example, it took 7 years for the California Rice
Commission working with environmental partners and the state to
develop a protocol to reduce methane emissions from rice
production. It was complex. They were very much steeped in the
science, but also steeped in the sort of practicalities of what
would work for farmers.
At the end of the day, after all of those many years of
trying to develop the protocol and coming up with methods of
reducing methane in rice production, not a single rice producer
in California or anywhere in the country, because our market is
available to producers nationwide and in some parts of Canada,
have signed up for that protocol. And that is because we have a
relatively low price for carbon. We don't pay very well, and we
have high transaction costs. And for most small- and mid-scale
producers, entry into the carbon market, whether it is the
California version or the voluntary market, doesn't make a lot
of economic sense because of those high transactions costs of
developing projects, of having them verify it. It is just
proved a very complex and ineffective way to deliver the
resources that we need to deliver that both help farmers to
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and increase carbon
sinks, but also to become more resilient, to be able to better
weather greater weather extremes. We simply haven't seen in
California farmers being interested in the carbon market, but
we have overwhelming demand for our grants-based Climate-Smart
Agriculture programs which, as I mentioned, are modeled after
the USDA farm bill conservation programs.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, ma'am.
Mr. Milligan, good to see you. I think the last time we
crossed paths for us was in Michigan, and really glad to have
you here. Thanks for coming to Washington.
Earlier this year, I introduced the SUSTAINS Act (H.R.
2606, Sponsoring USDA Sustainability Targets in Agriculture to
Incentivize Natural Solutions Act of 2021), which would allow
for third parties, including corporations, businesses of all
sizes, from large, mega-size, you pick it, Amazon, Google,
whatever, Disney, down to the mom-and-pop hardware store owners
on the corner, to invest in NRCS conservation programs. In
doing so, it would allow the private-sector to partner with
farmers, ranchers, landowners, in support of agricultural
conservation, the programs that we see out of the farm bill.
Do you believe that this concept is something that you and
others would support?
Mr. Milligan. Thank you, Representative Thompson.
Yes, I see a lot of positives to some of these programs,
EQIP and the CSP that have been out there. They have been very
positive to help growers.
We certainly feel that everything needs to be voluntary,
though, and they are, these programs, but looking ahead, I
still think it is very important that we remain voluntary on
these programs.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Thank you for those comments.
We invest billions of dollars through the farm bill. We are
really proud of the conservation title, and the benefits it
brings. A lot of that has helped us reach that natural land
solutions level of 6.1 gigatons of carbon sequestered annually,
and we can do better.
Despite investing billions, I believe the number was in
2020 there were 80,000 EQIP applications we couldn't fund
because we had exhausted those resources. When you think about
just doing a little bit more with EQIP and perhaps other
conservation programs, how much more carbon could we sequester?
And it honors the principle of you can't have a healthier
environment without a healthier economy, because it is helping
our farmers, ranchers, and foresters.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you, Ranking Member.
And now, I will recognize the gentlewoman from North
Carolina, Ms. Adams, who is also Vice Chair of our Agriculture
Committee here in the House. You are recognized, Ms. Adams, for
5 minutes.
Ms. Adams. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
Ranking Member as well, and to our witnesses. Thank you for
being here.
Mr. Bastos, in your testimony you suggested that there is a
role for this Committee and Congress to play in scaling up
voluntary carbon markets. My question is what policies or
incentives can best encourage participation in carbon markets
by limited resource landowners, such as small, historically
disadvantaged farmers?
Mr. Bastos. Congresswoman Adams, thanks for the question.
I think that the--I will say that some of the things we
[inaudible] helped scale in these programs in the voluntary
markets is related to bringing confidence to the market.
Relating to standards, investing and perhaps having the USDA to
work with a standards organization to build commonality, and
something that can be actually shared and understood by
farmers.
The second piece of that is actually a bit of the research
and the foundational research, and I think some of the
conservation programs can actually yield some of that research
data that will hopefully benefit the markets in terms of
quantification.
And last, I would say that there is an important investment
that needs to be done in terms of upscaling a labor force to
work at the intersection of agriculture and carbon markets so
farmers can get assisted in how they implement those best
practices to keep producing their crops in a sustainable
manner.
So, these are my thoughts.
Ms. Adams. Okay, thank you very much.
Ms. Merrill, thank you for sharing the programs California
farmers have been able to engage with to achieve both
environmental and economic benefits.
So, could you speak to California's efforts to ensure that
historically disadvantaged farmers are able to access and
participate in California's Climate-Smart Ag programs?
Ms. Merrill. Thank you, Representative Adams, for that
question.
We have a very strong focus on reaching socially
disadvantaged farmers and ranchers. We have a Farmer Equity Act
that was passed in 2017 that focuses in particular on farmers
of color and women farmers, and making sure that our state
programs are reaching them. So, as part of the Climate-Smart
Agriculture programs, we have a technical assistance fund to
provide funding for technical assistance providers, our
resource conservation districts, our co-op extension folks to
develop projects, Climate-Smart Agriculture projects with
farmers and to help with their application, as well as project
implementation, and a minimum of 25 percent of those dollars
must benefit socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers, and
since that fund was created, we have seen a significant
increase in the number of socially disadvantaged farmers or
underserved farmers who are participating in our programs like
the Healthy Soils Program and others that are really about
delivering not only benefits to the environment, but also to
farmers.
Ms. Adams. Okay. Are they able to submit multiple
applications, or just the one time?
Ms. Merrill. We have multiple programs, so they can submit
multiple applications to those multiple programs. So, whether
it is Healthy Soils to look at your soil management practices,
or our state Water Efficiency and Enhancement Program, which is
all about better irrigation management to reduce water and
energy associated with moving water.
Ms. Adams. Thanks very much.
Mr. Milligan, in addition to potentially mitigating
greenhouse gas emissions, many recognize that agriculture
practices used to generate carbon offsets such as no-till and
cover cropping provide other benefits such as reduced soil
erosion and improved water management. So, would you have
adopted the new farming or forest management practices required
for participation in the carbon market program if you had not
enrolled in the program?
Mr. Milligan. We as a general organization are very in
favor of all the voluntary programs. Some of our members have
enrolled in them and some have not.
Ms. Adams. Okay, great. Well, thank you very much, and
thank you all for your testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Austin Scott, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Milligan, I am going to come to you pretty quick here,
but I do want to mention that when we talk about the
environment, I think that we need to talk about it as a whole,
not as individual segments like carbon, for example. And I will
tell you, in my district they have cut down a tremendous number
of acres of forestland that provided tremendous wildlife
habitat. As we know, the forests are good for the environment
and the wildlife and the water, and I think that when you cut
down forestlands and replace it with solar panels, I don't know
that the net is a positive for the environment as a whole. I
mean, certainly the solar panels don't produce as much carbon
as other methods of producing the energy, but I do think it is
dangerous that we are not talking about the environment from
the stand point of wildlife habitat and water resources as a
whole when we segment this thing out. I am not sure that we end
up with a net positive.
I have a facility in Cook County, Georgia, and I was down
there the other day and I asked what all of those large
generators were for. I couldn't figure it out. And lo and
behold, the company out of Canada is mining coins in Cook
County, Georgia. And I don't understand the creation of the
coins or the value of the coins, just as I don't understand the
creation of the carbon credits or how the value of the carbon
credits are derived.
Mr. Milligan, you are the farmer of the group. Do you
understand how the carbon credits are valued, and how it is
determined what the farmer gets for the carbon credit?
Mr. Milligan. No, I do not at this time. It is a developing
market. I think that perhaps some of these markets are testing
the waters, shall we say. I think we need to have a standard as
to how to measure these, a consistent standard across the grain
market. Somebody sets a standard of what a bushel of wheat is,
what it weighs, what the grade is. I think these priorities
need to be established. I think there is a lot of, maybe the
science isn't quite caught up to where we are yet. It is a new
field. I think that we have to be real careful moving in. I
don't think we want to make a lot of mistakes. We don't want
this to fail. I think there needs to be a lot of groundwork
done yet.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. That is what scares me about
the application of this to agriculture is that the people who
are ultimately responsible for America's food supply may be
signing up for something that in some cases has a 100 year
requirement on it. And we don't know even how the value is
calculated or where the credit comes from, just as I don't
understand the mining of coins and the value of coins.
But I do know that there is a simpler way to do this, and
through ASCS, we used to encourage farmers to use good
practices for the environment, like no-till, and we used to--
there used to be a payment--some assistance for farmers to use
things like no-till, and those payments have disappeared, it is
my understanding. Is that correct?
Mr. Milligan. I think that was touched on a little bit
earlier with the Ranking Member. There have been some programs
out there that have worked very effectively, and as we
mentioned the funding ran short on that. So, I think you make a
valid point.
Mr. Austin Scott of Georgia. And so, if I could, one of my
concerns is that some of the people that I see up here in
Washington, one of which is from my state, has adopted a lot of
these practices, and that is very nice if you can afford to pay
$20 for a range-fed chicken, which is what they get for a
range-fed chicken--I might add, that is not cooked--when most
of us, if we are going to spend $20 on chicken, we do it at KFC
and we get a 12-piece bucket with mashed potatoes and green
beans. And I do think that there is a significantly better way
for us to help agriculture in this by simply adopting best
practices in parity with our producers, and helping with the
increased costs of that.
So, my concern with where this is taking us is that there
is going to be a value created out of thin air that is going to
provide very little for the farmer or the environment, and then
a whole bunch of people that don't have anything to do with
agriculture are going to be getting the money.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, is that acceptable?
The Chairman. Yes, it is.
The gentlewoman from Maine, Ms. Pingree, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for holding this hearing. I think this is a really important
topic, and there is a lot to say and not a lot of time to say
it, so I will try to be quick.
I think it is one--a couple things before I ask my
questions. I do think it is really important we don't muddy the
waters here between voluntary and mandatory carbon markets,
compliance markets. This is about voluntary markets and really
most of the witnesses have dealt with that, and I appreciate
that.
And just quickly, I think it is very difficult to use an
example for 2010. I love the programs that California is doing
and I know they have a lot of great work going, but the changes
in these markets from 2010 to today is enormous, and I think we
have to talk about what we are dealing with now, and the huge
interests in the voluntary markets that is going on right now.
So, I just want to put that out there.
But first, I want to ask, Ms. Reed, thank you so much for
your testimony. We have heard a lot of the witnesses talk about
scaling up and refining the farm bill conservation programs,
and I am pleased to hear that there is so much agreement on
that, and that is really one of the reasons why it is such an
important part of the Build Back Better Program, because we do
need to invest more.
But I want to talk about all the tools that we can use, so
we know those things are really important to our carbon
sequestration. But could you talk a little bit more about how
those two work together, these voluntary ecosystem services
markets, and the role they play in our broader strategy of
conservation programs and what we are talking about today?
Ms. Reed. Yes, thank you, Representative Pingree. Nice to
see you, and thanks for the question.
So, these voluntary markets are entirely complementary to
USDA conservation programs. As a matter of fact, those
conservation programs are a form of up-front financing to help
farmers and ranchers actually participate in the markets, which
can bring in an additional income stream. We do view them as a
form of up-front financing, and we feel that USDA conservation
and technical assistance is essential to farmers and ranchers
to have place-based assistance to help them be successful.
So, again, they are entirely complementary and a new and
additional opportunity, if you will, to invest in climate-smart
practices. And I think the reason that companies are investing
as well in both of those opportunity sets is because the
practices we are trying to increase at scale actually make
farmers and ranchers more resilient to the impacts of climate
change. So, all of them together are really win/win
opportunities for producers.
Ms. Pingree. Great, and thanks for talking about the
importance of the resilience for farmers, because we do want to
make sure all of our farmers both get that extra income stream,
but have these resilient practices.
So, a couple more quick questions to Ms. Eideberg from EDF.
Thank you so much for your testimony here today.
It has been touched on a little bit, and I think everybody
is very concerned about the lack of uniformity. So, if you want
to just say a couple things about what happens if the USDA
doesn't play a role, as this is increasingly becoming the Wild
West out there, and there are a lot of different systems and it
does need to be managed differently.
And if you could just throw in one other thing that I am
concerned about. I deal with a lot of organic farmers,
sustainable farmers who have been using these practices for a
long time. Mr. Milligan from the Wheat Growers mentioned it.
How do we recognize those farmers that already have good
practices going to make sure that what they have been doing in
the past isn't left out, or set aside?
Ms. Eideberg. Thank you, Congresswoman, for the question.
If USDA doesn't get involved--and I would actually even
hedge and say that it doesn't necessarily have to be USDA. It
could be another neutral third party. But if we don't have a
referee on the field, we don't have someone setting standards
and providing consistent measurement, farmers are probably
going to get the short end of the stick. They need to be able
to have a consistent target to shoot for, and then buyers want
to make sure that the credits that they are buying are quality
credits and are not going to be eliminated or discounted later.
So, I think for the protection of farmers, we have to have that
referee out there.
Second, in dealing with early adopters, this is a really
challenging place. I think that, I will go back to the Food and
Agricultural Climate Alliance that EDF is a part of. This is
something that our organizations have wrestled with. We think
there are some options out there. Our specific recommendation--
and I know that there are others out there--but our specific
recommendation was to do one-time payments to farmers who are
early adopters, and then make sure that they are continuously
enrolled in some sort of state or Federal or other approved
conservation program. So, there were innovative and different
ways we could think about it, but it is extremely important.
Ms. Pingree. Thank you. I am out of time. I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I really do appreciate this
conversation today.
The Chairman. Yes, thank you, Ms. Pingree.
And now, I recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
DesJarlais, 5 minutes.
Mr. DesJarlais. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and certainly,
thank you to all of our witnesses for appearing here today. I
am grateful for your testimony, and the opportunity to hear
your answers to this subject as to how we can best help our
U.S. farmers.
No one cares more about the land than this nation's farmers
and ranchers. They depend on healthy soil to feed and clothe
our country. When it comes to carbon markets and the farmers in
my district, the number one priority is that any programs
remain voluntary. Overburdensome government regulations create
costly and time-consuming barriers for hardworking members of
our agriculture community. I am a firm believer that the
private marketplace will best regulate itself.
There are still a lot of questions to be answered when it
comes to the carbon stored in soil becoming its own commodity
crop. Congress must ensure any legislation passed does not pick
winners and losers, and ultimately hinder innovation and stifle
competition.
Mr. Milligan, in your testimony you listed 11 questions you
frequently hear from growers. Considering the lack of full
understanding of these emerging markets, do you think it is
premature for the Federal Government to get involved?
Mr. Milligan. I think that as we have discussed this and we
have a special committee at National Association of Wheat
Growers, and we feel that government would have a very
prominent place in establishing some standards so we have
uniform standards across the industry, maybe a few other
guidelines as science, I mean, what does carbon look like? How
do you measure it? It is a Wild West field out there.
Yes, I think there is a place to set some uniformity and
some standards.
Mr. DesJarlais. Do you think Congress should divert USDA
resources for new programs to stand up carbon markets?
Mr. Milligan. We feel that voluntary works well, and the
private--I think the private has an opportunity to step in and
fill that need.
Mr. DesJarlais. Yes, I find it has been a rare occasion
that the Federal Government does much better in anything than
the private-sector can do, and certainly, I trust our farmers
who are actually in the field, like yourself, to make better
decisions.
Currently, what is the largest barrier to participation in
these markets for wheat growers, and more broadly, other
agriculture producers?
Mr. Milligan. I think it is the unknown. I have not had
personal experience with it, and I know some of our growers
have. The dollar amounts out there have not been--I think fell
way short of what the cost might be involved. There are some
long-term commitments that people have asked for that certainly
people are very hesitant to get into. It is the uncertainty.
Mr. DesJarlais. So, that wouldn't necessarily indicate that
this hearing is premature, but possibly any action that was
taken in this timeframe would be premature and would be harmful
to the ag community. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Milligan. It is a work in progress.
Mr. DesJarlais. Any idea what kind of timeframe it would
take to undertake something of this magnitude?
Mr. Milligan. It is a little above my pay grade.
Mr. DesJarlais. But anything that usually is rushed by our
government tends not to work out very well, and it seems like
we are in a big rush. We have a lot of pressing issues that we
need to be discussing right now, including our role in
oversight, but I appreciate we are moving forward with
hearings. It is good to have this conversation. I think it is a
little premature, and seems to be driven by a bigger agenda,
but I thank you for your answers and your time here.
I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mr. DesJarlais.
And now, the gentlewoman from New Hampshire, Ms. Kuster,
you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kuster. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you. I
appreciate you holding this hearing on carbon markets.
Given the weather events that happened across our country
this summer, whether it was wildfires or floods or hurricanes,
I do not believe that this is too soon to be talking about the
impact of carbon on the changes to our climate, particularly
for farmers, with the droughts and the very heavy rains. It has
been a very, very challenging time.
So, I believe that the crisis of climate change requires an
all hands on deck approach, and all viable solutions must be on
the table, including carbon markets for farmers and foresters.
I have talked to farmers and foresters across New
Hampshire, and I have been deeply impressed by all that they
are already doing to adopt climate-smart practices and make
their lands effective carbon sinks. Many are doing this on
their own initiative. Farmers know all too well their
livelihoods are on the line with the threats of climate change
and extreme weather.
I had hail on my deck this summer in New Hampshire that was
several inches deep, and it harmed the apples at the orchard
right down the road from my house. So, these are fantastic
USDA, Natural Resources Conservation Service programs that
support our efforts and provide valuable technical assistance
to producers to cope with these extreme weather events.
As private carbon markets grow, I can see these invaluable
opportunities to further strengthen the agriculture sector's
conservation work and carbon capture potential. In fact, it is
one of the main reasons that I came back to the Agriculture
Committee this session.
It is also important that we continue to reduce and
eliminate emissions by buying credits to offset them, and I am
concerned that small farmers and forest operations will have
limited access to participate in carbon markets. It is
important, as the witness said, that these markets have
rigorous protocols and oversight to ensure effectiveness, but
often, this can be burdensome for smaller farmers, like the
farmers in my state that have limited time and resources to
meet those requirements. Entities looking to purchase carbon
credits need to see the value of working with family farmers
and our homegrown foresters. As we advance solutions to address
the climate crisis, we need to make sure no one is left out or
left behind.
So, I have a question for Mr. Antonioli. Thank you for
being here to talk about the work that Verra is doing as the
world's largest carbon crediting verifier program. I am curious
about how what you see in terms of small farms and forests
participating in the carbon markets that you certify, and
beyond the demands of compliance process, what do you see is
the biggest barriers to small producer participation? How can
we help address this in Congress?
Mr. Antonioli. Thank you, Congresswoman, and those are
very, very good questions.
I want to point out one thing and emphasize a little bit
about what you said about the evolution of the carbon markets.
They are very different than what they were back in the day.
Even I was skeptic of agricultural carbon credits, because I
didn't think that the ability to demonstrate the soil carbon
sequestration was there. But over time, we have seen that the
science has evolved, technology has evolved. There is a much
better understanding of the non-carbon benefits, and there is
increased growing demand, which I think will help the small
farmers.
I mean, this isn't a solution that is going to work for
everybody, but it is another option, and it is a complement to
what farmers have available. And if the markets continue to
grow and we start to see continued higher prices, that is going
to inevitably be another option for farmers that is going to
let them do that.
Another really important element that I think is worth
bearing in mind is that farmers can step into this slowly. It
is not that you have to turn your entire farm to the
regenerative agriculture practices all of a sudden, all at
once. You can step into it at part of your field. You can do it
on a step-wise approach in terms of the practices that you
implement. And so, the idea there--and I think this really goes
down to how we have been thinking and how the market has been
thinking about how to create these--the protocols and the
methodologies, to allow farmers to step into this slowly in a
way that gives them the confidence they need. And then once
they realize the benefits, they can continue to expand that.
Thank you again.
Ms. Kuster. Great. Thank you.
My time is very limited, so just quickly, Mr. Luoma, can
you speak to how participation in private carbon markets has
helped your company and others provide good stewardship of our
forests with enhanced financial viability?
Mr. Luoma. Yes, thank you, Representative, for the
question. It is a good question.
As we have been talking about right along on the
agriculture side, the same holds true on the forestry side in
terms of voluntary participation. So, these----
The Chairman. The time has expired. Excuse, but we are on a
schedule and an answer could be provided in writing, if you
don't mind.
Ms. Kuster. I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luoma. Will do.
[The information referred to is located on p. 128.]
The Chairman. We are on a tight schedule and we want to get
everybody in.
Now I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. LaMalfa,
is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaMalfa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
I have a question for Mr. Luoma, obviously, we have had
plenty of wildfire out in the West and are running into issues
of the burn scar basically affecting just about everything. So,
in order to protect the carbon credits, we need to have the
asset that has been set aside as a credit area continue to
exist. But, the fires don't distinguish between these
boundaries, so carbon credit areas can be affected by fire. So,
one known as the Colville IFM project has burned during what is
called the Bootleg Fire. This happens to be on the Oregon side,
but there are many, many acres up there I believe would add up
as far as offsets in terms of tons was 14 million tons of
offset just this last August on the Bootleg Fire that was used
in the California markets for carbon compliance.
So, what happens in the situation where basically a set
aside area dedicated to the carbon capture carbon markets, if
that burns in a wildfire situation like we did have in this
forested area? Then what is the liability for those that bought
the credits or for those who are the landowners that
participated in the project sort of as the holder of the
credit, if that makes sense when you have a natural disaster
like that? How do we sort that out?
Mr. Luoma. Thank you, Representative LaMalfa. I appreciate
the question, and there is no question that the concern over
the fire situation out West is concerning to all of us.
Thankfully, we don't deal with that so much in the South or in
the Midwest or even in the Northeast.
I am not an expert on how the carbon markets are working
out there, but I would suggest that as we continue to study
improvements in the way we would implement these markets, that
we would have alternatives to cover the carbon that has been
identified for credits across a larger forested landscape so
that a particular tract of land, if it has been designated for
carbon storage and carbon credits, if something happens to that
like in fire or pathogens, that there are alternatives that can
be brought into play.
What I think is most important, though, is this notion that
working forests need to continue to work, and there are lots of
opportunities for identifying alternative carbon storage
sources across the working forest, and maybe----
Mr. LaMalfa. Mr. Luoma, again, our time goes so fast here,
and I am sorry about it, but I appreciate that thought that the
forest needs to continue to be working in order to be effective
on that. If we just dedicate it as a set aside and then never
touch it, once again, you're going to have the same problem we
have in a lot of the forested areas. So, it has to be working
landscape no matter if it is a set aside or not.
But, could you maybe offline give us some more ideas on
what the alternatives are? Because you have X amount of acres
set aside for this carbon credit area and it did burn, we would
probably have to have something more defined as what the
alternative would be. We can't have maybe two blocks of land in
order to do it in case one burns. I don't know if that would be
practical. So, let me thank you, Mr. Luoma.
[The information referred to is located on p. 129.]
Mr. LaMalfa. Let me ask Ms. Merrill here. You mentioned
that since 2003 the different carbon markets have proved
themselves basically inadequate to reach the different farmers
and ranchers due to pricing that the carbon market developed
protocol, for example, for rice growers, which I happen to be
and have lived firsthand. That rice producers haven't taken
advantage of it, haven't participated because it just doesn't
add up. We have experienced that with rice straw disposal and
all sorts of things over the years that have--it just--it never
gets back to the farmer, it is the people in between.
So, what could you emphasize would be a better pass forward
for getting more grower participation so they can actually
benefit and be more enthusiastic about it?
Ms. Merrill. Yes, thank you for the question.
We have seen certainly with the Climate-Smart Agriculture
programs in California, which are modeled after the USDA farm
bill conservation programs, that that is an approach that
works. The voluntary carbon market that is currently in place
pays pennies or up to $15 per metric ton of carbon sequestered,
but when we compare, for example, with that of a farmer in your
neck of the woods in Butte County who signed up for a Healthy
Soils grant----
The Chairman. I am sorry, but your time has expired. It is
very important that every Member, I want to get in, and votes
will be coming up shortly, so we want to have a tight schedule
so we can get everybody in. I appreciate that.
Now, I will recognize the gentlewoman from Illinois, Mrs.
Bustos, who is also the Chair of the Subcommittee on General
Farm Commodities and Risk Management. You are recognized for 5
minutes, Mrs. Bustos.
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As we have heard from our witnesses, there are several
private carbon markets that are currently in operation, and I
wanted to highlight a recent announcement by Indigo Ag and
GROWMARK, which is an Illinois-based, farmer-owned cooperative
that will create additional opportunities for farmers across
the Midwest to participate in a carbon market.
Indigo Ag is one of the first companies to initiate a
carbon market, providing much-needed flexibility for farmers to
meet outcome-based targets. They have worked extensively on
credits that are high quality and, very important,
independently verified. So, this combined with GROWMARK's large
network and the relationship with their grower customers, it
creates an exciting opportunity for farmers to generate
additional revenue by implementing climate-smart practices that
sequester carbon and improve water quality, and biodiversity.
Quality is the beneficial link between farmers and buyers, and
it is proven to lift prices 35 percent over the past year. And
as we all know, a critical component of building private carbon
markets is for buyers to know and to trust that the credits
generated are fully verified and based on strong measurement
protocols.
I have a statement here that I would ask for unanimous
consent to enter into the record, if we could do that before I
ask a question here.
The Chairman. Without objection.
[The news release referred to is located on p. 125.]
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So now, Mr. Bastos--and I like your name. It is very
similar to mine with one letter difference. Could you share how
Bayer determines the price it will pay farmers for these
credits?
Mr. Bastos, you are muted, sir.
Mr. Bastos. Oh, I am sorry.
Mrs. Bustos. Thank you. If you could try it again, please?
Mr. Bastos. Yes. So, Congresswoman Bustos, thank you for
the question.
The way we determine the price is actually based on public
information from multiple companies, and also like the
reference related to nature-based solutions in the market.
Right? So, we know that today, nature-based solutions are
actually ranging from a price between $15 to $25, so that is
how we actually have as a parameter for how much we are
expecting to get paid for these credits, and therefore, how
much it can actually afford this kind of cost that it takes to
verify those credits back to the farmer.
Mrs. Bustos. So, what if the price of carbon increases
during the term of a contract?
Mr. Bastos. That is exactly like what we have as a
provision in our contract. As prices increase, we actually
share more of that value back to the farmer.
Mrs. Bustos. And then can the credit price be adjusted
then?
Mr. Bastos. Yes.
Mrs. Bustos. Okay, and how about if the price of the carbon
decreases? What happens then?
Mr. Bastos. We honor the contract with the farmer and we
keep paying them the amount that we actually initially agreed
upon.
Mrs. Bustos. Okay. Okay. Thank you very much for that
clarification.
Mr. Antonioli, most agricultural carbon markets seek new
greenhouse gas reductions or new carbon sequestration. Farmers
and ranchers who are already implementing climate-smart
practices, these early adopters, so to speak, are often either
ineligible to participate in carbon programs, or can't
financially benefit from generating carbon credit.
My question to you, sir, is should carbon markets consider
or compensate early adopters, and if so, if you could explain
how you think that should be done?
Mr. Antonioli. Thank you, Congresswoman.
It is a very good question and we have already discussed
that topic, but I wanted to emphasize that I think there are
creative ways of solving that. But at the end of the day, I
mean, organizations like us, we do need to certify the
additional carbon sequestration that is generated. Maybe there
are other ways that you can compensate for farms who are
already doing the right thing, but from a carbon crediting
perspective, it is important that we ensure that we are
crediting only additional and new carbon sequestration.
Now, there is one element that is important, that the
practices that are being implemented or that can be credited,
kind of are additional--and you may already do no-till farming,
maybe you are doing some cover crops. But there are other
things you can do to continue to generate more carbon
sequestration. So, that is one of the really great innovations
that we have seen in the market, that you are able to add on
more management practices to continue to add to the carbon in
the soil, and that you can get credit for.
Thank you.
Mrs. Bustos. Okay, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back my remaining 12 seconds.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Allen, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Allen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and getting back to the
point of staying on subject. If you could put out some type of
a rule about what we can address and what we can't address so
that we can hold both sides accountable, I think that would be
in order. So, if your staff or you and the Ranking Member could
get together and set out those rules about what we can talk
about and then how we object to others and their comments, and
how we can stop this rhetoric on both sides, then I think that
would be the fair way to go about things. With all due respect,
you are the Chairman and I respect you and love you, and want
to see this Committee succeed, but it is very difficult under
these circumstances to do this.
But from the standpoint of this hearing, I have done as
much research and the staff has done as much research as we can
about this, and it is a very complex subject, as is climate
change, because I am skeptical of this whole business because a
lot of folks make a lot of money. The thing that really bothers
me is that our farmers have provided oxygen through their
timber and their crops to this country, and yet, now we are
talking about, ``Hey, we are going to incentivize you to do
more. We are going to pay you for more. We are not going to pay
you for what you have already done,'' because we know that over
the last--and there is no question that over the last 50, 100
years--I mean, just 50 years ago 98 percent of the population
was in agribusiness, lived on the family farm. And now we have
these huge cities with traffic problems and everything else
that are contributing enormously. And then you have big tech. I
mean, look what big tech is contributing to the carbon
footprint and everything that they manufacturer, all the
electricity they use. Air conditioning. Air conditioning is
another one, and then, of course, air travel is another one.
So, as our society has changed, we have to adapt to it and deal
with these things.
But here we go back to the farmer, and our farmers--like I
said, I am skeptical about this thing because as we have seen
many times, the government gets involved and then these large
corporations get to go out and say, ``Hey, I am carbon neutral
because I am paying a farmer 10  on the dollar to produce
oxygen.''
So, my question is do any of the witnesses feel qualified
to give a defense of these markets, and how in good
conscience--I can go to, say, my timber growers and encourage
them to engage in markets in which they would likely only
receive a very small percentage of exactly the value of what
they are creating. Would anyone have the expertise to explain
that to me?
Ms. Reed. I would be happy to, Congressman Allen. This is
Debbie Reed.
I will point out that markets pay for new product, just
like markets will pay for corn or soy that is generated on an
annual basis. These markets are paying for new product. I think
that is an important distinction, right? Why market rules
prevent you from paying for something that happened in the
past.
I do think, though, that brings a great point is that USDA,
if they set up a carbon bank, could, in fact, pay early
adopters through that carbon bank. I think that would be an
excellent value to reward growers, including farmers and
ranchers and foresters, who have, in fact, done something in
the past because we all, as society, do benefit from those
outcomes, as you point out. We benefit every day from them. So,
I think that is a perfect public role that is perhaps different
than what a private voluntary market could do.
Mr. Allen. But again, Americans--when we think of secondary
markets, because they have to be heavily regulated. There is a
lot of irresponsibility and fraud in these markets that these
corporations have been hiding for years, like derivatives and
all these other things, and some with nationwide and extreme
ramifications. Again, we have talked about the value of this,
and how do we offset the value with what we would be able to do
when we can't even measure it, as I understand it.
So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
And now I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Carbajal. You are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to all
our witnesses that came here today.
Agriculture practices and land management decisions play a
key role in the discussions surrounding global greenhouse
emissions and climate policy. Keeping farmers and ranchers in
production is vital to food, and of course, our national
security. We must make strides in sustainability while keeping
food on the table, and it is essential that we do so in a way
that supports small- and medium-scale farms in gaining entry
into carbon markets.
Ms. Reed, what resources can the government use to ensure
that opportunities to participate in agricultural carbon
markets are inclusive to a diverse range of farmers, and are
there existing Federal programs that could be utilized to
resolve potential participation barriers?
Ms. Reed. Yes, thank you, Representative Carbajal, for the
question.
I think the answer is yes. USDA technical assistance to
help farmers and ranchers understand which management changes
they can undertake so that their outcomes on an annual basis
can be measured and then valued in the market is the best,
perhaps, utilization of their resources to really provide that
on-the-ground technical assistance for farmers and ranchers.
I think there has also been some discussion about USDA
conservation programs which do the same thing and provide a
form of up-front financing as well as technical assistance for
farmers and ranchers to understand in their region and for
their own production systems the best actions they can take
that work within the context of their farm or ranching system.
We don't want to try to impose any one size fits all
requirements on farmers and ranchers. We want them to do the
things that actually work best for them, and I think that that
is the best utilization of USDA resources in those two arenas.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you very much.
The next question that I have is for Ms. Eideberg. Farms,
ranches, and forests in my Central Coast district are on the
front lines of climate change. Each year, extreme weather
events and drought continue to threaten my community and the
environment around it. Carbon markets have the potential to
deliver other critical environmental benefits beyond carbon
sequestration and GHG emissions reductions.
Ms. Eideberg, can you speak to what other benefits we might
see from carbon markets?
Ms. Eideberg. Certainly. Thank you for the question.
It has been mentioned here today that diversity in income
is a potential benefit of voluntary markets, but on the
agronomic side of things, the practices that are incentivized
by markets and by the conservation programs at USDA, increase
soil fertility, increase the ability of soil to retain water in
a flood situation.
Those are the key co-benefits that we are looking for these
conservation practices to provide. In California where you have
water in short supply, you need that soil to be able to
maintain every bit of moisture that it can, and using these
conservation practices can provide that co-benefit to the
farmer and to that field so that they are able to stay in
business for much longer than we might project now.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you.
Ms. Reed, what additional measures, what additional
outreach can be conducted to incentivize and to reach out to
more farmers and ranchers interested in participating in carbon
markets throughout our country, and certainly the Central Coast
that I represent?
Ms. Reed. Yes, thank you.
I think in the Central Coast in particular, what we need is
more data actually for specialty crops. We don't have a lot of
information about specialty crops and really how to quantify
the impacts of improved management practices in specialty
crops. I think that is one major thing that USDA could do is
additional research there, and additional support in those
production systems for--whether it is wine grape growers, for
instance, or almond orchards, to understand what practices make
them more resilient and can improve soil carbon sequestration
and water holding capacity, et cetera.
I think additionally, though, farmers and ranchers need to
understand what are the roles and responsibilities they take on
when they participate in these markets, so that they have a
very clear vision of what is going to be required of them----
The Chairman. The time has expired. You can provide an
answer in writing.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The information referred to is located on p. 128.]
The Chairman. The gentleman from Indiana, Mr. Baird, you
are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Baird. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Member.
I think we all recognize that this is an emerging market,
and it may be appropriate--or I think it is appropriate that we
have this discussion and kind of get a sense of what programs
are working in this market.
And so, having said that, Mr. Milligan, in your testimony
you expressed concern that many producers continue to have
questions about the carbon markets and the impact of those on
the farms, and that not all protocols will work in every
situation. And so, I hear frequently from my producers that all
practices may not work for all operations. So, for example,
livestock producers may have a different need, and so on, than
crop producers. So, do you have any suggestions how we can
account for differences in geographic or soil or other
operation differences that may otherwise prevent producers or
enhance producers' ability to participate in these programs?
Mr. Milligan. Thank you for the question. You raise a very
valid point. We did try to emphasize that in our conversation
earlier about the diversity in the rainfall.
I think it gets back to--there is going to be a lot more
research I think that is going to be involved from the land-
grant universities, the main stream that fits all, there may be
some guidelines and things out there for them. But as we get
into these different environments that are not quite as
plentiful, they have been passed by on the research. I think we
need some more research and sound science behind these
practices in these areas.
Mr. Baird. Absolutely. I agree with your thought about
additional research, and I appreciate a science-based kind of
decision.
But, in that same vein, how do you think we handle it if a
landowner has land and somebody else is renting it? How do we
handle those relationships on who gets paid?
Mr. Milligan. I am not sure I am capable of answering that
question. That question is a very valid question that has been
raised. Maybe some of the people in the carbon market--that are
in the carbon market might have some insight on that, but that
is certainly a factor going ahead.
Mr. Baird. Thank you.
So, I have a last question. I think agriculture--and we
have kind of focused on some of that here today--is a shining
light and has some real potential to be involved in this carbon
market. And then I mentioned livestock just a little bit
earlier.
So, Mr. Antonioli--did I pronounce that close--and Ms.
Reed, this has to do with dairy operations and the use of
methane digesters and so on. So, what steps do you think we
could take that would be helpful to get this challenge and help
dairy producers participate in these programs?
Mr. Antonioli. Thank you, Congressman Baird, for the
question.
So, there are a few things that dairy producers can do.
Obviously, they can do digesters. There is obviously a fairly
strong carbon market led by California that is actually
incentivizing the creation of digesters to treat the waste.
There are new technologies and new approaches that are being
brought on to the market. For example, there is a new
technology that is an additive to feed that reduces the methane
from enteric fermentation. And so, the carbon markets are great
at fostering that kind of innovation.
And to relate to your previous question, you think about
different lands. Right now, the current approaches might be
limited to certain lands and certain types of activities, but
over time as the markets evolve, if people start to see that
there are other opportunities, new crops, new activities, new
practices that can be done, those can be folded into the carbon
markets and continue to drive that innovation.
Ms. Reed. Yes, thank you.
I would add to that. So, we have a dairy project in
California which we are doing a whole farm approach, so it
includes a methane digester, it includes looking at feed
production for the actual dairy cows, and how we can reduce the
footprint of feed production. It includes some new feed
additives, as David pointed out, that I think will really show
positive ability to reduce methane from both enteric emissions
from the dairy cows, but also they are utilizing new
technologies to convert manure into soil amendment products
that will help increase soil carbon on the farm for the feed
that is being grown.
So, we are looking at whole farm, whole landscape
approaches, and then we are looking at water quality and water
use conservation on the farm so that we can really look at the
entire footprint and all of the beneficial impacts.
Mr. Baird. I appreciate all your responses, and I could go
on for additional time on this, but my time is up. I yield
back, Mr. Chairman.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentlewoman from Washington, Ms. Schrier, is recognized
for 5 minutes.
Ms. Schrier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you for
convening this hearing on such an important topic.
Farmers and ranchers are right at the front-lines of the
climate crisis. They are feeling the effects across the country
and droughts, fires, and floods are affecting their
livelihoods. Carbon markets are one tool that we have to
address and mitigate the growing threat of climate change, and
as I have heard, not all solutions work for all types of farms,
but this is one tool we have.
They have the potential to make an impact and have garnered
broad bipartisan support, but they do need to be implemented
really thoughtfully to ensure that they result in long lasting
carbon sequestration.
First, I would love to talk about forests, which have an
enormous potential to sequester carbon, and I am from
Washington State. As conventional agriculture works to develop
and implement regenerative practices in carbon markets, forests
have greater carbon storage potential right now in the near-
term, and increasing forest carbon sequestration is simple. It
is based on evidence-based forest management. And while there
are often high barriers to entry into these markets, we know
what the right practices are: hazardous fuel management,
reforestation, and an active wood products industry. In
addition to the carbon storage benefits, implementing these
practices both on public and private lands also has the
potential to reduce the frequency and severity of wildfires and
provides ecologic benefits such as improved wildlife habitat.
Now, traditional threats to forests like wildfire still
pose risks to the forestry carbon market, and disease can
rapidly erase years of progress. And that is why active and
aggressive forest management is key to mitigate these potential
risks and make our forests more resilient, and prevent them
from releasing carbon as opposed to sequestering it. We just
need an all hands on deck approach to forest management.
And that is why I introduced H.R. 3442, the National
Prescribed Fire Act of 2021, an increase in Federal investment
in prescribed burns as a preseason wildfire mitigation
strategy. I also helped secure $60 million in this year's
budget for the Collaborative Forest Landscape Restoration
Program, and I am working with local stakeholders in my
district to bring a small diameter sawmill to central
Washington, where 85 percent of one of my counties is forested.
I also want to note that private companies are interested
in offsetting their carbon footprint, and they understand the
potential that forests hold and are driving the demand for
carbon credits from forests. These companies don't just want to
invest in forests, they also want to invest in forest
sustainability and make sure this is done right.
I have some questions for Brian Luoma. Mr. Luoma, in your
testimony you mentioned the challenge of increasing
participation and confidence in foreign carbon markets. From
your perspective, how can Congress support this effort, and
what role do you see the Federal Government playing in forestry
markets specifically?
Mr. Luoma. Thank you, Representative, and I agree with
everything you just said. Congratulations on that legislation.
We need to continue to define what the opportunities are in
this market, and supporting funding in the USDA with the FIA
and the Forest Products Lab, the grants programs where we can
do research and do analysis and understand better what is at
play in the full life cycle analysis all the way to the built
environment. From seedling all the way through to seedling, if
you will, there is a tremendous amount of carbon to be
sequestered and stored in the forest while it is working, and
then moved into the built environment where it gets stored for
a long time.
We don't know a whole lot about how to do the accounting
for that. A lot of people are working on it. But I think
funding within the USDA to help us do research there will be
very helpful.
Ms. Schrier. Yes, I agree. I mean, how long will that
cross-laminated timber building remain? Because at some point,
wood degrades or is brought down and we are looking at 100 year
solutions.
Now, given that 40 percent of U.S. forests are publicly
owned, what opportunities do you see for public-private
partnership in the forestry carbon offset market space?
Mr. Luoma. Yes. Again, I think that is a discussion that
can be had within USDA and within all of the organizations that
are working on this, including the Environmental Defense Fund
and The Nature Conservancy. There is a lot of collaboration now
on the principles----
[The information referred to is located on p. 130.]
The Chairman. The gentleman can respond with a letter.
Thank you.
And now, the gentleman from Iowa, Mr. Feenstra, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Scott, and thank you,
Ranking Member Thompson.
I just want to give a shout-out to all our farmers and
producers around the country. I am absolutely so proud of them.
I am so proud of what they have done when it comes to our
environment. Sometimes they get vilified by environmentalists.
I just want to tell everyone, they are doing an amazing job. My
district is probably one or two in the nation when it comes to
production in agriculture, and we are doing all these things.
We are doing no-till. We are doing cover crops. We are doing
nutrient management, and when I hear these conversations, I get
concerned about are they going to be part of the solution when
it comes to helping them? When discussing carbon markets, the
farmers in my district, they have a lot of interest and with
that, they have several questions.
One of these questions is, like I said, they are doing all
these great practices. Now, are they going to be compensated
for these practices as we move forward, and I would ask Mr.
Bastos if you could answer that question?
Mr. Bastos. Thank you, Representative, for the question.
I think we debated a little bit today about the idea and
the challenge that we have in terms of early adopters in the
market. We at Bayer, we actually--in our program like in a way
that we actually compensate those early adopters, but I would
say that carbon markets and offsets are pretty much like one
type of solution. I think there are other solutions in that
space related to the food value chain, for example, in terms of
creating sustainably sourced products that can actually help
those farmers get compensated for the services that they do.
So, my point is offsets are one part of the solution, but
there are other tools that these farmers can actually
participate and be compensated for the services that they
provide to agriculture and to the environment.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you for that.
In my district, carbon capture and storage projects that
will sequester carbon directly from fertilizer plants, ethanol
plants, never letting the carbon go into the atmosphere. I am
supportive of these projects and 45 key tax credits that
encourage this type of construction.
This is for any witness. As companies work to reduce carbon
emissions on their own, what does that mean for the future of
carbon credits? Is there a viable market for farmers and
producers in the long-term when you have the private-sector
doing something like this?
Mr. Antonioli. Thank you, Congressman. That is a great
question.
I think there is a viable market in the long-term, but I
think you point to something that is very important, that there
are companies taking responsibility for their own emissions
first. And that is, in terms of the role of the voluntary
carbon markets, they are meant to be complementary to those
internal reductions.
The voluntary markets are growing. They will continue to
grow, but they will also complement the activities the
companies are doing to reduce their own internal emissions,
which is perhaps the bigger part of the solution or the
challenge.
Ms. Reed. Yes, I would add to that in that I think what you
are seeing the huge growth in markets is because we now have
every sector actually acting to reduce their emissions, and
every industry that operates across those sectors doing that.
So, the increased demand extends into the agricultural and
farming and ranching, if you will, supply chain, so there is
huge demand and I think that demand will only go up.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you for those comments. Thank you very
much.
As farmers look to engage in the carbon markets, my
priority is to ensure that the farmers are empowered, and have
the technical advice needed to make these decisions. This is so
important. Farmers succeed when there is certainty and
transparency in any marketplace. While many have interest in
the carbon markets, farmers are hesitant because of so much
confusion.
Mr. Milligan, in your testimony, you highlighted similar
concerns for wheat growers. I am wondering, from your
perspective, can growers--what are some of the biggest barriers
that we should be concerned about, and how do we rectify them?
Mr. Milligan. The biggest barrier seems to still be the
sound science behind what is actually out there in the market,
and of course, wheat is so diverse. It is grown in so many
different areas that wheat is kind of unique to the mainstream
crops.
Mr. Feenstra. Yes, David?
Mr. Antonioli. If I may, Congressman?
I realize that to answer your previous question, it is
really important to note that farmers, in terms of soil carbon,
generate what we call removals of carbon from the atmosphere,
and there is a very long-term market for those. There is a
fairly limited supply of those kind of credits in the market
today, and as we move towards 2051, the world is looking at
achieving net zero targets, their removals will be a critical
part of the question.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, and thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
The gentleman from Georgia, Mr. Bishop, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you so much for holding this hearing. It is indeed very timely
with the climate challenges with which we are faced, and as
indicated, our farmers are among the greatest stewards of our
environment.
I want to follow up on something that Mr. Feenstra touched
on, and I think it has to do with the concept of additionality
for early adopters. Some of the risks associated with carbon
markets as they are currently structured is that the early
adopters, like the organic peanut farmers and others in my
district who have been practicing climate-smart agriculture for
decades, and those who participate in the USDA conservation
programs like EQIP could possibly be excluded from
participating because the carbon sequestration and the storage
benefits from their operations are already baked into the
baseline. So, in effect, early adopters could feel that they
are penalized because they have been doing the right thing.
So, I was encouraged to see that Bayer Carbon Initiative
provides compensation to producers for up to 5 years of past
practices on or after January 1, 2012, but only 17 states are
currently participating in the program.
So, I would like Mr. Bastos to talk just a little bit about
the concept of additionality, and why Bayer decided to make the
payments eligible for past practices, and I would like to know
also if he feels that it would be helpful for USDA to provide
incentives similar to those that Bayer is providing for early
adopters, and if that would be helpful?
Mr. Bastos. Thank you for the question, Congressman Bishop.
The concept of additionality is one that we actually
discussed today about implementing these practices actually
happens because there is an incentive to implement the project
right, related to carbon. It wouldn't have occurred otherwise.
So, we actually have in our program this 5 year payment,
let's say, and that is kind of like in sync with some of the
standards actually represented by Mr. Antonioli here today.
So, that is how we actually approached the program, and the
other thing is related to incentives. I think that my personal
point of view on this is incentives are always helpful, but I
think they need to be in sync with what carbon markets actually
require, otherwise, to your point, they can be excluded if
additional incentives come on top of the current incentives in
the market, and they are not well designed to meet the
additionality criteria.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much.
Mr. Antonioli, switching gears slightly. The Family Forest
Carbon Program connects family forest owners with trusted
information and professionals, and it pays them for
implementing carbon positive forest management practices. The
House Agriculture Committee just passed a bill that provides
similar incentives for small forestland owners. Verra is
responsible for developing the methodology for this program. In
addition to the Family Forest Carbon Program, it provides
corporations with a platform to reach that critical
environmental and economic goals.
It wasn't covered in your testimony, but the American
Forest Foundation considers it a priority to support small
forestland owners in accessing carbon markets. Can you talk
more about the importance of supporting small farmers and
forestland owners?
Mr. Antonioli. Yes, sir, Congressman. It is a great point,
and that is one of the challenges that the carbon markets have
been facing is how do you actually make it accessible to the
small land holders and the small forest owners, because they
tend to be smaller and they have fewer resources at their
disposal. So, we are working actively with the American Forest
Foundation to try to figure out how to really create a new
methodology, if you will, to enable that.
The recently approved methodology for soil carbon is a good
example of how you create something that is scalable and that
is accessible to small farmers. Of course, the price is
critical. The higher the price, the more that you have
available to be able to make the practices happen on the
ground. It is an ongoing challenge, and it is something that we
consider always and are working towards that.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you very much. My time is about up. I
will yield my remaining 13 seconds back, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you very kindly.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
The gentlelady from Louisiana, Ms. Letlow, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Letlow. Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Thompson,
thank you for facilitating this hearing to discuss, and most
importantly, learn from a full panel of witnesses regarding
voluntary carbon markets and the agriculture industry.
To all the witnesses: your time and insight provided here
today has been invaluable as we, Members of this Committee,
continue the review and oversight of policies that have been
introduced this Congress.
I would like to start my remarks by echoing what many of my
colleagues have stressed before me. Our farmers, ranchers, and
forestland owners are the pioneers of conservation and
sustainability on our productive lands. There are numerous
factors that agriculturalists have to consider when planning
for a new season, and those decisions ultimately impact the
vitality of our soils for future growing seasons.
Whether it is adopting new practices, implementing new
technologies, or mitigating for potential risks, farmers are at
the forefront of innovation and they work hard every day to
preserve the land for generations to come.
It's essential that we recognize these successes of our
farmers and the standing USDA conservation programs, and ensure
our agricultural communities are the true beneficiaries, as we
continue to build upon these efforts.
Agriculture is a very diversified industry. Regions have
different growing seasons, climates, production practices, and
risks. What works for the Southeast generally does not apply to
the Pacific Northwest.
Mr. Milligan, in your written testimony you provided
several scenarios where a one size fits all approach isn't
feasible for just one crop. That is wheat. Similarly, no-till,
cover crops, and other basic conservation practices don't fit
more niche commodities like rice, crawfish, sugar, and others
in my home State of Louisiana.
I know you touched on this briefly in response to my
colleague, Mr. Baird's, questioning, but can you further
elaborate on the challenges presented by a single carbon market
system on such a diversified industry? Second, in your
experience, what would be the best approach to make these types
of programs more inclusive and equitable for all commodities
and across different crop mixes?
The Chairman. I believe that question was for you, Mr.
Milligan.
Mr. Milligan. Excuse me. Sorry. Thank you for the question.
It is a real challenge, as you mentioned, and I think I
mentioned earlier when you get to diverse crops. We have some
specialty crops in our area, too. You mentioned rice, and I
think it is still back to there needs to be more research,
whether it is land-grant universities. They certainly want to
be a part, when I speak about wheat, we feel that wheat growers
are doing a good job, but we feel we can do a better job. And I
think that pretty much sums up what it would be for a lot of
these other commodities. I think there certainly is an interest
in there to do the right thing and to be compensated for it,
but certainly we have to have the sound science to back it up.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you.
I have a follow up question for Mr. Bastos. I understand
your company has some experience in this space, given Bayer's
own carbon program. Do you have anything you would like to add?
Mr. Bastos. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman
Letlow.
So, I would emphasize some of the topics here. I think
research is actually definitely fundamental right, for us to
actually evolve into multiple crops, multiple systems, and even
different geographies. But we have to start somewhere, and I
think that that is never--there is never a bad time to actually
start somewhere, especially with climate change.
So, we think that this is a step-wise process. We start
where we actually can have an impact, and then by having an
impact, that creates some kind of better outcomes for the
market. The market gets excited. There is new innovation, new
technologies that allow these other farmers and other crops to
actually jump in and participate.
So, I think it is a starting point, and us as a company, we
are actually doing the same thing. We work with multiple
farmers, multiple crops, but we actually have to start
somewhere, and that is what we are doing today with the Bayer
Carbon Program.
Ms. Letlow. Thank you so much to the witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the remainder of my time.
The Chairman. Thank you very much.
The gentlewoman from Connecticut, Mrs. Hayes, who is also
the Chairwoman of the Subcommittee on Nutrition, Oversight, and
Department Operations, you are recognized for 5 minutes. Mrs.
Hayes.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to
be here today discussing carbon markets and their potential to
help in our fight against climate change.
It is increasingly clear that our farmers, especially our
small family farms with high costs of operation and slim profit
margins, are on the front lines of the climate crisis. Not only
are they tasked with mitigating their own carbon emissions, but
they must withstand more frequent natural disasters caused by
carbon emissions of the past. While carbon markets could be an
effective piece of a larger strategy to fight climate change,
we must ensure that we are putting family farms at the center
of our conversations, and not treating them as an afterthought.
Connecticut family farms have long led the way in climate-
smart policies, and are steadfast in their commitment to
stewardship over the land for future generations. Many farms in
the district that I represent have proactively implemented the
use of cover crops, rotational grazing, no-till farming, and
agroforestry. It is our duty not only to provide our small
farmers with the resources they need, but to adapt and sustain
climate-smart policies, and also to ensure we explore every
opportunity to make the agriculture industry a leader in the
fight in this climate crisis. Carbon markets, if done well,
will make farmers in my district part of the solution.
Ms. Eideberg, my question is directed to you. In your
testimony, you mentioned that USDA should ensure equitable
access to markets. Can you elaborate on how USDA can ensure
that small farmers have access to carbon markets?
Ms. Eideberg. Sure. Thank you for the question.
Carbon markets or voluntary greenhouse gas markets can be
confusing. They can be complicated. We have already heard other
witnesses and Members of Congress talk about some of the
challenges, contracts that are 100 years or more. These are all
barriers for producers to participate. Getting USDA involved,
setting some standards that everyone can work towards, making
sure that we are bringing down the cost of the measurement in
verification so that smaller farms can participate in these
scenarios. I think those are all really good roles for USDA to
play.
I heard one of our other panelists earlier talking about
conservation programs at USDA as a way for farmers to start
this process, kind of that up-front capital so they can
potentially engage later, so that is an opportunity. But I also
think that at USDA, we have an opportunity to provide really
strong technical assistance to those farmers who need this work
and making sure that we are supporting those on-the-ground
resources in every district and every county to every farmer is
incredibly important.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. You have actually answered my next
question, which was what existing Federal policies do to either
help or exacerbate some of the challenges of farmers, so I am
very happy to hear that you are acknowledging those things and
recognize that we have to work to close those gaps.
I know that another concern with carbon markets is that
they may not incentivize large corporations to cut their carbon
emissions, possibly leading to more pollution in underserved
areas.
Ms. Eideberg, how do you think the USDA and Congress can
ensure that carbon markets do not lead to more pollution in
environmental justice communities?
Ms. Eideberg. Well, I think the key point is the
distinction between voluntary markets that we are talking about
here, and compliance markets. EDF and I think many of the
panelists, if not all of the panelists here, would not be
advocating for producers to be able to completely offset their
emissions with credits from the agricultural sector, because
frankly, it can be a little bit risky. We might get there at
some point. We probably will, but right now, we are just
looking at voluntary markets, voluntary credits, and not
allowing for those offsets to occur.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. Thank you so much, Ms. Eideberg, and
to all the witnesses who are here today, thank you for your
time and your thoughtful answers to these questions to help
inform our decision making.
That is all I have, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Mrs. Hayes.
The gentleman from South Dakota, Mr. Johnson, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I thought Mr.
Milligan asked some very good questions in his testimony, and
then combined with Ms. Merrill's--her reminder to me of the
2010 crash of the prices for carbon credits, it got me
thinking. I mean, I wouldn't call myself an expert, but I am
reasonably well-versed in how farmers can get paid, all the
flexibilities in how they get paid when they take grain to the
grain elevator. Sometimes the price is set then. Sometimes it
is set later. Sometimes they get paid then. Sometimes they get
paid later. Sometimes the ownership transfers then. Sometimes
it transfers later. I don't really have any sense of how that
works in the carbon credit market, and so is there--and I don't
know whoever can answer this, but is there a standard approach,
number one, currently in place in these voluntary markets about
how and when producers get paid? Is there a lot of flexibility
in that arena? And then, is there a futures market that is
likely to develop, given this potential flexibility?
I would love to have a couple people answer, so if nobody
wants to take more than a minute or a minute and a half, that
would be great.
Ms. Reed. I can start.
There is a futures market that already exists. The CME
Group actually launched a carbon futures market, and they are
the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. I think you can check that
out. It is a recent development, and I think probably a good
one.
In terms of the flexibility for payments, I do think there
is flexibility, and there are different approaches as to how
that is achieved. Generally, however, farmers and ranchers are
paid only once the credit is actually certified and verified,
so it is kind of after they have done the work at the end of
the season, if you will. That is why it is important to have
some of those up-front USDA conservation payments.
We actually use bill.com to pay our farmers and ranchers.
They create an account and we just electronically deposit the
payments that way to make it easy on them.
Mr. Johnson. And again, I want somebody else to answer,
too, but maybe a quick follow-up, ma'am. What if they change
these practices and wanted to, in essence, hold on to the
commodity themselves for a while, the credit? I mean, is there
an ability for them to sell that 6 months later?
Ms. Reed. Well, so I started initially talking about--we
are not operating in traditional offset markets. We are
operating in supply chain emission reduction markets, and those
credits need to be utilized annually. So, there is a certain
period of time that the company actually needs to claim them.
In traditional carbon offset markets--and David could
probably speak to this--they can, in fact, hold on to them. In
our market, we actually don't sell a credit regardless until
the farmer or rancher actually agrees for it to be sold, and I
think that is a very important point, that this is farmer
data--we are utilizing their farmer credits, and they should
have a say in control over that.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, ma'am.
Sir, go ahead.
Mr. Antonioli. Yes, sir. I think that is exactly right, and
I think it is really down to every contract if there is
variability on that. But if a farmer wanted to keep the
underlying commodity and sell it later at a future time, that
would be entirely possible. It is down to the negotiation that
happens in between the farmer and whoever is going to buy the
credit from them.
Mr. Johnson. So, what is most typical? I mean, because you
just think about a farmer who probably doesn't want to maintain
a lot of price risk, given all of the other exposure they have.
Are most contracts for a set price into the out-years, years 2,
3, 4?
Mr. Antonioli. Thank you. I can't speak to that. We don't
see the contracts themselves. We just certify the credits, so
we don't see all the financial transactions behind them.
Mr. Johnson. Could any of the panelists tell me what they
think is most typical?
Ms. Reed. I can tell you that we currently are engaging
farmers in annual contracts while we really test the system and
see what works best. But we are really looking at 5 year
contracts, so that there is certainty on both sides of the
ledger, both for the farmer and rancher who are the sellers,
and then the buyer so that we know whatever you are looking at,
for instance, when you join, that is your baseline and you then
have the opportunity to sell credits on an annual basis for the
length of that 5 year contract.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. I am a little surprised there are not
more multi-year contracts just because the changes in practices
these producers put into place often are a little more
intensive on the front-end, and I think they would want a
multi-year ability to recoup that investment. So, perhaps that
is a good development.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield back. Oh, I do have
some additional questions I will submit for the record, sir.
The Chairman. Very fine. Thank you very much.
The gentleman from Florida, Mr. Lawson, is recognized for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lawson. Mr. Chairman, can you hear me?
The Chairman. Yes, we can. Go ahead, Mr. Lawson.
Mr. Lawson. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for calling
this hearing today, you and the Ranking Member, Mr. Thompson.
This is a very important hearing.
To make sure I can get an answer from everyone in the small
amount of time that we have, my question is what type--several
of you mentioned that many aspects of the voluntary carbon
market generates a lot of confusion because of how complex and
diverse the different programs are. My question then would
center around--to all of the witnesses, this will be to all of
the witnesses. In your opinion, what would the ideal carbon
market look like--ideal market would look like for farmers? If
you all could comment on that, that would be greatly
appreciated.
Mr. Milligan. David Milligan. Thanks for the question.
I think the ideal carbon market, the carbon sequestration
takes place at the farm, and I think these programs have to be
designed that the majority of that money comes back to the
farmer. It is not like wheat or something else where it is
transferred and it is processed and shipped and there is
freight process and changes value. It all happens right at the
farm. The revenue stream needs to come back to where the carbon
creation happens.
Ms. Reed. I will jump in and say I think very clear
contracts for farmers and ranchers without a lot of tiny print,
right, so that they are very understandable are really
necessary.
I would also say harmonized, standardized approaches for
how, in fact, they operate and how we buy and sell credits in
these markets are, in fact--would benefit everyone.
Mr. Bastos. If I might, Congressman Lawson, I would say the
following.
So, we talk about common standards, transparency, clearly
understandable rules for farmers. And I would say that in the
end, it boils down to trust, right? For a market actually to
thrive, we need to have enough trust from buyers who are
willing to place their investments in the market, and trust
that actually whatever they are buying is necessary, something
that is real, and they can actually count on.
So, I think an ideal market is a market that actually has
trust from farmers all the way to the buyers.
Mr. Lawson. Thank you.
Mr. Antonioli. Can I add one element to that, which would
be--thank you for the question, Congressman.
I think one key aspect of an ideal market would be for the
farmers to have confidence that the contracts that they are
going to sign into have been vetted and that they have
confidence that it is a real program that they are going to be
using, and that they are going to have value from the credits
at the end of the day.
There are a number of different options currently on the
market, and it can be very confusing for farmers, so having
some clarity around that could be very, very useful.
Mr. Lawson. Thank you.
Ms. Eideberg. Congressman, I am happy to jump in and
provide four suggestions for a framework and a carbon market
that EDF would like to see.
First, it is important that it be very transparent. Second,
we want to make sure that we are having verified quality
emissions coming from that marketplace and from those
operations. Third, we want it to be profitable. We want farmers
to continue to make money and diversify their income and see
this as a profitable way to continue, so they will continue the
practices on their farm. And then fourth, we want it to be
equitable and accessible by all farmers, regardless of size,
commodity, geography. That is hard to do, as we have heard
before, but I think we can eventually get there.
Thank you.
Mr. Lawson. Okay, thank you.
Ms. Merrill. And I would just weigh in, Congressman, to say
that we would agree with many of those principles, but find
that carbon markets just haven't been able to deliver on those
many fronts, and so, we would much rather see the farm bill
conservation programs scaled up and made accessible and focused
on climate change so that we do have that diversity of farmers
who can remain profitable, but can also have benefit from the
technical assistance, financial incentives so that they can not
only reduce carbon emissions, but also become more resilient
through greater weather extremes.
Mr. Lawson. Okay, thank you.
The Chairman. The time of the gentleman has expired.
The gentleman from Nebraska, Mr. Bacon, you are now
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I will just start
off by saying thanks to Ms. Spanberger. Her and I have worked
together on the Growing Climate Solutions Act (H.R. 2820), and
I have worked also with Senator Braun. We are trying to find
some innovative ways to help our farmers and ranchers, and I
think there is a lot of confusion on this particular topic, and
myself included have some learning to do.
So, I would like to start off with a couple of questions
for Mr. Bastos and Ms. Eideberg. I think other industries out
there have access to carbon credits. Our ag community has not.
Do I have that--am I accurate with that statement?
Ms. Eideberg. Well, I think there is access right now, but
it is in its infancy. It can be confusing. It can be
complicated, and if we want more farmers to have access and we
want the environmental benefits that are going to come, then we
need to take some more proactive steps in this space.
Mr. Bacon. Mr. Bastos, anything to add?
Mr. Bastos. Thank you, Congressman, for the question.
I think I would concur with Ms. Eideberg here on this. I
think it is very clear.
Mr. Bacon. A follow-up to this. What is the downside for a
corn farmer or a wheat farmer in Nebraska for this bill that we
are working on?
Ms. Eideberg. What is the downside?
Mr. Bacon. There seems to be a lot of suspicion, but I
don't see where the downside is at. I thought maybe I would ask
you.
Mr. Bastos. If I might, working with farmers every day as a
company, I would say that I see very little downside. I mean,
one of the things that I mentioned before is the need for
technical assistance and how farmers actually can navigate that
intersection of adopting practices, making sure they actually
work on their farm. Every farm is actually unique by nature, so
having technical assistance so they can actually make them work
with the crops that reduce so they can keep yielding more, and
at the same time do it sustainably and capture carbon, I think
that is a need and I think this bill can actually help in that.
Mr. Bacon. It seems to be this is removing ambiguity as
well?
Mr. Bastos. Yes.
Ms. Eideberg. Yes, and I think the downside in this space
is that if we don't act, then we are not providing the
standards and we are not providing the measurements and we are
not providing the technical assistance to farmers, because that
ship has sailed. The markets are happening. Producers are
getting involved, and we don't want poor quality credits to be
emerging on the market. We don't want fraud to occur, and we
don't want farmers to get shorted.
Mr. Bacon. Mr. Antonioli, it looks like you got a follow up
here. You want to answer something?
Mr. Antonioli. I was going to pretty much echo what she
said, but just add that there are currently a variety of
different options that farmers have to generate carbon credits,
and I think it is really important that they understand that
the programs that they use are going to generate high value,
real carbon credits that are going to help them in the long
run, because those credits will have value in the market, but
also help solve the climate crisis.
Mr. Bacon. Does this not provide farmers an opportunity to
improve their top line?
Mr. Antonioli. Excuse me?
Mr. Bacon. Does this not provide the farmers an opportunity
to improve their top line? This is going to improve their
margins?
Mr. Antonioli. I think so, yes.
Mr. Bacon. Here is another question. There seems to be
confusion. What is the cost to the Federal Government? Is there
a cost to the Federal Government doing this--working this bill,
ma'am?
Ms. Eideberg. The Senate version was scored by CBO, and
there was no cost. There was a cost for manpower at USDA that
$4 million is in the bill to--I think it is--yes, $4 million
paid for out of rescissions that USDA is not spending, so it
is--the bill is neutral by CBO scoring.
Mr. Bacon. Ms. Eideberg, so today we are saying this is a
government-run carbon market. It is not really. It is
certifying other folks that will be monitoring this. Do I have
that right?
Ms. Eideberg. So, the bill would put USDA in the position
to make sure that it is certifying and identifying the trusted
advisors that farmers can go to, that they can go to a neutral
third party and get the technical assistance and maybe the plan
of action for how they can potentially engage in this market,
and they know that they are getting that fair advice.
Mr. Bacon. I just want to stress it is totally voluntary.
Ms. Eideberg. Completely voluntary.
Mr. Bacon. And I know that is a concern for some people.
So, my final question with my last 39 seconds to Mr.
Milligan with the Wheat Growers. I know the Farm Bureau has
endorsed Ms. Spanberger's and I bill. Where do the Wheat
Growers stand on this?
Mr. Milligan. Well, we have a committee that is set up to
study climate sustainability, and we will put before that
committee, and maybe they will make a recommendation to our
board.
Mr. Bacon. Okay, thank you.
With my 16 seconds left, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
I recognize the gentlewoman from Virginia, Ms. Spanberger,
who is also the Chair of our Subcommittee on Conservation and
Forestry, and is recognized for 5 minutes, and also is one of
our outstanding leaders on the issue of climate change.
Ms. Spanberger. Mr. Chairman, thank you so very much, and
to our witnesses, I have actually never been more excited in a
Committee hearing in my short time in Congress. I have been
delighted and excited by this conversation, and I am so
grateful to go directly after my friend and colleague,
Congressman Bacon, who asked extraordinary questions.
I am just so excited because what we have heard today from
our witnesses is that climate-smart agricultural and forestry
practices can really help reduce the risks posed by climate
change while creating valuable revenue streams. That means
money for the farmers and producers who choose to participate
in voluntary, again, voluntary carbon markets, and these
markets are driven by an ever-increasing demand among
corporations--and thank you to the representative from Bayer
here to bring his voice to the conversation--from corporations
looking to invest in ways to lower their footprints as we
transition to a zero-carbon economy, maybe someday negative
carbon economy.
Unfortunately, these existing private markets are often
challenging to navigate for companies and for small farmers
alike. This has been made clear by the conversations I have had
with the smaller-scale producers and foresters in my district
throughout central Virginia, and I thought that Mr. Milligan in
his written testimony provided really important questions about
carbon markets.
And so, as we have heard today, there are crucial questions
that continue to loom about the best types of protocols for
carbon sequestration practices, and how farmers or forest
owners who want to perhaps implement these practices and want
to perhaps create new revenue streams for themselves can join
these markets.
And that is why I am so excited to work with my colleague,
Congressman Don Bacon, to reintroduce the Growing Climate
Solutions Act this Congress. The exciting thing is the fact
that we have had endorsements across the board. We have lists,
and Mr. Chairman, I submit for the record the list of entities
that have endorsed this bill,* from the American Farm Bureau,
the American Soybean Association, the National Potato Council,
the National Milk Producers Federation, to industries such as
McDonalds, Bayer, Microsoft, Chobani, to environmental groups
like Environmental Defense Fund, the National Wildlife
Federation, the National Audubon Society. And I will say, not
frequently do so many Members of Congress agree on something,
but certainly not frequently do so many organizations across
sectors agree on something as straightforward as this bill.
This bill would protect farmers and companies who want to
participate in existing voluntary carbon markets by involving
the USDA for certification. It would empower American farmers
and forest owners to make informed choices about how to
participate in voluntary carbon markets by really creating a
one-stop shop for information about these markets. It would
bring experts and trusted partners to the table alongside
producers through the creation of a robust producer-focused and
science-forward advisory council to make sure USDA is keeping
up with the rapid innovations that occur in this space. And
finally, this bill would not alter existing conservation
programs or place undue burdens on growers or forest owners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: the listing of endorsers is located on p. 127.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In fact, I was impressed that Ms. Eideberg in her testimony
spoke about some of the co-benefits that actually present to
farmers and producers, and notably, this bill also does not
touch the funding of the Commodity Credit Corporation.
So, I am so excited this bill passed the Senate with a vote
of 92-8. It had tremendous support and I thank the sponsors in
the Senate, Senator Braun and Senator Stabenow for their work
on this bill, and I have been so enthusiastic so far that I
have little time for questions.
But I would like to begin. Ms. Eideberg, I know there are
discussions about, if we are even talking about carbon markets,
we are accepting that carbon exists. Can you discuss how
legislation like the Growing Climate Solutions Act would help
provide growers and producers the resources they need to make
informed decisions about practices on their land that we know
are credible and actually help mitigate the impact of climate
change?
Ms. Eideberg. Sure.
So, producers are very interested in engaging in a type of
voluntary market, because as you mentioned, it is a way to
diversify income, increase their bottom line. The challenge is
that the markets are new, contracts are complicated, finding
ways to engage is probably going to require, in most cases, the
help of a trusted advisor. Farmers use trusted advisors for
everything from inputs, seed, tractors, I mean, they need help.
So, creating this verified advisor program through USDA,
which frankly, is very similar to how we do other programs,
USDA just provides that technical assistance that farmers need.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much. Thank you to all of
our witnesses for such an exciting hearing.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentlelady from Florida, Mrs. Cammack, is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Cammack. Well, thank you, Chairman Scott, Ranking
Member Thompson, and to all of our witnesses here before us
today.
I am very proud to represent part of the wood basket in
north central Florida, and just recently had a roundtable with
my forest owners about this very issue. One of those owners I
spoke with in my district recently described voluntary carbon
markets as the ``Wild West.'' I have to say that I agree with
his characterization. They have told me about the lack of
consistent standards and the differences in returns, depending
on the carbon exchange.
What I think shocked me the most, however, in these
conversations was learning from one of my constituents when
approached by a consultant working with a carbon exchange, that
they were going to have to pay $300,000 up front. They were
told that they would have the opportunity to recoup this cost
over time, but that there were no guarantees.
So, given this account, Ms. Merrill, have you heard, if
anything, from farmers regarding up-front costs to participate
in carbon markets? How do these costs compare to those
associated with participating in California's Climate-Smart Ag
programs, or USDA's conservation programs?
Ms. Merrill. Thank you, Congresswoman, so much for the
question.
Yes, we have heard about high transaction costs not only
for the California compliance market, but also for the
voluntary market, and that has meant largely that small, some
mid-scale farmers simply can't get into the market. They can't
afford it. The project evolvement and verification costs are
simply too high, and so many simply can't afford to
participate. What is different, of course, with the Climate-
Smart Agriculture programs is it is a grant-based program. You
have to develop a project, fill out an application, and
implement that project, but we have technical assistance here
in the state to support farmers of all scales and all types of
operations to participate in the Climate-Smart Ag programs. It
is a grants-based program. It is modeled after the USDA farm
bill conservation programs, which take an approach that we
think will better meet the needs of farmers, as well as better
meet the needs of the climate crisis. The complexities of the
carbon market are simply too great.
Mrs. Cammack. And I would like to ask our panelists here
today in person, generally how are producers who may not be
well capitalized, how are they able to enter these markets? I
will start with you, Ms. Eideberg.
Ms. Eideberg. I appreciate your comments because I have
often described these markets as a Wild West as well. That
being said, it is a perfect opportunity for Congress to step in
and provide some clarity; to put that referee on the field,
create some standardization, and make sure that farmers know
exactly what they are getting into. We don't want anybody to be
stuck with a $300,000 bill at the end of the day that they
can't pay. That is not okay.
So, we would welcome Congress's involvement to try to
figure these issues out. There are a lot of different
approaches, but if we fail to act in this space, whether that
be giving USDA authority to take some action, Congress writing
legislation in this space, or looking to some qualified third
party neutral actors, I think this problem is just going to get
worse because that ship has sailed. This is happening so what
can we do to make sure that farmers are not coming up short?
Mrs. Cammack. Mr. Antonioli? I caught you off guard. Sorry
about that.
Mr. Antonioli. Well, I was just going to say that I would
echo that tremendously.
The payments for real legitimate carbon credits only come
after you have done the practices, so that, of course, doesn't
apply that you have to invest in the technology or the--
whatever you need to implement those practices. But the idea
that the example you mentioned I think is exactly the kind of
challenge that you start to see more and more of if there isn't
some consistency and some vetting of the folks who are
providing these services and offering these things to farmers.
Mrs. Cammack. I appreciate that. I am running short on
time, so I am sorry. I am going to have to jump real quickly.
Mr. Milligan, could you estimate how many of your members
participate in carbon markets, and are there any lessons those
members have learned?
Mr. Milligan. I can only take a guess, but I know on the
Committee there are some people that have had some experiences,
whether they had it personally or not. So, I would say the
number is very low.
I think to your question, it has been pretty well raised
here. It is kind of the Wild West. We need to have more
criteria before we really know whether we are going to jump in.
Mrs. Cammack. Excellent. I appreciate that. Thank you so
much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman from California, Mr. Costa, who
is also the Chairman of our Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture, is recognized now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Costa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for holding
this important hearing on voluntary--I underline the word
voluntary--carbon markets in agriculture, which I think is part
of America's agriculture future. I also want to thank our
colleagues, Congresswoman Spanberger and Congressman Bacon, for
introducing what I think was very important companion
legislation to Senator Stabenow, and it is really the
opportunity I think that we need to seize.
Yes, I think it is the Wild West, and guess what, the Wild
West was an opportunity for new development and new
opportunities in America. I think what is lacking is the
framework that this legislation provides.
And so, Mr. Antonioli, first to begin, you talked about in
your opening comments about goals and milestones, and I don't
know when you could have a fully matured carbon market if you
have determined or estimated what the potential is for American
agriculture?
Mr. Antonioli. I don't have the numbers of what it would
mean in terms of--are you asking in terms of----
Mr. Costa. In terms of the reduction of carbon footprints,
in terms of the benefits that would accrue to agriculture that
would benefit as a result of that. I mean, there has to be some
research that has been done as what a fully matured carbon
market might present to American agriculture and to improving
the quality of our environment, I would think.
Mr. Antonioli. Yes. I don't have those numbers to----
Mr. Costa. Okay. Well, get them to us. They are important.
Jeanne Merrill, you have your California experience, and I
am a Californian. What do you think the lesson is to be learned
based on the comments you have made here today?
Ms. Merrill. Thank you, Congressman Costa. Good to see you
again.
Mr. Costa. Good to see you.
Ms. Merrill. I think we have a lot of really important
lessons in California, which is we have more farmers applying
to our Climate-Smart Agriculture programs than we have funding
for. The demand is high. Yes, we are seeing high demand for the
voluntary markets, but as our former governor, Jerry Brown,
would like to remind us, there are up times and there are down
times, and we saw some pretty significant down times with the
Chicago Climate Exchange when the bottom fell out.
Mr. Costa. No, I know.
Ms. Merrill. And we would expect to see some down times
again on the voluntary market. Yet, the urgent----
Mr. Costa. That is the nature of markets, is it not?
Ms. Merrill. I am sorry?
Mr. Costa. That is the nature of markets, is it not?
Ms. Merrill. It is absolutely the nature of markets, yes.
Mr. Costa. Let me go quickly, because I don't have a lot of
time.
I had a curious question here, and the Chairman and Members
of this Committee know clearly the challenges we have had in
the West, and the impacts of climate change with extreme
droughts.
We have to fallow, again, a lot of land in California. Does
fallowing the land in and by itself allow us to participate in
a voluntary carbon market that would bring some level of income
in when farmers are not able to plant? Do you know?
Ms. Merrill. I am sorry, is that for me?
Mr. Costa. Yes, I am sorry.
Ms. Merrill. Okay. I am not the right person to answer that
question.
Mr. Costa. All right, then we will move on.
Callie Eideberg, good to see you. Callie, you talked about
in your testimony that they need to be shovel ready in
voluntary markets--we all agree on that--in setting standards.
On the issue of shovel-ready, specifically what do you mean in
terms of the standards? Do you think the legislation that has
been introduced by my colleague here that I am supporting
creates the framework for those standards?
Ms. Eideberg. So, shovel-ready practices mean--I would pull
examples like methane digesters. Those are being deployed on
farms. Good soil health practices, like cover crops, no-till.
Those are fantastic opportunities for farmers.
We have seen a huge increase in cover crop adoption, but we
are still nationally in single digits at the amount of farmers
that have adopted cover crops.
Mr. Costa. You should know from your previous life and
experience, Callie, cover crops are good if you have water to
plant the cover crop. But since we are in extreme drought
conditions, that is not the case.
Let me ask you the same question I asked Jeanne Merrill. If
you have to fallow land, could you potentially qualify to
participate in such a market?
Ms. Eideberg. So, I think you would have to be able to go
and actually measure the carbon sequestration in a particular
field, and that is going to take some time. So, I think there
is a possibility that that is--that that could occur, but it
depends on the individual market.
Mr. Costa. Okay. My time has about expired, but I will have
some subsequent questions, Mr. Chairman, and again, thank you
for this important hearing, and thank my colleague,
Congresswoman Spanberger, for your important legislation.
Callie, it is good to see you.
The Chairman. The gentleman from Texas, Mr. Cloud, you are
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Cloud. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Antonioli, hopefully I am pronouncing that correct, how
much have you been able to distribute to farmers to date?
Mr. Antonioli. So, I am sorry, I do not have--thank you for
the question. I am sorry, I do not have the answer to that
question. We don't--we only certify the credits. The
transactions and the working with the farmers is down to
companies or technical providers, and they are the ones who end
up working with the farmers and working with them to get the
projects certified, which they use our services. But we don't
have any view into what actually is--what those transactions
are.
Mr. Cloud. Okay.
Mr. Antonioli. Our job is to ensure the quality of the
credits themselves.
Mr. Cloud. Got you.
Mr. Bastos, your program as well, are you able to pay
farmers? Can you speak to that, how much you have been able to
distribute to farmers?
Mr. Bastos. Thank you for the question, Congressman. We
have distributed to the farmers, actually paid the farmers
starting in July of this year, and ended up paying all of them
by the end of September.
Mr. Cloud. I am sorry, how much was that?
Mr. Bastos. We actually, the total amount I don't have here
on top of my head, but I can tell the following: We paid as
high as $170,000 to an individual farmer.
Mr. Cloud. Okay, and where are these funds coming from?
Mr. Bastos. From Bayer.
Mr. Cloud. I am sorry?
Mr. Bastos. From Bayer's balance sheet.
Mr. Cloud. From Bayer's--well, those funds from your
balance sheet are coming from somewhere though. Where is that
coming from? Where is the income to your balance sheet?
Basically, money comes into your company, eventually leaves
your company. What are the inputs?
Mr. Bastos. So, we are a company that actually has
activities in seeds and crop inputs, basically. We make those
crop inputs that are sold to farmers, and based on the income
that comes from those products, we actually use that----
Mr. Cloud. But in relation to carbon markets, are you
saying that is a loss leader for your company?
Mr. Bastos. No. No, we actually engage with like companies
to represent agriculture in their offset agreements to have
farmers actually as a source of offsets for those companies.
Mr. Cloud. Okay. Ms. Merrill, could you speak to
transaction costs?
Ms. Merrill. Yes. Congressman, is there a question what are
transaction costs?
Mr. Cloud. Well, a recent USDA report reported about ten
percent of carbon markets go to the farmer actually, and so, we
end up taking relatively $10 out of an industry and about $1 of
it ends up in the farmer. And so, somewhere there is some loss
somewhere, and my concern is if we are looking at an
environment that we need to look at the whole environment, the
whole world industry approach to environment, because it is a
global environment, and so, taking $10 out of an industry that
probably needs to be doing more investments in sustainable
activities than the ag industry, which is probably where we get
the green of the Green New Deal from, and $9--so, we take $10
out of an industry that could be putting research into this: $9
ends up into a regulatory framework somehow, and then $1 of it
actually gets to the farmer. And so, these are being marketed
in a sense as this great help to farmers in the basis of an
environment, but I am just--it seems like it is an overall
taking from the effort.
Mr. Antonioli, do you know what has been the greatest
driver of reduction of greenhouse gases?
Mr. Antonioli. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
I think it is important to recognize that carbon markets
really complement internal reduction----
Mr. Cloud. That is not the question I asked. The question I
asked is what has been the greatest driver of the reduction in
greenhouse gases?
Mr. Antonioli. I think the greatest driver has been a real
recognition that we need to do something about climate change.
Mr. Cloud. It has been a [inaudible] in the natural gas
industry. That has been the biggest driver of--and so, we are
taking $10 out of the oil and gas industry, for example, giving
$9 into a regulatory framework and giving $1 to a farmer. And
it just seems to me like this is more about creating a
regulatory critical class taking from producers, whether that
be in the ag industry or whether that be in the oil and gas
industry. And, we already have--there has been an important--we
have programs already that help those adopting these practices
early, early adopters, to help get them off the ground. And I
would just question the voluntary carbon markets. It starts off
voluntary, and then we ask the government to get involved, and
then it becomes mandatory. This is just how government programs
work, and it seems to me like the better approach would be to
continue to practice some of the sustainable practices and
programs that we already have.
Thank you. I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you.
And now, we reach the close of our hearing, and what a
hearing we have had. Many of you who are on our Committee with
your exchanges, our Members and witnesses can see, we are very
much interested in this issue, and we appreciate each and every
one of you. I want to thank each of you. First of all, I want
to thank Ms. Debbie Reed, Executive Director of the Ecosystem
Service Market Consortium. Thank you. I want to thank Mr. Leo
Bastos, Senior Vice President, Head of Global Commercial
Ecosystems at Bayer. I want to thank Mr. Brian Luoma, President
and Chief Executive Officer at The Westervelt Company, on
behalf of National Alliance of Forest Owners. Mr. David
Antonioli, who is the Chief Executive Officer at Verra. Ms.
Callie Eideberg, Director of Government Relations at the
Environmental Defense Fund, and Mr. David Milligan, President
of the National Association of Wheat Growers, and Ms. Jeanne
Merrill, Policy Director at the California Climate and
Agriculture Network, on behalf of National Sustainable
Agriculture Coalition. What a wonderful help you have been to
this Committee and the nation, many of which have been tuning
into this. This is one of our most exciting hearings. All of
our hearings are exciting and beneficial, but this one really
has gotten the interest of many across the nation.
I just want to say from my own conclusions as Chairman, you
all have answered some of my concerns. As you know, I do
believe, going forward, we are going to have to make sure that
verification, measurement, how we do this with our farmers is
really key as we determine how we engage them in the process of
what they are doing in terms of carbon sequestration. And we
have to be very careful on those two points of measurement and,
of course, the verification. And again, I thank you all for
answering my major concerns about our food security. We cannot
allow that to even take second place to this, because that is
what we rely on. And as many of you know, our economy in 44 of
our states, agriculture is our most significant part of the
economy of 50 states. So, we have a lot in our hands, and as we
fight these raging fires, we have to find a way, because that--
if we don't find a way, at the rate that these fires are
burning up our western forests, the floods, what happened in
New York with the depths of the floods from the hurricanes.
We have so much at stake here. We really appreciate you,
and understand that the future of our agriculture is in our
hands, and you have made a tremendous contribution this morning
to the future of our nation, and we thank you for that.
And so, now under the Rules of the Committee, the record of
today's hearing--what an important hearing--will remain open
for 10 calendar days to receive additional material and
supplementary written responses from the witnesses to any
question posed by a Member. Please feel free, witnesses, if
there is additional information that would be helpful to us on
this Committee, to formulate the right kinds of policies going
forward, please write us at this Committee. And we thank you
once again. God bless each and every one of you. Thank you for
an excellent hearing, and this hearing on our Agriculture
Committee is now adjourned. Thank you.
[Whereupon, at 1:13 p.m., the Committee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Comment Letter by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in
Congress from Georgia; authored by Greg Morris, Senior Vice President
and President, Ag Services and Oilseeds, Archer Daniels Midland
April 29, 2021

Attention: Docket ID No. USDA-2021-0003
Submitted electronically via Regulations.gov

Re: U.S. Department of Agriculture Notice of Request for Public
Comment on the Executive Order on Tackling the Climate
Crisis at Home and Abroad (Published March 16, 2021)

Dear Secretary Vilsack:

Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the request of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (``USDA'') for Public Comment on the
Executive Order on Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad
issued on March 16, 2021 (``Proposal''). We appreciate this opportunity
to share our insights and observations.
ADM has a vital interest in these issues. For more than a century,
ADM has transformed crops into products that serve the vital needs of a
growing world. At ADM, we unlock the power of nature to provide access
to nutrition and climate-smart products worldwide. With industry-
advancing innovations, a complete portfolio of ingredients and
solutions, and a commitment to sustainability, we give customers an
edge in solving the sustainability and nutritional challenges of today
and tomorrow. We're a global leader in human and animal nutrition and
the world's premier agricultural origination and processing company.
Our breadth, depth, insights, facilities and logistical expertise give
us unparalleled capabilities to make products for food, feed, health
and wellness, industrial and energy uses.
Across ADM's value chain, from the crops we buy to the products we
create, we're finding new, innovative ways to sustainably feed the
world. Last year, we embarked on Strive 35, an aggressive program to
reduce ADM's own environmental footprint, including cutting our
absolute greenhouse gas emissions by 25 percent within the next fifteen
years. We continue this effort across our own operations and leverage
our role as a major merchandiser of sustainable crops. We are focused
on sustainable farming practices, traceability, and energy efficiency.
Upstream, through our sustainable procurement policies and engagement
with growers, ADM helps reduce greenhouse gas emissions and advance
sustainable agriculture practices. Downstream, ADM researchers are
innovating biobased material solutions and building a portfolio of
sustainable alternatives to petroleum-based products.
From our diverse array of products to our differentiated production
and transportation capabilities, ADM is uniquely qualified to comment
on the many ways climate change mitigation and resilience can be met
through agriculture. With that introduction, ADM's specific comments
are as follows:
1. Climate-Smart Agriculture and Forestry Questions
A1. How can USDA leverage existing policies and programs to encourage
voluntary adoption of agricultural practices that sequester
carbon, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and ensure resiliency
to climate change?
USDA has a number of existing programs at its disposal which
encourage adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices, including,
but not limited to the Wetlands Reserve Program (WRP), Conservation
Reserve Program (CRP), Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP),
Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP), Wildlife Habitat
Incentives Program (WHIP), and Grassland Reserve Program (GRP).
However, our experience in climate-smart agriculture projects has
highlighted the value that education and technical assistance provide
in ensuring practice adoption goes smoothly and remains viable long-
term. As such, we recommend that any additional funding through these
programs should be paired with adequate technical assistance to ensure
practice retention and sustainable long-term benefits. Additional
funding would be merited to ensure that this technical assistance is
offered to assist small and medium farms and historically underserved
farmers.
A2. What new strategies should USDA explore to encourage voluntary
adoption of climate-smart agriculture and forestry practices?
Farmers and ranchers can be hesitant to abandon legacy practices
for climate-smart practices if the risk and cost of change appears high
combined with an imprecise estimation of the tangible benefit. Carbon
reduction through practices on the farm or ranch can result in a
monetized reward, but competing credit creation proposals from private
entities can be hard to compare and difficult to apply to one's own
circumstance. USDA has the opportunity to provide objective education
to farmers and ranchers about carbon standards. Through the
establishment of methodologies for accounting for carbon in climate-
smart practices, it would set standardized guidelines which would allow
our sector to integrate those practices into our supply chains.
USDA could also expand its use of public-private partnerships with
existing initiatives to encourage broader adoption of climate-smart
practices. ADM is already leveraging strategic partnerships to
encourage growers to voluntarily adopt more climate-friendly management
practices. In seeking out new opportunities, USDA could consider how it
could better support these existing and emerging private-sector efforts
through education and technical assistance in the regions in which
these projects are underway. In summary, to the extent USDA can clarify
the key definitions and measurements associated with carbon in climate-
smart practices, we believe that farmers and ranchers could better
assess the risks and benefits associated with the voluntarily adoption
of carbon mitigating practices. When successful pilot programs are
ongoing, USDA can accelerate the effort by giving the pilots support
and publicizing within the farm sector the practice outcomes and
resulting carbon reduction.
B. How can partners and stakeholders, including state, local and Tribal
governments and the private-sector, work with USDA in advancing
climate-smart agricultural and forestry practices?
Partnership with USDA can provide benefits by broadening the
perspectives brought to address a challenge, by providing financial
assistance to lower the financial burden on selected private-sector
participants and by acting as a public policy organizer to help bring
common perspectives across key layers of government. In each of these
areas, the participation of USDA lowers the risk borne by all
participants and can accelerate the uptake of best practices.
One such partnership which both ADM and USDA are collaborating is
the Ecosystem Services Market Consortium (ESMC), which serves to
advance the development of a national voluntary carbon market to
recognize and reward farmers and ranchers for their climate-smart
agricultural practices. ESMC is working to establish many of the
voluntary climate-smart systems that USDA has set out to achieve and is
expected to begin operation by next year.
ADM is also engaged in many other sustainable agriculture efforts,
such as Field to Market and Saving Tomorrow's Agricultural Resources
Program, that are working to advance climate-smart management practices
on large acreage across the country. There are opportunities for
expansion of existing programs as well as adoption of new partnership-
based efforts which could benefit from education and technical
assistance from USDA. There are perceived risks which can arise from
changing approaches to farming and ranching which have survived the
test of time. Targeted financial assistance could help reduce this
hesitancy and help the programs achieve their environmental goals.
USDA can also demonstrate its partnership by re-energizing and
reconfiguring existing programs like the BioPreferred Program which can
support the development and production of climate-smart products
through its own procurement. This could also be a mechanism to
encourage harmonization of similar efforts at the state level, all
enhancing the attractiveness of work to develop new product solutions
from American agriculture.
C. How can USDA help support emerging markets for carbon and greenhouse
gases where agriculture and forestry can supply carbon
benefits?
Significant uncertainty exists for farmers concerning the
development of various carbon markets--particularly as it relates to
how carbon benefits are calculated, as well as the efficacy of those
credits and their duration. One way USDA can support emerging carbon
markets for agriculture is to take a leadership role in establishing a
standard for methodologies for how climate-smart agricultural practices
are quantified. Once a standard is known by farmers and ranchers, then
the voluntary aspects of the market can function more effectively.
Today multiple methodologies and systems stand in competition with each
other, and it is not easy to fully compare their benefits and
drawbacks. This lack of clarity creates risk for the farmer which would
be mitigated by an established USDA standard. This standard would
define what a climate-smart agricultural practice is and how it should
be measured. USDA need not be the only standard. USDA could also
recognize alternative methodologies coming from the private-sector so
long as the outcome were verifiable and comparisons across
methodologies could be reasonably undertaken.
In addition, USDA is well-placed to establish a variable feedstock
scoring system to update currently used default values which may not
incentivize farmers to undertake additional efforts to sequester
carbon. Moreover, to do this fully, the burden on the farmer to collect
and verify the required data over an extended period of time is high,
and even greater uncertainty about participation exists where a farmer
is leasing property. This need not be an obstacle which is so high as
to discourage the effort. USDA could support this meaningfully in the
near term by encouraging the development of data collection
technologies which could shortcut this process, lower the burden on
farmers and result in a variable feedstock scoring system which will
benefit American farming for many years.
USDA is well positioned to enhance and deepen the acceptance of
climate-smart agriculture through embracing non-traditional tools to
enhance the value of the output of climate-smart agriculture. For
example, USDA could consider looking to the Federal Grain Inspection
Service (FGIS) to assess whether there is flexibility when defining
grain standards to identify crops produced using carbon reducing
techniques. In this way, accurate grain standards could support the
commoditization of climate-smart agricultural practices by rewarding
producers in the market.
D. What data, tools, and research are needed for USDA to effectively
carry out climate-smart agriculture and forestry strategies?
As the bioeconomy grows, there will be opportunities for dedicated
crops which can meet those needs and add value to a farmer's operation
without the need to bring additional acres into production. One example
is covercress which serves as a cover crop between corn and soybean
crops, and can be utilized as a low carbon fuel feedstock. USDA should
provide additional funding for research, development and technical
assistance for the development, utilization, and processing of these
crops. In addition, any assistance should support the medium and long
term benefits to ensure the uptake and confidence in the
transformation. It would serve USDA's stated goals of supporting market
demand in an environmentally responsible manner.
E. How can USDA encourage the voluntary adoption of climate-smart
agriculture and forestry practices in an efficient way, where
the benefits accrue to producers?
An effective climate mitigation system needs to reflect the deeply
integrated nature of agriculture. To ensure that the benefit flows back
to farmers and ranchers while maximizing the environmental benefits, it
must be approached through an aggregate, whole value chain approach.
Piecemeal approaches are unlikely to result in widespread adoption of
climate-smart practices and are likely to lack the self-reinforcing
nature of a truly aggregate approach. Moreover, it would run the risk
that agriculture's contributions to mitigating climate change remain in
geographically isolated pockets across the agriculture value chain,
leading to undercounting or association with other sectors seeking to
claim the benefit to offset their practices.
ADM currently supports supply chain projects where financial
incentives, education and outreach, and technical assistance to the
farmer are arranged and paid for by the supply chain partners. In this
way, claims regarding soil health, GHG reduction, water quality
improvement, and farm economics arise more transparently and can remain
within the agricultural supply chain. By staying within the sector,
they can reliably be communicated to the ultimate consumers who may
want to support sustainability through their grocery and product
choices.
Carbon markets, if left unaddressed, could break the chain between
the practices undertaken by farmers and ranchers and the ability to
identify and trace this benefit to become a part of consumer choice.
When the financial incentives which flow to farmers and ranchers move
out of the supply chain, the link to the ultimate consumer is lost. In
contrast, if the carbon reduction attribute can ``follow the bushel''
through the full agriculture supply chain, there can be an accurate
accounting of the full host of environmental contributions undertaken
by agriculture.
Agriculture is in a unique position to be able to work
collaboratively across the supply chain to enact and sustain change. We
have a strong story to tell. For example, ADM is working with farmers
and our customers to create new categories of sustainability-based
ingredients such as carbon neutral flour from our Milling business and
sustainably sourced soybean oil. These new products have the ability to
create a consistent demand pull from the consumer for climate-smart
practices if the market signal is allowed to flow through the value
chain.
Many industries do not have the opportunity to work within their
supply chain to reduce their own carbon footprint. Allowing other
industries to purchase carbon credits from agriculture to offset their
carbon intensity results in undercounting the contribution of
agriculture to addressing this national challenge. Moreover, it weakens
the ability of agribusinesses, food and beverage companies and other
consumer facing entities to collectively lower their supply chain
carbon footprints and put in place incentives to reinforce these
beneficial practices. By ensuring that sustainability claims are
retained within the agriculture value chain, the consumer preference
for sustainability attributes in a product can be delivered all the way
back to the farm gate.
USDA could also accelerate the adoption of climate-smart
agricultural practices and products by implementing a Federal
procurement policy similar to its BioPreferred Program, where a certain
percentage of climate-smart-produced products would be required to be
purchased in order provide additional base load demand.
2. Biofuels, Wood and Other Bioproducts, and Renewable Energy Questions
A. How should USDA utilize programs, funding and financing capacities,
and other authorities to encourage greater use of biofuels for
transportation, sustainable bioproducts (including wood
products), and renewable energy?
The U.S. is a global leader in biofuels and bioproducts. As the
U.S. moves further towards a low carbon economy, biofuels and
bioproducts should continue to have a critical role to play in reducing
greenhouse gas emissions. They are innovative industries with deep
bipartisan roots in public policy which should be maintained and
expanded--recognizing their unique role in offering an immediate low-
carbon solution, while serving as an important economic driver
particularly for rural communities.
Biofuels
ADM, through the successful Prime the Pump (PTP) program, along
with nearly all the current high-volume biofuel retailers, was a proud
partner with USDA when it announced its Biofuels Infrastructure
Partnership (BIP) in 2015, and again in 2020 with the Higher Biofuel
Infrastructure Incentive Program (HBIIP). By increasing the market for
higher biofuel blends such as E15 and B20, USDA can help create more
demand for farmers across the country and a win for American
agriculture.
USDA should continue funding this important program, focusing on
projects with the lowest cost and highest volume impact to maximize its
investment. Every additional gallon of biofuels blended today provides
a greenhouse gas benefit over the petroleum product it replaces,
providing immediate environmental benefits as well as additional value
for farmers and biofuel producers.
USDA should also continue its work updating the lifecycle analysis
for biofuels. [I]n particular, USDA should update its assessment of soy
oil-based biodiesel similar to USDA's 2019 corn ethanol update.
Demonstrating the true climate benefits of today's biofuels will
provide additional value throughout the biofuel supply chain,
benefitting farmers, producers, and the environment.
Bioproducts
USDA can provide the most impact for the deployment of climate-
smart bioproducts by helping to level the playing field compared with
petroleum-based products. While loan guarantee programs can provide a
level of financing, ultimately it only reduces the risk for the lender
and is limited in its ability to drive technological innovation. USDA
should consider providing incentives for the production of bioproducts,
perhaps on a per pound basis, for the first 5 years of
commercialization. This would not only help pay for capital
expenditures, but also make bioproducts economically viable.
Additionally, as noted above, an existing USDA program that has
been underutilized is the BioPreferred program. ADM urges USDA to
revitalize and expand the BioPreferred program so it can be utilized
more effectively to promote the greater use of climate-smart
bioproducts. The program is useful from a procurement standpoint. But
it is equally as useful in its ability to increase consumer awareness
of these eco-friendly products. In addition to these existing
activities, there is potential for BioPreferred to act as a coordinator
for state-level activities or programs of a similar nature to increase
procurement and consumer awareness on a much larger scale than strictly
Federal activities could provide. Expanded production of bioproducts
will substantially reduce GHGs, improve water quality, divert waste
from landfills, and improve soil health.
Renewable Energy
Thermal energy (steam, hot water, refrigeration) is fundamental to
the production of food, biofuels and bioproducts, and cannot be
practically met from sources like wind and solar due to the
inefficiency in converting electricity to thermal energy. It is
currently one of the largest hurdles to further decarbonize the
industrial sector, and requires a diverse portfolio of energy sources
to provide flexibility and reliability.
The most efficient, sustainable and cost-effective source of
thermal energy is Combined Heat and Power (CHP), which ADM employs at
most of our large U.S. manufacturing facilities. CHP is an energy
efficient technology that generates electricity and captures the heat
that would otherwise be wasted to provide thermal energy. In many cases
CHP systems co-fire biomass to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
however limitations continue to exist which prevent additional biomass
utilization.
Enhanced reliance on biomass is hindered by challenges in the
sustainable collection of material at scale and developing a resilient
supply chain which would allow for sufficient, diverse and reliable
supplies. USDA could undertake research to identify more efficient ways
to sustainably collect, store and transport biomass at commercial
scale, while ensuring enough material remains on the field to benefit
soil organic content.
In addition, while outside the purview of USDA, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) currently fails to distinguish in
its Clean Air Act permitting regulations between the 1 year life cycle
of carbon dioxide emissions resulting from the use or processing of
agricultural crops and the carbon stock emissions released by fossil
fuel combustion. By clarifying the insignificant nature of biogenic
carbon emissions from fermentation and similar uses of annual
agricultural crops, EPA can spur increased domestic production of
sustainable, advanced bioproducts and materials made from corn and
other plant-based inputs with a wide range of environmental benefits.
Through the ongoing collaborations between USDA and EPA, this could be
a beneficial area of discussion.
B. How can incorporating climate-smart agriculture and forestry into
biofuel and bioproducts feedstock production systems support
rural economies and green jobs?
Consumers have increasingly shown an interest in seeking out
climate-friendly products. Consequently, rural economies stand to
uniquely benefit from incorporating climate-smart practices into
biofuel and bioproduct feedstock production systems. As the increased
sustainability value is captured all the way back to the farm level,
rural economies stand to benefit from increased crop values. Perhaps
even more impactful for the longer term is the increased capital
investment in the larger bioeconomy.
The expanded use of renewable fuels has had a tremendously positive
impact on rural economies and job creation. In 2020, more than 62,000
jobs were directly associated with the ethanol industry, which
supported an additional 242,600 indirect and induced jobs. Moreover,
the ethanol industry spent $21.4 billion on raw materials, inputs, and
other goods and services.
In addition the biodiesel industry sustains 65,600 jobs and
generates over $17 billion in annual economic activity. Every 100
million gallon increase in U.S. biodiesel production supports an
additional $780 million in economic activity and 3,200 jobs.
Climate-smart bioproducts also have significant potential to
provide additional value for corn, soybeans and other crops. This will
not only reduce U.S. dependency on imported petroleum, but will reduce
greenhouse gases from traditional petrochemical products, while
providing jobs for rural economies and improving farmer revenue.
C. How can USDA support adoption and production of other renewable
energy technologies in rural America, such as renewable natural
gas from livestock, biomass power, solar, and wind?
As stated previously, one of the challenges with biomass power is
around the collection of material at scale and developing a supply
chain which would allow for sufficient, diverse and reliable supplies.
USDA could provide research funding to study more efficient ways to
collect, store and transport biomass at commercial scale and in this
way help biomass brow to be a reliable source of renewable energy.
In addition, as noted above, while outside the purview of USDA, the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) currently fails to
distinguish in its Clean Air Act permitting regulations between the 1
year life cycle of carbon dioxide emissions resulting from the use or
processing of agricultural crops and the carbon stock emissions
released by fossil fuel combustion. By clarifying the insignificant
nature of biogenic carbon emissions from fermentation and similar uses
of annual agricultural crops, EPA can spur increased domestic
production of sustainable, advanced bioproducts and materials made from
corn and other plant-based inputs with a wide range of environmental
benefits.
4. Environmental Justice and Disadvantaged Communities Questions
As USDA builds upon or creates new programs to advance climate-
smart agriculture, it can ensure they are equally accessible through
standardization of best climate practices, and pushing them out through
its Farm Service Agency (FSA) network. This has the opportunity to
democratize sustainability in American agriculture.
The smart use of sustainability in environmentally friendly
techniques can improve the profitability of farming in these ways. USDA
is well placed to redouble efforts to push information to smaller and
medium size farmers which are historically underrepresented. This could
encourage a faster uptake in climate-smart farming and ranching and lay
out alternative pathways to profitability. This can bring resources to
disadvantaged communities in rural America where we can better capture
the value of environmentally friendly and climate-smart farming.
By taking a holistic approach to the whole agriculture value chain
and those affected by it, USDA can also have a much broader impact when
it comes to ensuring equal participation in the agriculture of today
and the future where our industry benefits from an enhanced and diverse
workforce. Part of that effort is to reposition agriculture and
reinvigorate the purpose we play to provide a more sustainable future.
Today's agriculture reaches far beyond the scope of America's legacy
agriculture. Innovative products which deliver nutrition is a manner
which our pallets find desirable can further increase demand for those
crops grown in sustainable ways. Many consumers search for ways to
connect their food and beverages to the farmers who have labored to
produce them. Small and medium farmers, and farmers from
underrepresented communities, could benefit from USDA assistance in
connecting them to consumers who would welcome this information.
USDA should also continue its partnership with agriculture to build
a more skilled, diverse and inclusive workforce. ADM is proud to be a
founding member of Together We Grow--a consortium in partnership with
USDA of modern food and agriculture companies, NGOs, and academia who
are dedicated to this task to make American agriculture a leader for
generations to come.
In order for a more skilled, diverse and inclusive workforce to
have equitable access to opportunities in the 21st century, it needs to
be able to access technology, and in particular, the internet. American
agriculture is connected to the global consuming world on a digital
platform, and broadband needs to be brought to every corner of rural
America. Like water and electricity, it is one of the essential tools
to run an effective farming and ranching operations, and allow students
to reach their full potential. USDA plays a critical role in Federal
efforts to expand broadband through the ReConnect Program. USDA should
ensure its resources are maximized to eliminate the digital divide in
the most rapid and cost-effective manner possible.
* * * * *
Taken together, these actions would enhance America's commitment to
climate-smart products and practices, strengthen our rural economies,
and protect our environment.
Finally, we would like to endorse and incorporate by reference the
comments filed by the National Biodiesel Board (NBB), Growth Energy,
National Oilseed Processors Association (NOPA), Plant Based Products
Council (PBPC), the Corn Refiners Association (CRA), and ESMC.
Sincerely,

Greg Morris,
Senior Vice President and President Ag Services and Oilseeds,
ADM.
______

Submitted Letters by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia *
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Editor's note: items annotated with  are retained in Committee
file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Letter 1
on behalf of sarah gallo, vice president, agriculture and environment,
biotechnology innovation organization
September 23, 2021

Hon. David Scott,                    Hon. Glenn Thompson,
Chairman,                            Ranking Minority Member,
Committee on Agriculture,            Committee on Agriculture,
U.S. House of Representatives,       U.S. House of Representatives,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.

Dear Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee:

The Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) is pleased to
submit a statement for the record to the United States House of
Representatives Committee on Agriculture hearing entitled, ``Voluntary
Carbon Markets in Agriculture and Forestry.''
Introduction
BIO \1\ represents 1,000 members in a biotech ecosystem with a
central mission--to advance public policy that supports a wide range of
companies and academic research centers that are working to apply
biology and technology in the energy, agriculture, manufacturing, and
health sectors to improve the lives of people and the health of the
planet. BIO is committed to speaking up for the millions of families
around the globe who depend upon our success. We will drive a
revolution that aims to cure patients, protect our climate, and nourish
humanity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.bio.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Tackling Climate Change through Agriculture
To meet the challenge of climate change, it is crucial to lead with
science and U.S. innovation. We must incentivize the adoption of
innovative, sustainable technologies and practices; and streamline and
expedite regulatory pathways for breakthrough technology solutions.
Investment and deployment of cutting-edge technologies will be
crucial to ensure farmers, ranchers, sustainable fuel producers, and
manufacturers are able to be part of the solution to climate change and
maintain the U.S.'s global leadership in agriculture. This includes
removing barriers and assisting beginning and socially disadvantaged
farmers and ranchers to access and utilize these technologies, so all
producers can adapt to the challenges ahead. By accelerating and
deploying innovation, American agriculture can be resilient, self-
sustaining, and drive our economic recovery.
BIO applauds the Committee for examining how carbon markets can
promote resilient and sustainable supply chains across economic sectors
including translating sustainability best practices to all
bioindustries. If done right carbon markets will create market pull
incentives for investment in and use of innovative technologies and
products that fight climate change.\2\ This will enable U.S.
agriculture to combat climate change while producing enough food, feed,
fuel, and fiber for a growing world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.bio.org/strategic-vision.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Scaling Up Carbon Markets
To ensure voluntary carbon markets can be successful, the
government should establish the infrastructure to measure and verify
those carbon sequestrations at the local farm level. The government can
and should play a catalytic role in providing guidelines for carbon
markets to ensure credibility. Furthermore, farmers need assistance in
understanding and accessing the current voluntary and compliance
markets for these credits. Common sense policy will make sure that
American agriculture continues to lead on this new frontier of climate
change mitigation and restoration.
The development of carbon markets can foster acceptance for new
technologies that can further reduce the environmental impact of
agriculture, including tools like precision plant breeding,
biostimulants, and microbial inoculants, and enhanced animal feed with
enzymes and other additives to reduce emissions in livestock. These
improved agricultural practices increase crop yields and provide
several environmental benefits including capturing nitrogen directly
from the atmosphere and increasing root growth that binds carbon to the
soil.
Combined with modern agricultural techniques and sustainable
farming practices such as planting cover crops and no-till, innovative
technologies that enhance productivity can play a key role in
sequestering carbon dioxide in the soil, improving soil health, and
protecting America's waterways.
Toward this end, BIO supports \3\ the Growing Climate Solutions Act
(GCSA), H.R. 2820,\4\ introduced by Representatives Abigail Spanberger
(D-VA) and Don Bacon (R-NE) \5\ and its Senate companion, S. 1251 \6\
introduced by Senators Mike Braun (R-IN) and Debbie Stabenow (D-MI),
which passed the U.S. Senate with strong bipartisan support by a vote
of 92 to 8.\7\ This bill will support America's farmers, ranchers, and
foresters who want to adopt innovative practices that combat climate
change while continuing to provide the world with food, feed, and
fiber.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.bio.org/gooddaybio-archive/good-day-bio-senate-
passes-growing-climate-solutions-act.
\4\ https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/house-bill/2820.
\5\ https://spanberger.house.gov/news/
documentsingle.aspx?DocumentID=3721.
\6\ https://www.congress.gov/bill/117th-congress/senate-bill/1251.
\7\ https://www.senate.gov/legislative/LIS/roll_call_lists/
roll_call_vote_cfm.cfm?congress=117&
session=1&vote=00251.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Conclusion
BIO is committed to working with the Committee, Congress, and the
Administration to ensure the establishment of voluntary carbon markets
will enable American agriculture to be a solution to climate change, by
accelerating investments in sustainable innovative technologies. As
such, we urge you to support policies like the Growing Climate
Solutions Act to advance pioneering technology to achieve these goals.
By incentivizing investments in innovation we can return our nation and
the world to health and prosperity by taking bold and drastic action to
address the climate crisis.
Sincerely,

Sarah Gallo,
Vice President, Agriculture and Environment,
Biotechnology Innovation Organization.
Letter 2
on behalf of ronald w. hovsepian, president, chief executive officer &
board member, indigo agriculture, inc.
September 23, 2021

Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee:

Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony for the hearing
of the U.S. House Agriculture Committee on Voluntary Carbon Markets in
Agriculture and Forestry. The Committee's leadership on this topic
echoes the call to harness agriculture as an immediately accessible
climate sustainability solution. We appreciate your consideration of a
profitable role for farmers in voluntary carbon markets and how the
government can help facilitate the growth of such markets. In doing so,
we respectfully urge that--

the government should not create an entirely new set of
rules and criteria for carbon offset creation, but instead
leverage the extensive work already done by respected carbon
programs, based on decades of U.S. and international effort and
collaboration among expert public and private organizations.

Indigo Agriculture, Inc. (``Indigo'') was founded in 2014 and is
headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts, with its commercial office
based in Memphis, Tennessee. We have offices in Argentina, Brazil,
Europe, and India. Indigo helps farmers reduce input costs and create
new profitability opportunities, not only driven by microbial and soil
health, but also driven by data sciences and artificial intelligence--
leveraging agronomy, finance, and logistics. Indigo takes a systems
approach to agriculture and to transparent sourcing, resource
efficiency, and resiliency for farmers while working with the industry
partners.
Carbon by Indigo is the first private program to quantify
agricultural climate benefit with the highest measurable registry-
approved rigor at a global scale. Our ecosystem partner-based approach
supports our technology to realize the large, pooled projects needed to
move beyond carbon abatement and realize mass drawdown across
agricultural acres. Carbon offsets represent a $42 billion revenue
opportunity for farmers \1\ of ``tradable'' credits that is enabled by
many players in this new industry and will require active government
support of these constructs. As a leader in ag carbon offsets, Indigo
is enabling and witnessing the price per credit in real time, by 35%
over the past year, directly benefiting farmers. Our protocols are not
narrowly focused, and they are designed to enable optionality for
farmers. We have over 3 million acres enrolled in the pilot phase of
our program in 23 states. For us, it's about putting the farmers first.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.michiganfarmnews.com/growmark-indigo-ag-join-
forces-to-expand-farmer-access-to-carbon-credit-market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Role of Agriculture in Climate Sustainability
Growers and ranchers can adjust their management practices to
reduce atmospheric greenhouse gas emissions and draw down and sequester
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Simultaneously, climate-smart agricultural
land management practices yield environmental and economic co-
benefits--from improvements in biodiversity and decreased
nitrification, to enhanced grower profitability and financial
resilience. Those benefits are compounded when practices are stacked.
Despite these known benefits, adoption rates of climate-smart farming
practices remain low. According to our Atlas review in 2020, between
2017-2019, only 5.6% of U.S. growers planted cover crops, 34.3%
practiced no-till, and 24.8% rotated crops.\2\ Less than 1% of acreage
was managed using all three practices. The Federal Government can play
a pivotal, catalyzing role in incentivizing increased voluntary
adoption of these beneficial techniques, and by using new and existing
programs to institutionalize the reality that farmers and the
atmosphere only benefit when carbon markets adhere to high standards of
quality, as outlined in Table 1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.indigoag.com/progress-report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We have seen significant advancements in voluntary and compliance
carbon markets. We've also witnessed the emergence of and progress made
by multilateral initiatives dedicated to tackling complex policy
issues, and to ultimately achieving alignment around high quality
credit requirements. Across public, private, and cross-sector
dialogues, we hear growing agreement that natural climate solutions
(NCS), when used in conjunction with the mitigation hierarchy (i.e.,
reducing emissions before offsetting them), are essential to achieving
our shared goals of enhancing climate sustainability through
innovation.
Achievement will rely on both reduction and avoidance of emissions,
as well as on the removal of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. NCS
are the only affordable, scalable, and immediately implementable means
to CO
2
removal and carbon sequestration. To be effective,
credit suppliers and buyers need to be confident that the credits
generated and purchased are high-quality and independently verified.
Further, the market needs to have confidence that crediting structures
are clear, transparent, and backed by robust accounting and
accountability. Environmental and advocacy leaders agree that
businesses should set public plans for de-carbonization of scope 1, 2,
and 3 emissions, reduce emissions to the maximum extent possible,
harness high quality, registry-issued credits to offset unavoidable
emissions, commit to long term purchase agreements for those credits,
and always utilize transparent reporting and third-party verification
for all activities.
Since the enactment of the Paris Agreement in 2015, there has been
a five-fold increase, up seven percentage points since 2019, in the
number of Fortune 500 companies who have made public commitments to
reduce their carbon footprints.\3\ There has been recent development
and approval of voluntary offset project protocols around agriculture
and land use that have been thoroughly and publicly vetted by members
of the scientific, industry, and advocacy communities. While project,
jurisdictional, and accounting concerns remain, these residual concerns
should not inhibit efforts to scale carbon markets. Quality is the
beneficial link between farmers and corporate buyers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.naturalcapitalpartners.com/insights/response-
required.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Upholding Offset Quality in Agricultural Carbon Markets
The carbon market has developed and evolved since the 1990s through
a variety of mechanisms, both voluntary and regulatory in nature,
producing a range of outcomes regarding scientific rigor, transparency,
stakeholder engagement, and feasibility of implementation. While the
market has flourished through the rise of programs which adhere to the
highest standards (e.g., the Verified Carbon Standard, the Climate
Action Reserve, the Western Climate Initiative), there continue to be
credits in the marketplace which are created through less-rigorous
approaches, resulting in lower quality credits and, ultimately, harm to
the global atmosphere through misrepresentation to credit buyers.
Ultimately, the Growing Climate Solutions Act--if enacted by this
Congress--can be a mechanism to enable additional policies and programs
that increase market confidence, liquidity, risk management, and prices
if implemented with high-quality, registry approved, and independently
verified standards. At a minimum, when setting criteria for government
programs that support carbon markets, the U.S. Government should adhere
to the common standards set by the following references:

The GHG Protocol for Project Accounting (2005) \4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://ghgprotocol.org/standards/project-protocol.

The Offset Quality Initiative (2008) \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.c2es.org/site/assets/uploads/2008/07/ensuring-
offset-quality.pdf.

Western Climate Initiative Offset System Essential Elements
Final Recommendation Paper (2010) \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://wcitestbucket.s3.us-east-2.amazonaws.com/amazon-s3-
bucket/documents/en/wci-program-design-archive/WCI-
OffsetRecommendations-201707-EN.pdf.

ISO 14064-2 (2019) \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://www.iso.org/standard/66454.html.

ICAO CORSIA Emission Unit Eligibility Criteria (2019) \8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://www.icao.int/environmental-protection/CORSIA/Documents/
ICAO_Document_
09.pdf.

2019 Refinement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories (2019) \9\ (regarding default and
emission factor-based quantification approaches)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.ipcc.ch/report/2019-refinement-to-the-2006-ipcc-
guidelines-for-national-greenhouse-gas-inventories/.

ICROA Offset Standard Review Criteria (2020) \10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://www.icroa.org/resources/Documents/
ICROA%20Offset%20Standard%20Review%20
Criteria%202020.pdf.

In reviewing these references, common minimum standards become
quite clear. High quality offset credits must be real, additional,
permanent, unambiguously owned, free of leakage, and do no harm.
Crucially, these quality criteria only function as a group. Removing
one criterion from the list, for example additionality, ruins the
integrity of the resulting credits, even if they conform to all other
quality criteria. In considering how to approach offset quality, the
U.S. government should closely consider the approach taken by the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO; a special body of the
United Nations) when designing the offsetting rules for the Carbon
Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA).
ICAO developed minimum quality criteria for both offset programs and
the emissions units, consistent with the previous references listed
above, and then invited offset programs to apply for approval. The U.S.
government could design a similar program through which the credit
issuing bodies could apply for approval against such quality criteria.
This approval process would fit under the scope of the Growing Climate
Solutions Act. Following approval, project developers would have
clarity about how to develop projects and generate credits, which could
then be eligible for purchase by the government or private sources.
This will be most effective if it ultimately encourages entities to
aggregate growers together into pools to reduce barriers to grower
participation. By leveraging the existing carbon market infrastructure,
we can make far more efficient use of government dollars than would be
required to set up an entirely new certification program.
There are specific areas of concern for carbon credits from
agricultural land management as they relate to the minimum criteria for
offset quality. Table 1 below discusses these areas in the context of
the criteria defined by the Offset Quality Initiative.

Table 1  Considerations for sourcing high quality carbon credits from
agriculture
------------------------------------------------------------------------
High Quality Offsets
Should:              Specific Considerations for Agriculture
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Be Real                      Croplands and rangelands are complex
ecosystems, subject to dynamic management
regimes in both the baseline and project
scenarios. Accurately quantifying GHG
impacts of changes to these systems is
difficult. The protocols and methodologies
used to generate credits for sale should
be built on rigorous science and include
mechanisms to account for any uncertainty
arising from the accounting methods
employed.
Be Additional                There are multiple aspects to establishing
additionality, including regulatory
surplus, the timing of the activity in
relation to the reporting and
verification, the barriers faced by the
farmer to implementation of new
activities, and the question of whether
the new practice(s) should be considered
business as usual. A high-quality program
and protocol should address all of these
aspects, either at a sector level or at a
project level. Only the most contemporary
projects should be eligible, and eligible
project start dates should not be static,
which can lead to eroding of additionality
for new projects in future years.
Be Based on a Realistic      Unless and until there are sufficient data
Baseline                     available on agricultural soils and
emissions in the U.S. to set credible
performance benchmarks, the baselines for
agricultural projects should be structured
around what the GHG impacts would have
been had the project not occurred. Use of
a ``zero baseline'' where soils are simply
measured over time and compared to time t
= 0 are not credible because (a) farmers
on a positive trajectory may receive
credits without implementing any practice
changes; and (b) farmers on a negative
trajectory may not receive any credits
despite successfully slowing or stopping
the soil carbon declines. The most
credible approach to baselines for
agriculture is to compare current year GHG
impacts against what would have happened
in the current year had there been a
continuation of historical management
practices.
Be Quantified & Monitored    Some agricultural offset credits have been
marketed based on broad emission factors
that were applied with little to no field-
specific information involved in the
quantification (i.e., Tier 1 approaches).
USDA should ensure that any credits are
generated using actual field-level data,
collected directly from the grower(s) or
indirectly through other means (e.g.,
remote sensing). In addition, monitoring
of performance and permanence must be
required throughout the entire crediting
period. Credits should only be issued on
an ex-post basis.
Be Independently Verified    Some agricultural offset credits have been
marketed with no requirement for ex-post,
independent verification of every tonne,
or else no requirement to reach Reasonable
Assurance. All credits purchased should
only be issued following an ex-post
verification to a level of Reasonable
Assurance by an independent verification
body. Such entities should be required to
obtain certification or accreditation
under the ISO 14065 standard.\11\
\11\ https://www.iso.org/
standard/74257.html.
Be Unambiguously Owned       There exist private, corporate agricultural
carbon programs which are not sufficiently
transparent to clearly ascertain and track
ownership of GHG reduction rights over
time, leaving open the possibility of a
single emission reduction being claimed by
multiple entities at the same time.
Government should only procure credits
which have been issued by carbon programs
which have sufficient rules and procedures
in place to ascertain ownership of GHG
reduction rights for all projects prior to
issuance, as well as tracking and
enforcing ownership of credits post-
issuance. At a minimum, ownership at the
time of issuance and at the time of
retirement should be public information.
Address Leakage              Changes to agricultural management
practices can potentially lead to changes
outside of the project area. Most
importantly, if the project leads to a
decline in yield of agricultural products,
some or all of that decline will be
balanced by yield increases (and resultant
emissions increases) elsewhere. Government
should support programs and/or protocols
that sufficiently address emissions
leakage from agricultural projects.
Address Permanence           Where agricultural carbon credits are based
in whole or in part on storage of carbon
in soils, the projects and the carbon
programs must effectively address the
permanence of the credits. The
internationally accepted standard for
permanence of carbon offsets is 100 years
from the year the emission reduction
occurred. There are several effective
mechanisms for ensuring permanence of the
credits (not necessarily permanence of
individual carbon atoms), but credits
should only be procured when reversal risk
is assessed and managed on a 100 year
timeframe.
Do No Net Harm               Certain agricultural management practices,
such as the introduction of livestock
manure, have the possibility of causing
new environmental harms if not managed
properly. Not all carbon programs are
transparent about how they monitor and
enforce against negative, non-GHG impacts
of the project activities. Credits must be
from programs which transparently and
effectively assess and mitigate risk of
negative environmental harms. Going
further, the USDA may want to prioritize
credits with demonstrable non-GHG
benefits. A successful agricultural carbon
project may have significant economic
benefits to low-income, rural communities.
This impact supports efforts to improve
the environmental justice attributes of
government climate mitigation efforts.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thank you for your attention to the importance of ensuring high
quality in voluntary carbon markets. The Federal Government can play a
critical role in facilitating the growth of a robust voluntary carbon
market in agriculture if it adheres to these quality criteria. We stand
ready to work with you and are available for scientific or policy
support. Thank you for your time and consideration of these comments.
Sincerely,

Ronald W. Hovsepian,
President, Chief Executive Officer & Board Member.
Letter 3
on behalf of zack parisa, co-founder and chief executive officer,
natural capital exchange
September 23th, 2021

Hon. David Scott,
Chairman
House Committee on Agriculture
Washington, D.C.;

Hon. Glenn Thompson,
Ranking Minority Member,
House Committee on Agriculture
Washington, D.C.

Dear Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Thompson,

On behalf of the Natural Capital Exchange (NCX), I am submitting
this statement for the record to the House Committee on Agriculture's
hearing titled, ``Voluntary Carbon Markets in Agriculture and
Forestry.''
First of all, thank you for the opportunity to submit our views
regarding the need for climate-smart opportunities to create real,
additional, and verifiable carbon sequestration as well as new revenue
streams for forest landowners.
NCX is a first-of-its kind, data-driven marketplace for forest
carbon credits. We work with landowners of all sizes to generate high-
quality carbon credits and match them with buyer demand, increasing
forest carbon on a landscape scale. This spring, we created the
largest-ever forest carbon project by acreage in our very first market
cycle. NCX empowers landowners to benefit from new climate-smart
revenue streams and allows businesses and public sector organizations
to purchase carbon credits in a market with unprecedented transparency,
scale, and impact.
The NCX market is built on our AI-powered Basemap, the first-ever
comprehensive forest map of the entire U.S. Basemap uses remote sensing
technology to measure the size and species of trees on every forested
acre, every year. With this data, we can precisely estimate forest
carbon sequestered by any U.S. landowner of any size, generating high-
quality and verifiable carbon credits. With zero fees, zero minimums,
and annual contracts, our market eliminates barriers to entry for
landowners and unlocks a gigaton-scale supply of forest carbon. Already
this year, more than 500 landowners have committed to defer harvest on
over 900k acres (an area larger than nearly half of all national
forests) across 15 states, sequestering an expected 600,000 permanent
tons of CO
2
.
Consequently, both NCX and the landowners that we serve have a keen
interest in the rules governing carbon credit validation and marketing.
As Congress evaluates ways to maintain and improve voluntary forest and
agriculture carbon markets (including potentially using Federal
programs to increase forest carbon sequestration), we support efforts
to (1) drive greater participation in voluntary carbon markets, (2)
complement voluntary markets without competing with or destabilizing
them, and (3) set a high bar for quality when establishing, endorsing,
or purchasing carbon credits, in order to ensure real impact and
instill confidence in the credit market at large. We appreciate the
chance to work with you and your staff on these issues and would be
glad to provide technical expertise on forest carbon measurement and
carbon accounting.
Drive Widespread Participation in Voluntary Carbon Markets
Many forest owners have been hamstrung by high barriers to entry
into carbon markets, due not only to costly monitoring and verification
frameworks but also to time-intensive requirements for participation in
these markets, such as demanding hundred year commitments. These
barriers prevent widespread participation of small- and medium-sized
landowners in carbon markets and limit those markets' economic and
environmental impact. Congress should make it a priority to ensure that
forest landowners of all sizes can easily participate in voluntary
carbon markets. It can do this by incentivizing lower barriers to entry
and the development of cost-efficient verification methods.
NCX and others in the private-sector are working on eliminating
barriers to participation in these markets by reducing verification
costs, increasing quality assurance, and creating a seamless user
experience. In our experiences, forest landowners are more than willing
to adopt climate-smart forest management when three conditions are met:
(1) Appropriate compensation, (2) Low barriers to entry (avoiding long-
term contracts or costly measurements), and (3) Fair and real
measurement of impact, so they know they're getting paid fairly for
their effort.
Complement Existing Private Voluntary Carbon Markets Without Competing
With Them and/or Destabilizing Them
The emerging private carbon sequestration market is constantly
innovating, keeping pace with best practices and modeling change
rapidly as technology improves. Congress should seek to foster that
innovation and avoid taking steps that could stifle it. To the extent
that Congress seeks to create Federal forest carbon programs, it should
focus on defining the outcomes that underpin high-quality carbon
credits, rather than creating static rules or methodologies that
discourage innovation. This will allow the best ideas, models, and
practices to rise to the top, rather than locking current thinking into
program requirements, and preventing us from adapting as the field
changes and grows. Future programs should be designed to complement
existing private initiatives and reward them for innovation, rather
than supplant them or tie them to old versions of rapidly changing
technologies.
We strongly encourage any new programs to: (1) solicit bids from
private companies and organizations to develop and participate in such
a marketplace, and (2) allow different kinds of products (e.g.,
different length contracts, different practices etc.) to exist on the
marketplace.
Set a High Bar for Establishing, Endorsing, or Purchasing Carbon
Credits
The United States Government, governments around the world, and
hundreds of major corporations have set ambitious de-carbonization
goals. Increasing carbon in forests can make a major contribution to
achieving those goals, with one study finding they can provide around
13% of global CO
2
reductions needed by 2030.\1\ The future
of these markets depend, however, on ensuring a strong and unassailable
reputation for additionality, permanence and overall credit quality. To
instill confidence in the carbon credit marketplace, to ensure that
public dollars are spent wisely, and to enable the Federal Government
and corporations to meet their climate targets, any Federal program
that encourages forest carbon sequestration must utilize a rigorous and
cost-effective verification system. Without a high bar for
additionality through rigorous measurement and verification--both of
ending carbon stocks and of baseline harvest activity (i.e., a
prediction of the ``business as usual'' carbon stocks in the absence of
any carbon payment)--we risk (1) failing to achieve the level of carbon
removal needed to meet our national goals and (2) undermining the
reputation of the forest carbon credit sector and its ability to be
part of a national climate solution.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Natural climate solutions. Bronson W. Griscom, Justin Adams,
Peter W. Ellis, Richard A. Houghton, Guy Lomax, Daniela A. Miteva,
William H. Schlesinger, David Shoch, Juha V. Siikamaki, Pete Smith,
Peter Woodbury, Chris Zganjar, Allen Blackman, Joao Campari, Richard T.
Conant, Christopher Delgado, Patricia Elias, Trisha Gopalakrishna,
Marisa R. Hamsik, Mario Herrero, Joseph Kiesecker, Emily Landis, Lars
Laestadius, Sara M. Leavitt, Susan Minnemeyer, Stephen Polasky, Peter
Potapov, Francis E. Putz, Jonathan Sanderman, Marcel Silvius, Eva
Wollenberg, Joseph Fargione. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, Oct. 2017, 114 (44) 11645-11650; DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1710465114.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
NCX's innovative technology and methodology makes it possible to
measure and verify truly additional carbon sequestration for each acre
of forest, at scale. This empowers all forest landowners to participate
in these growing markets, helping to fight climate change as well as
creating new revenue streams for rural communities.
NCX appreciates the opportunity to submit this statement for the
record, and look forward to working with the House Committee on
Agriculture to create new opportunities for landowners, ensure future
success of voluntary carbon markets, and help our nation meet its
climate goals.
Sincerely,

Zack Parisa,
Co-founder and CEO,
NCX.
______

Submitted Statements by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Statement 1
on behalf of caryn dyson, senior policy advisor, akin gump strauss
hauer & feld llp
Today, as United Nations Climate Week begins, Qualcomm released a
new report entitled ``Environmental sustainability and a greener
economy: The transformative role of 5G''.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.qualcomm.com/media/documents/files/5g-and-
sustainability-report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Spearheaded by the Corporate Responsibility and the Economic
Strategy (``IPAG'') teams, and reviewed by investor relations,
government affairs and 5G engineering teams, the report highlights the
sustainability benefits of 5G technology with a call-to-action for
joint efforts by industry and government to accelerate 5G adoption.
Detailed use cases show how 5G enabled sustainability is an economic
opportunity with major potential for increased revenues, profit margins
and productivity--as well as a range of other business benefits.
Recommendations for policy makers include accelerating the deployment
of 5G networks and 5G uses cases, as well as enhanced investments in 5G
technology leadership and a robust global semiconductor ecosystem, to
ensure these urgent sustainability advantages are realized sooner.
Key findings from the report shows the rollout of 5G in the U.S.
alone is expected to:

Create as many as 300,000 new green jobs by 2030. The roles
of data scientist, data engineering and software engineering
will gain traction as companies rely more and more on 5G.

Enable the reduction of 374 million metric tons of
greenhouse gas emissions in the United States, which is
equivalent to taking 81 million passenger vehicles off U.S.
roads for 1 year.

Save 410 billion gallons of water nationwide by offering
increased insight into usage patterns and leakage issues.

Reduce pesticide usage in the United States by 50% with
unmanned aerial vehicles for remote sensing and spray
application.

Increase fuel efficiency by 20% through optimized lane
management systems and traffic management systems enabled by C-
V2X.

The full report is attached and linked above. Please also see this
article in Forbes \2\ from this morning, highlighting the report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.forbes.com/sites/carolinamilanesi/2021/09/20/
qualcomms-study-highlights-5g-as-sustainability-enabler/
?sh=7af002ab2b47.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
attachment 1
Environmental sustainability and a greener economy: The transformative
role of 5G

attachment 2
[https://www.forbes.com/sites/carolinamilanesi/2021/09/20/qualcomms-
study-highlights-5g-as-sustainability-enabler/?sh=7af002ab2b47]

Sep. 20, 2021, 11:00 a.m. EDT
Qualcomm's Study Highlights 5G As Sustainability Enabler
Carolina Milanesi,\1\ Contributor, Consumer Tech \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.forbes.com/sites/carolinamilanesi/.
\2\ https://www.forbes.com/consumer-tech.

Tech analyst and storyteller, I connect the dots between
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
tech, brands and humans

You might know 5G from one of the many ads American carriers have
been pitching at us consumers, promising faster data downloads, lack of
latency and overall better mobile experience. But 5G, the next-
generation data network, impacts much more than the little device
always in our pocket. According to PWC, 5G will create an additional
US$1.3tn global GDP by 2030 thanks to increased efficiencies and
productivity that will add value across sectors.
Today Qualcomm published a report titled ``Environmental
sustainability and a greener economy: The transformative role of 5G''
\3\ that goes beyond the impact on industries efficiencies and looks at
5G as a sustainability driver.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.qualcomm.com/media/documents/files/5g-and-
sustainability-report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Qualcomm has had a long-standing commitment to corporate
responsibility in reducing the company's carbon footprint and
developing more energy-efficient technology. As a result, energy
efficiencies have been designed into Qualcomm's facilities so that the
combined heat and power plants enable them to self-generate electricity
to meet their needs and efficiently utilize the waste heat to provide
cooling to their headquarters. Their energy-saving initiatives saved
59,577 megawatt hours of electricity and 16,495 tons of emissions. From
a technology perspective, Qualcomm committed to reducing power
consumption by 10% every year in their flagship Qualcomm Snapdragon
Mobile Platform products.
I had the opportunity to discuss the report with Dr. Kirti Gupta,
VP of Economic Strategy at Qualcomm. ``I am an engineer by training,
and I see the ability we have here at Qualcomm to bring to the table
engineers and economists as quite unique. We wanted to identify
specific algorithms and technologies that are directly designed to
target sustainability through environmental optimizations. We want to
find ways to reduce the amount of signal sent, reduce interference,
optimize the transfer of different kinds of data so that we are doing
more with less energy'', explains Dr. Gupta.
5G Use Cases: Avoided million metric tons of GHG emissions in 2025 in
the United States \1\

Qualcomm.
Editor's note: the footnote reference (1) is not included in
the article. it is from the Qualcomm report chart, see above.
The reference is as follows: \1\ Independent analysis based on
data published by GSMA. ``The Enablement Effect The Impact of
Mobile Communications Technologies on Carbon Emission
Reductions'' (2019). http://www.gsma.com/betterfuture/
wpcontent/uploads/2019/12/GSMA_Enablement_effect.pdf.

The ability to lean on smart technology enabled by 5G to use
natural resources more efficiently could result, according to the
report, in a reduction of about 6% of the annual emissions. If 373
million metric tons of GCG emissions do not mean much to you, think
about it in terms of taking 81 million passengers vehicles off the U.S.
roads for a year.
Headquartered in San Diego, California, Qualcomm knows all too well
how important it is to preserve freshwater. Meters, leak detectors and
other sensors used on the utility network can all contribute to better
water management. On average, 90 billion gallons of water are wasted in
a year in the U.S. due to leakages. While smart meters are already
available today, 5G brings speed and reliability. Dr. Gupta proudly
tells me that ``With 5G latency gets down to 1 millisecond, less than a
flash of the camera, and a reliability of 99.999999%. The other
advantage 5G brings is the ability to have it deployed in rural areas,
not only urban settings, which is mostly where you find smart meters
today.'' Smart meters can also be helpful to monitor and manage usage
and monitor and project water storage systems and rationing if needed.
Even though demand for products grown without pesticides is
increasing, most agriculture production is still very much reliant on
the use of pesticides. In the U.S. alone, an estimated 5.1 billion
pounds of pesticides are applied to crops every year. Unfortunately,
very little has been done to protect farmworkers who often suffer from
pesticide poisoning-induced headaches, nausea, shortness of breath and
even seizures. The use of 5G-enabled drones allows for more efficient
ad accurate pesticide spraying, which reduces the amount and frequency
of pesticide spraying. Using drones will also positively impact
farmworkers who can keep a safer distance from the chemicals.
Since 2010, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) started
collecting data on green jobs that they define both in terms of output
and process. The output approach is about jobs created by
establishments that produce green goods and services, while the process
approach measures jobs created by establishments that use
environmentally friendly production processes and practices. BLS
categorizes green Jobs into the following: water conservation,
sustainable forestry, biofuels, geothermal energy, environmental
remediation, sustainability, energy auditors, recycling, electric
vehicles, solar power and wind energy. In addition, according to
internal economic projections run by Qualcomm, the implementation of 5G
enabled technology such as artificial intelligence, cloud computing,
IoT and automation will boost green jobs by creating of 300,000 new
positions by 2030.
The positive impact 5G will have on sustainability would not paint
the whole picture unless one also looked at the technology itself and
how it fared from a sustainability perspective to previous mobile
technologies. In this respect, Qualcomm highlights a much more energy-
efficient network that is the result of focusing on techniques such as
beamforming, device-to-device communication, mobile infrastructure
sharing and energy harvesting.
Energy efficiency of 5G networks

Qualcomm.

If you look at all the data, there is no time to waste in
addressing climate change. The current digital transformation push and
the rollout of 5G across the U.S. must have sustainability as a core
business driver. With the U.S. rejoining the Paris Agreement and
addressing global warming high in the priority list of the current
Administration, Qualcomm is calling for more investment in research and
policies that can benefit 5G development and deployment as well as the
broader semiconductor industry.
Some might be inclined to dismiss the report as a little self-
serving, coming from the company that has become synonymous with 5G.
Yet, the opportunity to lean into 5G and what it empowers and do so
sustainably is a real opportunity. Companies in industries such as
manufacturing, agriculture, health, transport and construction should
turn to Qualcomm and its engineers' brain trust and start
experimenting. Qualcomm is spot on: there is no Planet B. What we have
is what we have to preserve.

Disclosure: The Heart of Tech is a research and consultancy
firm that engages or has engaged in research, analysis, and
advisory services with many technology companies, including
those mentioned in this column. The author does not hold any
equity positions with any company mentioned in this column.
Statement 2
on behalf of barbara p. glenn, ph.d., chief executive officer, national
association of state departments of agriculture
On behalf of the National Association of State Departments of
Agriculture (NASDA), we appreciate the opportunity to submit this
statement outlining the priorities of state departments of agriculture
on policies related to voluntary carbon markets in agriculture and
forestry. We request that this statement be included in the record of
the upcoming, September 21st hearing of the Committee on Agriculture
focusing on ``Voluntary Carbon Markets in Agriculture and Forestry''.
NASDA represents the commissioners, secretaries, and directors of
the state departments of agriculture in all 50 states and four U.S.
Territories. State departments of agriculture are responsible for a
wide range of programs including food safety, combating the spread of
disease, and fostering the economic vitality of our rural communities.
Conservation and environmental protection are also among our chief
responsibilities. Also, NASDA members are also responsible for their
states' public forests.
State departments of agriculture are uniquely positioned as co-
regulators with responsibilities for conservation, environmental
protection, and the promotion of economic sustainability of farmers,
forest owners, and ranchers to address concerns related to climate
resilience. In this role, NASDA encourages the Committee to ensure USDA
and state departments of agriculture work in partnership in developing
and implementing climate-smart agriculture programs.
In November 2020, NASDA along with several other national
organizations representing farmers, ranchers, forest owners, the food
sector, and environmental advocates formed the Food and Agriculture
Climate Alliance (FACA). This alliance is dedicated to working together
to define and promote shared climate policy priorities. On November 17,
2020, FACA released more than 40 policy recommendations to guide the
development of Federal climate legislation.
Many of the FACA recommendations are reflective of NASDA priorities
and we would ask that the Committee on Agriculture consider the
following as part of any future legislative or oversight activities of
the Committee:

NASDA asks that any legislative or oversight activities
undertaken by the Congress related to climate focus on
advancing science-based outcomes.

NASDA asks that any legislative or oversight activities
undertaken by the Congress promote fairness and equity within
the agriculture community through climate solutions.

NASDA encourages Congress to enact and fund voluntary,
incentive-based climate-smart agricultural programs as part of
the farm bill and other legislative vehicles that consider
agriculture's unique role in building resiliency and climate
adaptation.

NASDA asks that the Congress fund research programs and
forecasting tools that will help agriculture adapt to the
effects of a changing climate, including increased pests and
disease, changes in suitable cropping and livestock production
systems and increases in extreme weather events.

NASDA supports expanding Federal tools, including the soil
health provisions of the 2018 Farm Bill, to incentivize and
measure soil health improvements. Soil health incentives can
encourage farmers to adopt practices that improve soil heath
and increase carbon sequestration. Improved protocols for
measuring the gains in soil carbon from soil health
improvements can support development of markets for soil carbon
capture and storage.

NASDA asks that the Congress enact policies that credit
ongoing efforts of many farmers and ranchers that have
previously adapted climate-smart strategies to reduce
emissions, sequester carbon, and improve resiliency.

NASDA supports the creation of voluntary, incentive-based
climate-smart agricultural programs that are practical, and
provide benefits for farmers and ranchers.

NASDA stands ready to assist this Committee in any way possible as
it carves a path forward on this important policy issue.
Please contact Zachary Gihorski ([Redacted]) if you have any
questions or would like any additional information.
Statement 3
on behalf of rita hite, executive vice president, external relations
and policy, american forest foundation
On behalf of the American Forest Foundation (AFF), let me first
thank you for the opportunity to submit this written testimony to the
House of Representative's Agriculture Committee for the hearing titled,
``Voluntary Carbon Markets in Agriculture and Forestry.'' AFF is a
national conservation organization focused on delivering measurable
conservation impact, including climate change mitigation, by empowering
family forest owners to take action on their land.
One in four rural Americans is a forest owner, with the average
property size being less than 70 acres. These twenty-one million
families and individuals own 39 percent, or 290 million acres, of
America's forests. This is more than any other ownership type, making
these family forest owners essential for both maintaining and enhancing
forests for the many benefits they provide, from clean water and
wildlife habitat to carbon sequestration and storage. This means family
forests are already making an essential contribution toward mitigating
climate change, and recent research and practical experience point to
opportunities to work with family forest owners to do even more.
America's forests and forest products already capture and store
more than 750 million metric tons of carbon dioxide annually, which is
equivalent to nearly 15 percent of annual U.S. carbon dioxide emissions
generated from the burning of fossil fuels. With the right policies to
enable voluntary action, our nation's forests can do much more, with
some estimates pointing to the potential to double this important
contribution to climate mitigation. Recent research by The Nature
Conservancy points to forests as the most significant natural climate
solution opportunity and within this, to reforestation and enhancing
carbon management in existing forests as the two largest opportunities
for climate-smart forestry. This study also points to enhancing carbon
management of existing forests as one of the most cost-effective
solutions.
To date, family forest owners with smaller tracts--the majority of
family forest owners--have continue to be left out of carbon market
opportunities due to high transactional and upfront costs. Most small
forest owners cannot afford the costs associated with entering or
navigating the emerging opportunities presented by the carbon market.
This is beginning to change with programs like the Family Forest Carbon
Program (FFCP), a partnership between AFF and The Nature Conservancy
(TNC), that is creating new pathways for private landowners to access
markets, giving families another option to offset forest management
costs and generate income from their land. The FFCP, with a new
methodology that is pending approval from Verra's Verified Carbon
Standard (VCS) Program, enables family forest owners to participate in
climate-smart forestry actions that work for them while producing real,
additional, measurable, verifiable, and permanent carbon credits that
can be sold in the voluntary carbon market. The FFCP has successfully
implemented a sustainable voluntary carbon program on a pilot basis in
Pennsylvania, and by the end of 2022, the program aims to be working
across twelve states in four regions of the country.
Currently, less than one percent of acres in existing carbon
projects are on acreages between 20 and 1,000 acres, the size range of
the majority of family-owned properties in America. There are many
reasons for this lack of participation in carbon markets by smaller
landowners, including:

Lack of knowledge and information about carbon markets--
Carbon markets are relatively new and finding a trusted source
for information or guidance can be difficult.

Program complexities--Traditional forest carbon programs are
complex, requiring specialized knowledge and experience to
participate over the required project term.

Lengthy contract terms--To account for permanence, or the
assurance that carbon is permanently stored over the long-term,
contract terms for carbon programs often range from 30 to over
100 years in length, making them inherently multi-generational.

High upfront costs--There are significant upfront costs to
develop a forest carbon project on an individual's property,
including a detailed forest inventory, comprehensive project
development documentation, and a third-party validation/
verification process. Costs can easily exceed $100,000 before a
landowner is issued carbon credits that may be sold, a process
that may take 12 to 18 months depending on the carbon program.

Loss of flexibility--Traditional forest carbon programs
often place constraints on forest management activities,
complicate the ability to transfer the property to one or more
heirs, and may impact the land value if the property is sold to
a party not interested in continuing the forest carbon project.

Measurement of Carbon--In traditional carbon markets, the
landowner is responsible for the periodic monitoring and
verification of the carbon their forest holds over the length
of the project, and submitting regular written reports to a
carbon registry.

For African American forest owners, whose average forest size is
smaller than the national average at around 63 acres, there are
additional barriers to market access, including lack of access to
technical resources and lack of trust in government and financial
institutions. All too often, African American and other historically-
underserved landowners also face challenges with heirs' property: land
that is passed on through generations without a clear will and for
which there are now multiple owners and no clear understanding of who
can make legal decisions about the land. These combined issues have led
to a 97 percent decline in African American landownership in the U.S.
South. When these landowners are left out of carbon market
opportunities, it means disproportionately climate-impacted communities
are left out of important opportunities to take local climate action
and access private investment in their forests.
Despite these challenges, carbon markets are a worthy tool that can
financially incentivize landowners to contribute to climate mitigation
through managing their forests in ways that sequester and store more
carbon over time. Further, Congress is uniquely positioned to not only
remove a number of the barriers that exist to voluntary carbon market
expansion, but to invest in an accelerated expansion of the market that
will lead to increased private investment in rural Americans, including
family forest owners, as well as a carbon benefit that makes a
meaningful difference in climate mitigation.
To enable programs such as the FFCP and other carbon markets to
work and leverage significant private-sector funds for forest climate
action on family forests, we recommend passage of the Rural Forest
Markets Act (RFMA). The Rural Forest Markets Act (H.R. 3790) will
unlock private capital by de-risking investments for private investors
by providing credit enhancement, such as a loan or bond guarantee. This
has already been done for a number of other commodity markets in the
agricultural sector. This credit enhancement is essential to enabling
the use of private investment capital, which can then be used to fund
the significant upfront costs of climate-smart forestry actions that
take, in some cases, decades to produce carbon that can be sold in the
market. Without this private capital, carbon markets will be largely
off-limits to small forest owners.
In addition to RFMA passage, other policy tools will be essential
for unlocking carbon markets and forests' potential in ways that
benefit landowners, such as policies that:

Enable government backing of emerging forest carbon markets:

Co-invest in the production of carbon credits--Utilize
existing conservation programs or policies like tax
incentives, recognizing that many forestry practices will
not be paid for only with carbon market revenues, but
include climate- and other co-benefits.

Serve as buyer of last resort--USDA could auction off
put option contracts that guarantee a minimum value for
future credits as another form of credit enhancement that
will offer assurance to investors and safeguard landowners
as sellers.

Offer concessionary capital--Funds could be used as
the upfront capital needed for upfront forest carbon
management costs to be repaid or forgiven. This gives
investors the confidence to know that concessionary capital
will be the first to suffer any losses, thereby offering a
layer of protection for their own investment capital.

Offer a buffer pool or insurance product--USDA could
help make forest carbon projects more financially viable by
offering a low-cost insurance product or buffer pool to
support these projects in the case of unintended reversals.

Invest in the forest carbon practice science--Data and
inventory solutions including investment in the Forest
Service's Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program and
specific investment in small-area estimation; science to
identify and account for the carbon around specific forest
practices in specific forest types; and program development
through funding support that can bring innovation, efficiency,
continuity, and credibility, and continuous improvement to
climate-smart forestry action.

Support landowner engagement and technical assistance with a
specific focus on ensuring support for historically-underserved
forest owners. This is essential to help stem the loss of
African American family forest owners who have not had the same
opportunities to access markets and technical assistance.

AFF estimates that if we can tap just 20 percent of family-owned
forested acres by 2030, we can sequester at least 2 gigatons of
additional carbon dioxide by the end of the century. While tapping
family forests for climate is not by any means the only solution to
addressing climate change, it is a critical piece as we pursue an all-
of-the-above, all-sectors approach to tackling the issue. Carbon
markets can enable voluntary actions on the part of family forest
owners and provide new income streams, all while enabling the private-
sector to help pay the bill.
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide testimony. We are
happy to follow up to offer any further details or answer any
questions. Please feel free to contact AFF Policy Manager Robert
Sherman at [Redacted] with any questions.
Sincerely,

Rita Hite,
Executive Vice President, External Relations and Policy,
American Forest Foundation.
Statement 4
on behalf of brent smith, vice president, marketing, sustainability &
proprietary products, nutrien
Dear Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee:

Nutrien is pleased to submit a statement for the record to the
United States House of Representatives Committee on Agriculture hearing
entitled, ``Voluntary Carbon Markets in Agriculture and Forestry.''
Introduction
Nutrien is taking a leading position in the evolving carbon
ecosystem within the agriculture landscape. As a global leader in
fertilizer manufacturing and as the largest global agricultural
retailer, providing crop inputs and services to over 500 thousand
growers globally, we aim to be an advocate for our grower customers
while identifying scalable solutions to help mitigate climate impacts.
In November 2020, we launched an end to end carbon program with the
goal of helping our grower customers navigate the emerging voluntary
markets. At the outset of this program, we identified core guiding
principles to drive our actions and decisions as these markets continue
to evolve. While these were developed specific to carbon, we feel they
are applicable across climate-smart agriculture practices.
Nutrien Carbon Guiding Principles

Attractive Grower Value Proposition: profitable for the
grower, with a clear and transparent incentive structure

Easy Grower Participation: practical eligibility criteria,
with low administrative burden.

High-Quality Carbon Outcomes: verifiable carbon outcomes,
quantified using proven agronomic science and following
standardized protocols and processes that is scalable to
administer.

Broad Base of Agronomic Practices: leverage a broad base of
agronomic practices that reduce greenhouse gases and improve
soil carbon sequestration.

``Every Acre Counts'': incentive opportunity for practice
change across every acre with the potential to drive carbon
benefit.

Flexible Monetization: optionality to monetize carbon
credits in voluntary or compliance markets, preserving multiple
pathways to maximize carbon value and grower profitability.

Technology & Innovation to Accelerate: configured to embrace
new technology and innovation that improves program scalability
without sacrificing carbon outcome quality.
Emerging Voluntary Markets
Emerging voluntary markets have created a large amount of confusion
around carbon reductions and removals in agriculture, particularly at
the grower level. There are a range of offers in the marketplace that
span from independently verified and validated outcomes through carbon
registries all the way to individual companies providing their own
protocols and even touting the carbon benefits of specific products
with little data to validate them. When layering in other ecosystem
outcomes such as water or biodiversity, it creates more complexity and
confusion at the grower level. We believe that there is an opportunity
for the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to take a leadership role
in defining the quality aspects of carbon reductions and removals to
provide better clarity to all stakeholders on which protocols are
generating verified outcomes that are actually making a difference.
Voluntary markets exist today to support the incentivization of
verified outcomes. Nutrien is a believer in market-based solutions and
that scaling environmental outcomes is achievable even if they are not
at scale today. There are specific opportunities to increase that scale
that the Committee could assist through future policy.

Cost to Administer. Administration and the cost to serve of
verifying outcomes remains a challenge to maximize value to the
grower. Any costs required to administer the program is value
that is not able to flow as an incentive to the grower.
Strategies that focus on reducing the cost of verifying
outcomes will greatly support the voluntary adoption of
climate-smart agriculture. We feel the one of the best ways to
support this is through additional research. If better public
data was available on environmental attributes of farmland
(i.e., soil organic carbon), then modeled outcomes could be
generated with greater certainty and lower costs of physical
validation. See additional commentary below.
Voluntary Market Limitations. Current voluntary markets have
taken protocols for carbon reduction and removal from other
industries and applied those to agriculture. We view these as
important building blocks but the application to agriculture
does not always fit with the realities of nature-based systems.
Below are the three primary concerns that future policies could
support or help to address.

Additionality. We view every acre as having the
potential to reduce or remove additional carbon and
that the only difference is the amount based on local
conditions. Therefore, we view the additionality
threshold to be at the field level. Current protocols
provide for an additionality threshold at either the
county or other geographical level that puts an
artificial ceiling on the incentives for agriculture to
sequester more carbon. We view this as
counterproductive to the ultimate goal and that every
acre should count.
Past Practices. Many growers have been practicing
climate-smart agriculture for many years. Given that
the voluntary markets are only able or willing to
incentivize new carbon reductions or removals, these
growers are effectively locked out of participating
because they have been progressive in their thinking.
It also creates potential incentives to reverse these
practices for a period of time so that they can
participate in the future. These practices do continue
to sequester carbon and provide other ecosystem
services that have value and should be recognized. We
view this as fundamentally unfair and strategies could
be developed to recognize the impact of past practices
towards verified outcomes.
Permanence. Current permanence requirements range
from 30-100 years. We strongly feel that it is not
sustainable to monitor acres over this type of time
horizon, particularly the upper range. Growers are
understandably unwilling to contract for practice
implementation on these timelines and we believe that
risk options for project developers, which are limited
to buffer pool estimates, are not feasible to reduce
risk. Strategies to address the concerns of permanence
while making it more practically implementable and
addressing land ownership concerns would help to scale
these markets.
Uncertainty. In order to quantify carbon outcomes,
these markets are focusing on a combination of modeled
outcomes with physical measurements on some frequency
in an attempt to balance accuracy with the cost to
administer. However, both models and measurements
introduce a meaningful level of uncertainty with
requirements and options for both not clearly defined.
Additional investment in research, supported by
Congress, could make meaningful impacts to this
limitation.
Public-Private Partnerships
We believe there is a large, untapped opportunity for public-
private partnerships in advancing the adoption of climate-smart
agriculture. As a company operating in the private-sector, we feel
there is an opportunity to collaborate closer with USDA on existing
programs. A key area to focus would be on ``Technical Service
Providers''. TSPs are currently required for several existing programs
to provide an independent plan to the grower in order to participate.
Private sector companies are largely excluded from being recognized as
TSPs, although some states have done this. Streamlining the process for
private companies and Ag retailers, that may already be certified
through other programs like the Certified Crop Adviser (CCA), to be
certified as TSPs has the potential to make a meaningful difference in
the adoption of these programs across the country. That is why we
support the Growing Climate Solutions Act, which would leverage private
companies expertise while supporting farmers' participation in carbon
markets, rewarding them for good environmental stewardship and
protecting our natural resources.
We also believe that as future policies are more fully developed,
the private-sector can and will provide additional opportunities for
increased adoption of these strategies as well as providing practical
feedback on feasibility. In particular, we feel that the ag retail
sector is uniquely positioned to help drive the adoption of new and
existing programs given the existing relationships at the farm level
and agronomic service mindset that exists between these companies and
their grower customers. We feel the infrastructure exists to provide
agronomic advice within the private-sector, including climate-smart ag
practices, and that this infrastructure does not need to be duplicated.
Much can be accomplished through more robust public-private
partnerships.
Outcomes vs. Practices
We believe that Congress has an opportunity to create a policy
environment that supports existing markets working to scale climate-
smart agriculture. We also believe that these same strategies can
support positive impacts to biofuels given that agriculture products
are often the raw materials for biofuel production.
We feel it is important to shift, over time, the focus from
incentivizing practice adoption to incentivizing verified outcomes when
feasible. This shift in focus will better align incentives and help to
ensure that the overall goals of climate-smart agriculture are actually
realized, whether those goals are related to carbon, water, or another
environmental attribute. Additionally, we believe that by focusing on
outcomes, it helps to drive innovation in the space as market
participants look for new and unique ways to deliver on those desired
outcomes.
Research & Data
We feel that the combination of research and data is one of the key
leverage points where Congress can make a meaningful difference in the
adoption of climate-smart agriculture. In order to arrive at verified
outcomes and to validate in a scalable way, more data is going to be
required to reach more acres and lower administrative costs. We would
recommend a focus on three key areas:
Baselining Research: In order to participate in voluntary markets
of reasonable quality, calibrated models based on public research is a
requirement (backed by validating data such as soil samples). There are
two limitations to this dynamic. First, not enough public research is
available across geographies and cropping systems to get these models
to a reasonable level of uncertainty. Second, each participant
effectively has to recreate the data accumulation to calibrate its
model. The Committee could help solve for both limitations with the
smart use of carbon specific research funding and/or incentives for
growers to provide their data that meets a USDA standard.
Moving Beyond Practices: We believe there will be a natural
evolution of the emerging markets for carbon outcomes. Today, we are
focused on practice changes. As things evolve and improve, the market
will move from practices to products and eventually genetics. Congress
has an opportunity to direct USDA to set the framework and support the
research to accelerate ``carbon scoring'' of products that when
properly used lead to outsized carbon reduction or removal gains.
Reinvestment in National Data: Having local and actionable data
across the country will be imperative to successfully driving change
where the biggest opportunities exist for climate-smart agriculture.
Congress has an opportunity to reinvest in USDA's national data
infrastructure. Today, much of this data is out of date or simply
doesn't exist for the intended purpose of climate-smart agriculture. A
couple of examples would be ERS and the Rapid Carbon Assessment data
completed in 2011 under the Obama Administration but was never
replicated or updated. Having a national data source for performance
benchmarking of soil carbon would be tremendously valuable to driving
adoption. There are certainly many other examples of where national
datasets would improve the nation's ability to accelerate climate-smart
agriculture.
Existing Programs
Existing USDA [conservation] programs run by NRCS (EQIP, CSP, CRP,
ACEP, and RCPP) are powerful tools which make an impact on practice
changes in the field. We believe that these programs can continue to be
enhanced with clear guidance on how they can support and be
complementary to evolving carbon and ecosystem service markets. We feel
these programs and markets should be complementary and not competitive.
Additionally, we feel there are opportunities for these USDA
programs to become more streamlined and easier to administer. The
largest hurdle we hear about from our grower customers to engaging in
existing programs is the complexity and administrative requirements to
engage. In order to leverage existing policies and programs, the burden
to participate should be lowered. We feel there is an opportunity to
increase clarity on eligibility and grower benefits for existing
programs while also reducing the complexity to participate, making it
easier for the grower. We also understand that there are capacity
constraints in administering these programs. While additional Federal
funding could be a solution, we see an opportunity for public-private
partnerships to fill this need (see additional comments in the next
section).
Finally, where programs can have consistency at the Federal level
vs. state level, industry would be better able to support scaling
voluntary adoption of existing programs. For example, NRCS programs are
set at the Federal level but often implemented at the state level. This
can cause meaningful differences from state to state. As a national ag
retailer, this makes it more difficult to support the scaling of these
programs with our customers.
We are thankful for the opportunity to comment on an issue that is
important to Nutrien, our farmer customers, and the agricultural
industry as a whole. We appreciate the interest of Congress in the role
of voluntary carbon markets in rewarding producers for implementing
sustainable farming practices, and we look forward to working with the
Committee as you develop and implement climate-smart ag policies.
Statement 5
on behalf of farmer's business network, inc. and gradable
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Committee, Farmers Business Network, Inc. (FBN
'
) and
Gradable
'
welcome the leadership of the House Agriculture
Committee on voluntary carbon markets, which ultimately have the
potential to help producers to receive recognition in the marketplace
for the important stewardship work and premium practices that they are
implementing on the farm. We are excited for the opportunity to support
the work of the Committee in reviewing the current status of the market
and the best available emerging science, especially in service of
helping to inform future policy development.
FBN is an independent ag tech platform and farmer-to-farmer network
with a mission to power the prosperity of family farmers around the
world, while working towards a sustainable future. Gradable, launched
by Farmers Business Network, provides new technology and services that
facilitate the scoring, sourcing, and pricing of Low-Carbon Grain,
making environmental transparency in the grain industry a reality now.
Gradable enables comprehensive environmental transparency by tracking
Scope 1 and 3 emissions, while supporting a market for premium,
environmentally scored grain. Gradable also provides buying
intelligence software that directly connects farmers with consumer-
packaged goods companies, animal feed providers, biofuel makers and the
world's other major grain buyers.
We are supporters of and commend the development of the Growing
Climate Solutions Act. We welcome any voluntary program that allows
growers to receive compensation for environmental stewardship practices
that they implement on their land, and hope that the bill will help to
highlight and grow the successful supply chain programs that growers
are already finding valuable today. Another important component of this
work is the investment in and coordination of research--which is
critical to ensuring that the value of climate work is centered in and
retained by growers.
We would ask to submit, for the record, the attached analysis for
the Committee's consideration, showing the value of independent
variable scoring methodologies to this work. The attached analysis
outlines our belief that there are scientifically verifiable paths
emerging presently that make variable scoring an attractive approach
for achieving greater de-carbonization throughout the agricultural
supply chain and the basis for farmers to receive direct financial
incentives for their voluntary climate and environmentally sustainable
practices.
About FBN
Farmers Business Network, Inc. is an independent ag tech platform
and farmer-to-farmer network with a mission to power the prosperity of
family farmers around the world, while working towards a sustainable
future. Its Farmers First
'
promise has attracted over 27,000
members to the network with a common goal of maximizing their farm's
profit potential. FBN has set out to redefine value and convenience for
farmers by helping reduce the cost of production and maximize the value
of their crops. The FBN network has grown to cover more than 70 million
acres of member farms in the U.S., Canada, and Australia. To learn
more, visit: www.fbn.com.
attachment

______

Submitted News Release by Hon. Cheri Bustos, a Representative in
Congress from Illinois
[https://press.growmark.com/growmark-and-indigo-ag-join-forces-to-
expand-farmers-access-to-carbon-farming-opportunity]

GROWMARK and Indigo Ag Join Forces to Expand Farmers' Access to Carbon
Farming Opportunity
Collaboration Reflects Progress in Establishing High-Quality Carbon
Credits As a New Crop for Farmers
August 10, 2021 (Bloomington, IL and Memphis, TN)--GROWMARK,\1\ a
farmer-owned cooperative focused on the success of its customers, and
Indigo Ag,\2\ a company leveraging nature and technology to unlock
economic and environmental progress in agriculture, today announced a
joint effort to spur participation in the growing market for
agricultural carbon. Under this collaboration, the GROWMARK System's
network of FS branded retailers will help farmers navigate an
increasingly complex soil carbon market and confidently get started on
their carbon farming journey with the only high-quality, third-party
verified credit program in operation today: Carbon by Indigo.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.growmark.com/.
\2\ https://www.indigoag.com/.
\3\ https://www.indigoag.com/carbon.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The GROWMARK System and Indigo together will provide farmer owners
with the end-to-end support necessary to succeed in the agricultural
carbon opportunity. Participating FS retailers will help farmers
evaluate and enroll in Carbon by Indigo and implement beneficial
farming practices proven to sequester carbon and abate greenhouse gas
emissions. Upon enrollment, Indigo will leverage its advanced
capabilities for measuring and verifying on-farm environmental impact
at scale to translate the effects of farmers' efforts into a new source
of revenue in the form of premium carbon credits.
``The opportunity for farmers to benefit from public demand for
high-quality carbon credits is tremendous,'' said Mark Orr, Vice
President, Agronomy, GROWMARK. ``We're proud to work with Indigo to
provide our farmer partners with a simple and informed path to generate
maximum revenue for their efforts.''
The two companies are joined in a mutual effort to ensure farmers
are equipped with informed guidance as they contemplate participating
in the carbon market and, if they do choose to enroll, are supported
with the resources and knowledge to maximize their agronomic,
environmental, and financial success. Building on Carbon by Indigo's
distinct focus on ensuring informed decision making,\4\ the GROWMARK
System partnership enables farmers to confidently work with partners
they know and trust to help them make the right decisions for their
unique operation. Combining the extensive expertise of the GROWMARK
System's network of trained agronomists with Indigo's experience
operationalizing the demanding measurement and third-party verification
standards set by leading global credit registries, the industry
collaboration provides a simple and viable path for farmers to succeed
with carbon in the long-term.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://www.indigoag.com/pages/news/indigo-ag-debuts-new-
identity-for-its-industry-leading-carbon-farming-program-carbon-by-
indigo.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
``FS retailers in the GROWMARK System are proven industry leaders
in offering trusted expertise to help farmers interpret and simplify
the complexities of modern agriculture, and they do so over a broad
geographical footprint,'' said Chris Harbourt, Global Head of Carbon at
Indigo Ag. ``We are excited to be working with GROWMARK and FS
retailers to help further farmers' understanding of the fast-growing
carbon farming landscape and support the development of the market to
adequately reflect the value of farmers' environmental contributions.''
As demand for voluntary ag carbon credits grows into an estimated
$42 billion farmer opportunity, Indigo and the GROWMARK System--which
continues to focus on identifying and supporting new paths for climate
positive practices under its Endure sustainability initiative \5\--are
working to ensure farmers maximize the long-term profitability
potential of their participation. A focus on high-quality credit
generation is critical to this effort and to carbon credits'
effectiveness as an outcomes-based approach to catalyze adoption of
beneficial farming practices at scale. Carbon by Indigo's work to
generate premium credits has in turn cultivated a network of premium
credit buyers (including global brands like JPMorgan Chase, Ralph
Lauren Corporation, The North Face, and Barclays) and resulted in a 35%
increase in the price of Carbon by Indigo credits over the last year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://view.joomag.com/endure-brochure-2020/
0941432001599172795.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
You can learn more about GROWMARK here \6\ and Carbon by Indigo
here.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.growmark.com/.
\7\ https://www.indigoag.com/carbon/for-farmers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
About GROWMARK, Inc.
GROWMARK is an agricultural cooperative serving almost 400,000
customers across North America, providing agronomy, energy, facility
engineering and construction, and logistics products and services, as
well as grain marketing and risk management services. Headquartered in
Bloomington, Illinois, GROWMARK owns the FS trademark, which is used by
member cooperatives. GROWMARK also owns and operates SEEDWAY, the
largest full-line seed company in the United States. More information
is available at growmark.com.
About Indigo Ag
Indigo Ag improves grower profitability, environmental
sustainability, and consumer health through the use of nature-based and
digital technologies. The company's core offerings--Biologicals,
Carbon, Marketplace, and Transport--integrate across the supply chain
to optimize how the world's most impact crops are produced, sourced,
and distributed. Founded in 2014 with a mission of harnessing nature to
help farmers sustainably feed the planet, today the company's
technology connects stakeholders across the agricultural ecosystem to
unlock sustainability and profitability benefits for all. Indigo Ag is
headquartered in Boston, MA, with additional offices in Memphis, TN;
Research Triangle Park, NC; Sao Paulo, Brazil; and Basel, Switzerland.

Chris Grogan, Manager, Publications and Media Relations,
GROWMARK, Inc.
______

Submitted Material by Hon. Abigail Davis Spanberger, a Representative
in Congress from Virginia

Growing Climate Solutions Act Supporters

Accelergy Corporation    Environmental Defense    National Pork
Fund                     Producers Council
Aequor                   Evangelical              National Potato
Environmental Network    Council
Agree Economic +         Farm Credit Council      National Sorghum
Environmental Risk      Farm Journal Foundation   Producers
Coalition                                        National Venture
Capital Association
Agricultural Retailers   Farmers Business         National Wildlife
Association              Network                  Federation
Agriculture & Applied    Florida Farm Bureau      National Woodland
Economics Association    Federation               Owners Association
FMI--The Food Industry   Nestle USA
Association
AgSpire                  Food and Agriculture     New Mexico Farm and
Climate Alliance         Livestock Bureau
Alabama Farmers          Forest Stewards Guild    New York Farm Bureau
Federation
American Agriculture     General Mills            Newtrient
Movement
American Association of  Global Cold Chain        No Evil Foods
Veterinary Medical       Alliance                North American Meat
Colleges                Good Karma Foods          Institute
American Biogas Council  Gradable                 North American
Millers' Association
American Conservation    Green Plains             North Carolina Farm
Coalition                                         Bureau Federation
American Farm Bureau     Growth Energy            North Dakota Grain
Federation                                        Growers Association
American Farmland Trust  Horizon Organic          Novozymes
American Feed Industry   Hungry Planet, Inc.      Nutrien
Association
American Forest          Illinois Farm Bureau     Ocean Hugger Foods,
Foundation                                        Inc.
American Forests         Impossible Foods         Ocean Spray
American Mushroom        Indiana Agriculture      Ohio Farm Bureau
Institute                Coalition for            Federation
American Public Gas       Renewable Energy        Oklahoma Farm Bureau
Association
American Seed Trade      Indiana Corn and Soy     Organic Trade
Association                                       Association
American Sheep Industry  Indiana Farm Bureau      Outstanding Foods
Association
American Society of      Indigo                   Pennsylvania Farm
Animal Science                                    Bureau
American Soybean         International Emissions  PepsiCo
Association              Trading Association     Pheasants Forever
American Sugar Alliance
Anuvia                   Iowa Farm Bureau         Quail Forever
Archer Daniels Midland   Kellogg Company          Revolution Gelato
Company
Arizona Farm Bureau      Kentucky Farm Bureau     Rhode Island
Federation              Land O Lakes              Department of
Association of                                     Environmental
Equipment                                         Management
Manufacturers
Association of Public &  Land Trust Alliance      Rural & Agriculture
Land-grant              Louisiana Farm Bureau     Council of America
Universities             Federation              Rural Voices for
Conservation
Coalition
Audubon New York         Mars, Inc.               S2G Ventures
Bayer                    McDonalds                Shellfish Growers
Climate Coalition
Ben & Jerry's            Michigan Agribusiness    Society for Range
Association              Management
Benson Hill, Inc.        Michigan Chapter--The    Society of American
Biological Products       Nature Conservancy       Foresters
Industry Alliance                                Stonyfield Farms
Biotechnology            Michigan Farm Bureau     Supporters of
Innovation              Michigan Milk Producers   Agricultural Research
Organization                                      (SoAR) Foundation
Bipartisan Policy
Center Action
Boehringer Ingleheim     Michigan State           Sustainable Food
Animal Health            University               Policy Alliance
Bunge                    Microsoft                Syngenta
Califia Farms            Millborn Seeds           The Federation of
Southern Cooperatives
California Farm Bureau   Minnesota Farm Bureau    The Fertilizer
Federation                                        Institute
Cargill                  Mondelez International   The National Institute
Center for Climate and   National Alliance of      for Animal
Energy Solutions         Forest Owners            Agriculture
Center for Rural         National Alliance of     The Nature Conservancy
Affairs                  Forest Owners
Center for Sustainable   National Association     The Tofurky Company
Climate Solutions        for the Advancement of  Theodore Roosevelt
CERES                     Animal Science           Conservation
Chobani                  National Association of   Partnership
Citizens Climate Lobby    State Departments of    Trout Unlimited
Agriculture
Citizens for             National Association of  Tyson
Responsible Energy       State Foresters
Solutions
Climate Leadership       National Association of  U.S. Chamber of
Council                  University Forest        Commerce
CocoNifty                 Resource Programs       U.S. Durum Growers
Association
Colorado Farm Bureau     National Audubon         U.S. Hemp Roundtable
Society
Composite Panel          National Biodiesel       Unilever North America
Association              Board
ConservAmerica           National Cattlemen's     United States
Beef Association         Cattlemen's
Association
Corn Refiners            National Cooperative     Upfield
Association              Business Association
Corteva                  National Corn Growers    USA Rice
Association
Crop Insurance and       National Cotton Council  USA Rice
Reinsurance Bureau
CropLife America         National Council of      Vermont Farm Bureau
Farmer Cooperatives
Danone North America     National Farmers Union   Walmart
Ducks Unlimited          National Grange          Western Landowners
Alliance
Ecosystem Service        National Hemp            Yum! Brands
Market Consortium        Association
National Oilseed         National Milk Producers  Yum! Brands
Processors Association   Federation

______

Supplementary Material Submitted by Debbie Reed, Executive Director and
Member, Board of Directors, Ecosystem Services Market Consortium and
Ecosystems Market Research Consortium
Insert
Mr. Carbajal. . . .
Ms. Reed, what additional measures, what additional outreach
can be conducted to incentivize and to reach out to more
farmers and ranchers interested in participating in carbon
markets throughout our country, and certainly the Central Coast
that I represent?
Ms. Reed. Yes, thank you.
I think in the Central Coast in particular, what we need is
more data actually for specialty crops. We don't have a lot of
information about specialty crops and really how to quantify
the impacts of improved management practices in specialty
crops. I think that is one major thing that USDA could do is
additional research there, and additional support in those
production systems for--whether it is wine grape growers, for
instance, or almond orchards, to understand what practices make
them more resilient and can improve soil carbon sequestration
and water holding capacity, et cetera.
I think additionally, though, farmers and ranchers need to
understand what are the roles and responsibilities they take on
when they participate in these markets, so that they have a
very clear vision of what is going to be required of them----
The Chairman. The time has expired. You can provide an answer
in writing.
Mr. Carbajal. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

The best way to conduct outreach is for USDA to provide funding for
more widespread conservation technical assistance to farmers and
ranchers who are interested in participating in these carbon markets.
USDA does not currently have the capacity to conduct technical
assistance on the scale needed to usher in further climate-smart
agriculture techniques in time to meet our global climate commitments.
We are encouraged by USDA's recent announcement of its proposed
Climate-Smart Agriculture and Forestry Partnership Program but it
remains to be seen whether that program will provide needed, place-
based conservation technical assistance that is tailored to specific
soil types and growing systems. There are private-sector and civil
society technical assistance providers who do this work, such as the
Certified Crop Advisors (CCA), who could aid efforts to do outreach to
farmers but Congress could do more to incentivize those public-private
partnerships, whether in the next farm bill or through other
legislation currently under consideration, to scale up climate-smart
agricultural and conservation practices across American farms and
ranches.
Additionally, the Growing Climate Solutions Act has provisions that
would help connect farmers with the technical assistance they need to
adapt their production systems in ways that could generate
environmental credits to be sold on carbon and other ecosystem services
markets. Passage of the GCSA, through regular order to allow for
additional compromises, should be a priority for the Committee and
Congress. ESMC supports passage of the GCSA and is encouraged by the
overwhelming bipartisan support for this bill.
______

Supplementary Material Submitted by Brian Luoma, President and Chief
Executive Officer, The Westervelt Company; on behalf of National
Alliance of Forest Owners
Insert 1
Ms. Kuster. Great. Thank you.
My time is very limited, so just quickly, Mr. Luoma, can you
speak to how participation in private carbon markets has helped
your company and others provide good stewardship of our forests
with enhanced financial viability?
Mr. Luoma. Yes, thank you, Representative, for the question.
It is a good question.
As we have been talking about right along on the agriculture
side, the same holds true on the forestry side in terms of
voluntary participation. So, these----
The Chairman. The time has expired. Excuse, but we are on a
schedule and an answer could be provided in writing, if you
don't mind.
Ms. Kuster. I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Luoma. Will do.

At The Westervelt Company, we own and manage both forests and
mills. Forest owners seek to optimize the use of their working forests
and the sustainable natural resource they provide. Forests that are
highly productive for products will continue to provide wood for mills.
But almost all private working forest owners own land that isn't
ideal for growing 2x4s--whether that's marginal lands or regions where
marketable timber may not be the top priority, or in communities that
no longer have the local manufacturing infrastructure to use trees.
These forests are used for other purposes and may be used for carbon.
One of the reasons we talk about markets for forest carbon and wood
construction in tandem is because they are part of one system, and we
have to take a whole system approach to optimize carbon storage and
sequestration. The bottom line is that, when it comes to carbon, we are
looking for additional markets, not replacement markets.
Forest owners know how to grow trees--we're the best in the world.
If there can be more clarity, certainty, and reduced complexity in the
carbon market, we see huge opportunity to grow more trees. Everyone I
talk to wants these programs to work. They want everyone involved to
have confidence in the market.
If a voluntary carbon market can bring a new revenue stream to
forest owners, especially on marginal lands not suited for lumber
production, forest owners will be able to make the significant
investments necessary to bring those lands to their full carbon
sequestration and storage potential.
Insert 2
Mr. LaMalfa. . . .
I have a question for Mr. Luoma, obviously, we have had
plenty of wildfire out in the West and are running into issues
of the burn scar basically affecting just about everything. So,
in order to protect the carbon credits, we need to have the
asset that has been set aside as a credit area continue to
exist. But, the fires don't distinguish between these
boundaries, so carbon credit areas can be affected by fire. So,
one known as the Colville IFM project has burned during what is
called the Bootleg Fire. This happens to be on the Oregon side,
but there are many, many acres up there I believe would add up
as far as offsets in terms of tons was 14 million tons of
offset just this last August on the Bootleg Fire that was used
in the California markets for carbon compliance.
* * * * *
Mr. LaMalfa. Mr. Luoma, again, our time goes so fast here,
and I am sorry about it, but I appreciate that thought that the
forest needs to continue to be working in order to be effective
on that. If we just dedicate it as a set aside and then never
touch it, once again, you're going to have the same problem we
have in a lot of the forested areas. So, it has to be working
landscape no matter if it is a set aside or not.
But, could you maybe offline give us some more ideas on what
the alternatives are? Because you have X amount of acres set
aside for this carbon credit area and it did burn, we would
probably have to have something more defined as what the
alternative would be. We can't have maybe two blocks of land in
order to do it in case one burns. I don't know if that would be
practical. So, let me thank you, Mr. Luoma.

Fire has always been a natural part of forest ecology in North
America. Severe wildfires like those we see in national headlines are
not, and they are a significant source of emissions. The EPA estimates
that annual wildfires emit around 140 million metric tons of carbon
annually, although that number varies from year to year. Wildfire is a
challenge in drier forests in the West, but it is not a significant
factor in the South where we operate. Fire is not unexpected, so all
forest carbon protocols include a buffer pool. A buffer pool includes
extra sequestered and stored carbon that participants draw on in case
of a loss. Buffer pools act like an insurance policy and don't count
toward carbon removals unless they are used.
Insert 3
Ms. Schrier. . . .
I have some questions for Brian Luoma. Mr. Luoma, in your
testimony you mentioned the challenge of increasing
participation and confidence in foreign carbon markets. From
your perspective, how can Congress support this effort, and
what role do you see the Federal Government playing in forestry
markets specifically?
Mr. Luoma. Thank you, Representative, and I agree with
everything you just said. Congratulations on that legislation.
We need to continue to define what the opportunities are in
this market, and supporting funding in the USDA with the FIA
and the Forest Products Lab, the grants programs where we can
do research and do analysis and understand better what is at
play in the full life cycle analysis all the way to the built
environment. From seedling all the way through to seedling, if
you will, there is a tremendous amount of carbon to be
sequestered and stored in the forest while it is working, and
then moved into the built environment where it gets stored for
a long time.
We don't know a whole lot about how to do the accounting for
that. A lot of people are working on it. But I think funding
within the USDA to help us do research there will be very
helpful.
Ms. Schrier. Yes, I agree. I mean, how long will that cross-
laminated timber building remain? Because at some point, wood
degrades or is brought down and we are looking at 100 year
solutions.
Now, given that 40 percent of U.S. forests are publicly
owned, what opportunities do you see for public-private
partnership in the forestry carbon offset market space?
Mr. Luoma. Yes. Again, I think that is a discussion that can
be had within USDA and within all of the organizations that are
working on this, including the Environmental Defense Fund and
The Nature Conservancy. There is a lot of collaboration now on
the principles----

The Federal Government should help private markets succeed, not
take them over. For example, the Forest Service's Forest Products Lab
(FPL) is a successful, long-standing partnership that helps drive
innovation in the marketplace, including the development of lifecycle
analysis for wood in the built environment. We welcome and encourage
this kind of collaboration and would like to see more of it.
Government can also play an important role in providing high
quality data, analysis and information sharing to help inform markets.
The Forest Service's Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program does
this for private working forests in a variety of ways. We can further
improve FIA to provide timely, useful data to inform carbon markets.
This data will help drive collaboration between the public and private-
sector and ensure that all parties have access to the same rigorous and
up-to-date data sets.
There are likely other relevant roles of government that can help
bolster markets for forest carbon and increased wood utilization. We
have a long history of partnerships between USDA and producers. We
should draw from that to help us build partnerships that strengthen
markets.
The House Agriculture Committee has three clear pathways to further
climate-smart policies supporting private working forests and forest
products:

1.  Help expand markets for forest carbon, increasing accessibility
and credibility. If there is a strong market signal for our
forests to sequester and store more carbon, we will do just
that.

2.  Encourage more sustainably sourced wood construction in the built
environment. It reduces the carbon footprint of the built
environment and supports forest retention and overall
carbon mitigation.

3.  Improve forest carbon data. Markets for carbon and markets for
climate-smart construction need data to prove that climate
benefits are real. We have some of that data, but not all
of it. The U.S. government can collect and give credence to
the data so that markets, forest owners, and consumers all
have faith in it.
______

Supplementary Material Submitted by David Antonioli, Chief Executive
Officer, Verra
Verra is a Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit that administers the
world's foremost crediting program in voluntary carbon markets, the
Verified Carbon Standard (VCS) Program, which has registered over 1,700
projects and issued over 760 million credits from many different types
of activities, land types, and contexts around the world.
Verra was honored to provide testimony at the House Agriculture
Committee hearing on Voluntary Carbon Markets in Agriculture and
Forestry on September 23, 2021, and we appreciate the opportunity to
submit additional input on a number of important questions and issues
raised by Representatives and witnesses. In providing this input, Verra
also expresses its willingness to respond to additional questions and
to provide additional information.
Overview of the role played by the Voluntary Carbon Market in the
sectoral climate transition:

The voluntary carbon market consists of several credible
crediting programs that issue real emission reductions and
removals. That said, new entrants and approaches are arising in
the market, such that buyers and investors must be careful
about the carbon credits that they purchase and retire.

In the 20 years of global practice, voluntary carbon markets
have demonstrated their transformative influence helping
sectors transition to more climate-friendly practices. Over
time, voluntary carbon markets have brought critical finance to
new practices that over time become common practice.

Voluntary carbon markets are operational now. Programs and
projects exist and are being put in place by stakeholders
across the U.S. in response to critically urgent climate
action. Demand for carbon credits is increasing with net-zero
commitments from private actors, and with that, credit prices
are increasing, and standardized procedures are being put in
place to ensure the rigor of credits being used (via, for
example, the Taskforce on Scaling Voluntary Carbon Markets).

While the enabling environment for government-driven action
comes together, the atmosphere can benefit today from emissions
reductions and removals undertaken in the context of voluntary
corporate and individual action. Voluntary carbon market
activity has helped foster synergies between the public sector,
the financial sector, and many private actors on the demand and
supply side. The increased collaboration helps shift sectoral
and national emissions profiles. Once climate-smart agriculture
and forestry practices are adopted, most continue to be used
due to the additional benefits received, underscoring the value
of providing carbon finance to support large-scale adoption.

Transparent information about the creation and use of carbon
credits in the voluntary market in the U.S. exists in the work
of recognized international standards, and it is important to
be able to access credit details to show the role of voluntary
carbon markets in meeting U.S. climate goals, across sectors,
and nationally.

Responses to questions:

1.  How can a single carbon market system work for such a diverse
industry like agriculture?

Verra's carbon crediting program provides a common framework to
ensure integrity and quality, including:

(1)  Carbon accounting methodologies (often known as protocols in the
U.S.);

(2)  Independent expert auditing;

(3)  Registry procedures ensuring transparency.

However, within that framework, there is considerable flexibility
for landowners to bring forward a variety of high-integrity crediting
project types. Voluntary carbon markets can reduce or remove emissions
and be implemented in one of several sectoral scopes, including
Agriculture, Forestry, and Other Land Uses (AFOLU), transport, energy,
and construction.
Although every project's `product' is tons of carbon, every project
chooses what activities it will undertake to remove or reduce carbon
emissions. The list of available methodologies is a menu of options
that landowners, and more likely groups of landowners, can assess for
applicability. Verra's methodologies often have modules to accommodate
different land-use types, while practices included can be selected for
use incrementally. New methodologies enable new opportunities for new
project types.
In the agriculture sector, Verra has approved six (6) methodologies
that quantify changes in soil organic carbon stocks and/or nitrous
oxide and methane emissions. Management practices covered by these
methodologies include improved cropland and grassland management such
as reduced tillage, cover cropping, and rotational grazing. Our most
recent methodology covers most of these practices and was developed
with the support of U.S. company Indigo Ag. We also recently approved
an accounting methodology that quantifies reductions in methane
emissions through the use of feed additives that suppress microbial
activity in ruminant livestock.

2.  Do methodologies (protocols) take too long to develop?

A methodology to develop a project is proposed by those who will
develop a project that will issue carbon credits on their land. Verra's
methodology development experience combines emissions quantification
approaches from private actors, our rigorous science-based rule-making
process, and input from leading scientists in the field.
Verra's methodology development takes an average of 1.5 years. The
aforementioned Improved Agricultural Land Management methodology
developed by Indigo Ag was approved in under 1 year. Verra's 43
methodologies span sectors and cover a large number of different
activities within sectors. We are continually reviewing new proposed
methodologies and updating existing methodologies.

3.  How can we be sure selling carbon credits will not impact food
production?

Generating carbon credits is not a commodity that will take the
place of crops or other farming, principally because of the scale of
revenues--revenues from carbon are not likely to supplant revenues from
the sale of crops. Instead, revenues from sequestering carbon can help
farmers adopt more sustainable agricultural practices, which tend to
result in higher yields and more drought-resistant fields that are also
able to better handle floods. That is why carbon crediting tends to
work in favor of both food production and farmers. Methodologies such
as the Improved Agricultural Land Management methodology include
applicability conditions that specifically prohibit declines in crop
productivity resulting from the project activity, precisely to avert
impacts on food production.

4.  Does managing land for carbon credits disregard other
environmental and social benefits?

Since its founding, voluntary carbon markets in the ``Agriculture,
Forestry and Other Land Use'' (AFOLU) categories have aimed to drive
finance to land use practices that protect environmental and social
benefits. Verra was the first crediting program to recognize
sustainable development outcomes for AFOLU projects by labeling carbon
credits with the Climate, Community & Biodiversity (CCB) Standard in
2005. In early 2021, half of all AFOLU carbon credits had this label.
The science backing linkages between emissions management practices
and outcomes related to other benefits are becoming more prevalent and
better understood. On the environmental side, this includes factors
such as improved water quality, soil health, biodiversity conservation,
reduced erosion, increased climate resilience, and flood protection. On
the social side, we see improvements in health, income generation, job
creation, women's empowerment, and economic diversification. Projects
that demonstrate such benefits can provide additional revenue for
farmers, ranchers, and other landowners; according to publicly
available market pricing data, buyers are willing to pay a premium for
credits from such projects. Verra's Sustainable Development Verified
Impact Standard (SD VISta), for example, allows projects to request
certification of these benefits.

5.  Aren't there concerns about the quality of carbon? How good is
your soil carbon MRV (monitoring, reporting, and
verification)?

Verra prides itself on being science-based. In 2020, we convened an
agriculture land management working group that includes some of the
world's leading soil scientists from U.S. land-grant universities and
beyond. We are informed by these experts and believe that the
monitoring approaches and tools employed in our methodologies represent
the latest state of the science. We recognize that there are exciting
advances in the understanding of soil carbon dynamics and believe that
the science points to the ability of improved practices such as cover
cropping, organic inputs, and minimum soil disturbance to maintain and
grow long-term soil carbon stocks. As science evolves, we update our
approaches to ensure that the rigor of monitoring and quantification
results in real and credible carbon crediting for agricultural
projects.
As described previously, Verra's methodologies establish how
project proponents must monitor, report, and verify emissions. The
methodology development process also includes a specific step where the
methodology itself gets validated and verified by an independent
auditor that is globally certified to ISO standards and the
International Accreditation Forum. All methodologies are also submitted
to public consultation before being approved by Verra.
We recognize that, particularly in the last few years, a variety of
carbon credit approaches have arisen, offering varying degrees of
rigor. Some of these approaches differ from globally accepted
principles of carbon crediting from established independent crediting
programs. In that light, there is a role for questions and skepticism.
We value the opportunity to highlight the quality and integrity of the
carbon credits that Verra issues.

6.  How do you guarantee permanence? What liability do farmers face
in the event of a wildfire?

In 2007, Verra established a global buffer pool to address the risk
of non-permanence of carbon emission reductions and removals. Each
AFOLU project must contribute a percentage of their verified reduction
to the AFOLU buffer pool based on an assessment of risk using a non-
permanence risk tool, which is itself periodically reassessed. This
buffer pool is now the world's largest and most diversified (by project
type and geography), serving to ensure the permanence of all AFOLU
credits issued by Verra. Today, the buffer pool has 58 million credits
that can be used to cover carbon stock losses from any AFOLU project.
If and as reversals occur in any single project in the system, the
carbon losses resulting from the event are quantified and reported on.
Losses are covered through the cancellation of an equivalent number of
buffer credits from the buffer pool. This ensures that issued credits
still represent real emission reductions.
If credits beyond those placed in the buffer by a specific project
are lost due to causes outside of a landowner's control (e.g., fire),
they are provided insurance by other credits in the buffer, so the
landowner does not have to repay these credits directly.

7.  How can forest owners operate a project and still maintain
working land?

Landowners undertake the desired VCS project activities on the
extent of their land that they wish to include in a project. Various
methodologies include activities that allow for the continued economic
development of the forest resource while the project is in place, e.g.,
Improved Forest Management, Reduced Impact Logging.
In practice, the vast majority of AFOLU projects integrate the
finance of the voluntary carbon market with other productive activities
of the land, such as silvopastoral crops, tourism, obtaining non-wood
forest products or timber products, and even incomes from local Payment
for Environmental Services (PES) mechanisms that can be associated with
water supply, watershed maintenance, and/or scenic beauty.

8.  There are many early adopters of practices that increase carbon
already. Will landowners be able to benefit given that some
government programs pay for conservation outcomes?

There is no provision in Verra's rules that states that a landowner
cannot receive non-carbon funding in addition to the funding provided
by carbon finance. Cost-share funding from government agencies does not
preclude a farmer from accessing carbon finance. In many cases, carbon
finance may be needed in addition to other sources of funding to make
it financially feasible to carry out the project activity with the
level of carbon quantification, monitoring, and reporting required to
create a verified carbon credit. Receiving payments for implementation
of best management practices, for example, would be allowed as long as
it did not affect the additionality of the project.
It is paramount that Verra maintain the integrity of high-quality
carbon credits by guaranteeing their additionality. Nonetheless, we do
not render stakeholders ineligible if they have begun implementing good
practices. For example, Verra allows a 5 year timeframe for projects to
be registered following the start of activities in order to allow
projects time to complete the required documentation and the validation
process. Furthermore, our Improved Agricultural Land Management
methodology enables landowners to add new practices to existing best
management practices already used on their land in order to generate
credits for these new practices.
The additionality test in the Improved Agricultural Land Management
methodology uses a sociocultural barrier test combined with common
practice, not just financial feasibility assessment.

The sociocultural barrier test assesses whether there is de
facto resistance to instituting the practice, and the carbon
finance would create the incentive to implement.

The common practice test confirms that for projects in a
specific location, where a practice is not carried out by at
least 20% of the farms in the area, then it can be deemed
additional and eligible for assessment.

The financial additionality assessment which relates to regulatory
surplus notes that often public funding is not sufficient to enable the
activity to take place. Where it can be demonstrated that carbon
funding is still needed to actually pursue the activity on a given
site, the project can be considered.
Finally, early adopters benefit from the climate-smart agriculture
and forestry management practices (e.g., drought protection, flood
control) they engage in, regardless of the source of funding. Once
adopted, most of the practices continue to be used due to the notable
benefits received.

9.  Will small- and mid-size farmers be able to benefit, or is it
mostly for large businesses?

As a mission-driven nonprofit organization, Verra seeks to increase
the accessibility of the benefits from carbon finance to a range of
landowner and business sizes based on successfully implementing high-
integrity projects.
A standard approach to enable smaller-scale actors to engage in
voluntary carbon markets is through the creation of `grouped' projects.
In this approach, a variety of landowners bring together geographically
disparate activities taking place across a predefined area, thereby
leveraging economies of scale to reduce individual transaction costs.
Grouped projects are common in the land-use sector. A recent American
Forests Foundation methodology that Congressman Bishop mentioned during
the September 23 hearing is aimed specifically at allowing smaller
forest owners to engage by offering a platform for them to access
carbon payments.
Verra also continuously innovates to facilitate greater
participation by small-scale landowners. This includes:

Streamlining methodology frameworks via modular approaches
where project proponents choose the appropriate activities and
do not need to convert their entire land management to carbon.

Simplifying validation and verification processes for small-
scale projects.

Maintaining lower fees for small-scale projects to register
and issue credits through Verra.

10. How can farmers participate if there are so many barriers to
entry? Do farmers get any real income since this is so
expensive?

The voluntary carbon market has many requirements, by necessity. To
the extent that they create barriers to entry, they are not ``proof''
of the failure of the market. In fact, they demonstrate a rigorous
mechanism based on quality-related parameters that ensure that credits
that are used by companies to offset their emissions are real,
measurable, permanent, and additional.
Farmers need a way to diversify their revenue, to help them secure
benefits for their families, and to maintain ownership of their working
lands. While various startup costs in the more established carbon
markets might represent a hurdle, the market itself has brought about
solutions over the last 20 years, including the design of early-stage
finance mechanisms and forward contracts.
Importantly, the investments and support that government agencies
can make to support the scaling of an equitable and efficient market
are aimed at enabling broader use of voluntary carbon markets. Many of
the transaction costs faced in verifying a carbon project are not paid
to the crediting program for registration and issuance of credits, but
relate to the processing, monitoring and verification of the project's
emissions data. New entrants can be supported in addressing these costs
by, for example:

i.  Providing necessary data sources,

ii.  Helping to make data accessible,

iii.  Working with existing technical expertise,

iv.  Developing training and capacity building,

v.  Supporting carbon platforms and other tools.

11. Isn't it too early for the government to get involved if
voluntary carbon markets are so new?

It is not too early for the government to get involved. Building a
robust solution to address the climate emergency cannot wait, and given
the number of options farmers and landowners have to generate carbon
credits, there is quite a bit of confusion that could readily be
addressed by targeted government intervention. All approaches (e.g.,
public, private, and public-private) need to come online to scale up
action. Voluntary carbon markets have over 20 years of global
experience and are up and running. New U.S.-based buyers and sellers
are entering daily. Government support on targeted elements would
multiply the benefits that voluntary carbon markets can bring to
farmers, ranchers and foresters and make the market more accessible.
Government should prioritize:

Reducing confusion in the market and among farmers and
forest owners in respect of what constitutes a high-quality
carbon credit:

Providing clarity around basic market structure and
the roles provided by different parties can help landowners
navigate the process;

Supplementing landowner understanding will allow them
to focus their attention on those crediting programs that
are more likely to generate units that will have long-term
value in the market.

Research on the emissions outcomes of practices that can
take place across different land types:

Making this data available for landowners and
technical experts to set up their projects will clear a
significant hurdle required to demonstrate real and
measurable project activities;

This data can support new and more rapid methodology
(protocol) development;

This effort can leverage a recent White House
monitoring, reporting, and verification Initiative that is
bringing a whole of government and society approach to
compiling and developing the best available data related to
carbon mitigation and management.

Capacity-building and technical assistance by government
entities will increase awareness and understanding of the
development and accreditation process:

Training workshops and accessible information
platforms will level the playing field for new market
entrants;

Enabling connections with a significant number of
experienced carbon market actors.

Support related to finance and start-up costs:

As described earlier, supporting projects by
complementing their data needs and availability, and by
providing technical expertise, will reduce a large part of
project start-up costs;

Helping lower costs of the independent third-party
auditors is a worthy consideration;

Providing seed funding, low-interest loans and
financial support for new projects.

Establish a carbon bank by investing in carbon credits held
by the public-sector:

Supports lowering costs for projects as they would not
need to subtract from the number of credits they can sell
by providing credits to an independent buffer;

Serves as a mechanism for providing permanence
assurance in face of fire risk and other losses.
______

Submitted Letter by Earthjustice
September 23, 2021

Hon. David Scott,
Chairman,
House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

Thank you for the opportunity to testify on the role of voluntary
carbon markets in the agriculture and forestry sectors, and how to take
advantage of these sectors' tremendous prospects to both reduce
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and restore the amount of carbon lost
from soil. This testimony inspects the effectiveness of market schemes
as a climate solution, and offers recommendations on holistic, scalable
approaches to agriculture and land management as part of our national
response to climate change.
There is no doubt that agriculture must be part of any solution to
the climate crisis. Of course, agriculture is highly vulnerable to the
more extreme and variable weather that climate change is bringing, and
our food and economic security depend upon both stabilizing our climate
and increasing the resilience of our food system. More relevant here,
and usually not recognized, agriculture is a major contributor to
climate change, and we simply cannot reach our climate goals without
more aggressively and effectively addressing this contribution.
Agriculture's contribution is equivalent to approximately \1/3\ of U.S.
total GHG emissions--about the same as the transportation sector--when
properly calculated to include all climate change impacts related to
agriculture.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See EPA, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks
1990-2019 (2021), https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2021-04/
documents/us-ghg-inventory-2021-main-text.pdf. EPA concludes that
agriculture's GHG emissions are about 10% of total U.S. GHG emissions;
as explained below, this approach significantly understates the correct
figure.
Editor's note: references annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fortunately, we can be confident that agriculture can play a
pivotal role in tackling the climate crisis. Implementation of proven
and well-documented climate-friendly agricultural practices can
increase the amount of carbon removed from the atmosphere, increase the
amount of carbon stored in soil, and/or reduce agricultural emissions
of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and methane. These practices will
also often increase resilience to extreme weather, reduce environmental
and public health harms, and, in most cases, over time, improve
producer productivity or profitability. While proven, these practices
are used on only small portions of U.S. farmland; policy changes are
needed to dramatically accelerate their adoption. Crafting that policy
is the task of this Committee.
The urgency of the climate crisis must be met with effective
answers. We offer this testimony to address key issues concerning the
use of carbon markets in agriculture as a proposed climate solution and
explore the following points:

1.  Any climate solution must account for the true climate impact of
agriculture, which is approximately \1/3\ of all U.S. GHG
emissions.

2.  There are a number of agroecological practices that provide
proven ways to reduce GHG emissions and sequester and store
carbon. Scaling up these efforts and funding additional
research into them offer an effective solution to the
climate crisis.

3.  Carbon markets do not provide an effective climate solution. They
are impermanent, uncertain, and based on a scientific
fallacy, all of which undermines their credibility. They
are also historically inequitable, and fail to address
longstanding environmental justice concerns.
I. Agriculture's True Climate Impact
As lawmakers analyze solutions for tackling the climate crisis, it
is imperative they understand the true climate footprint of the
agricultural sector. Though the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
estimates that agriculture is responsible for about 10% of U.S. GHG
emissions,\2\ this figure excludes many factors that contribute
additional emissions from the sector. This figure does not account for
emissions from on-farm fuel and electricity use (See figure below, Bar
2), emissions associated with the manufacture of agricultural inputs
like fertilizer (See figure below, Bar 3), or emissions downstream of
production such as food processing, distribution and food waste.
Additionally, these estimates do not account for the impacts of methane
on policy-relevant timescales, as they utilize 100 year timeframes
rather than a more relevant 20 year timeframe (GWP20) accurately
reflecting methane's concentrated warming impacts (See figure below,
Bar 4).\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See EPA, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks
1990-2019 (2021), https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2021-04/
documents/us-ghg-inventory-2021-main-text.pdf.
\3\ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2013:
The Physical Science Basis Ch. 8, at 714 tbl. 8-7 (2014) at 720.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A major omission in this account of agriculture's climate footprint
is related to land use. Past and ongoing conversion to cropland and
grazing land has resulted in enormous losses of stored carbon, and
agricultural activities pose ongoing threats to the magnitude and
persistence of the remaining soil carbon stocks. Furthermore, this
estimate does not include the impact of continued land use, i.e., the
continuing yearly impact of prior conversions of natural lands to
agriculture.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Matthew Hayek, et al., The Carbon Opportunity Cost of Animal-
Sourced Food Production on Land, 4 Nature Sustainability 21 (Jan.
2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The use of land for growing crops or raising livestock means that
agricultural land--62% of the continental United States--cannot be used
for other purposes, including those that could have a very different
climate impact, for example by sequestering or storing carbon in
grassland or forest land. A more accurate and complete assessment of
agriculture's climate impact would include the ``quantity of carbon
that could be sequestered annually if [that land] were instead devoted
to regenerating forest [or grassland].'' \5\ See figure below, Bars 5
and 6. Adding these climate change impacts to the annual food system
emissions would very dramatically increase agriculture's true climate
change footprint: ``the cumulative potential of carbon dioxide removal
on land currently occupied by animal agriculture is comparable in order
of magnitude to the past decade of global fossil fuel emissions.'' \6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Timothy Searchinger, et al., Assessing the Efficiency of
Changes in Land Use for Mitigating Climate Change, 564 Nature 249 (Dec.
13, 2018).
\6\ See Hayek supra note 7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thus, when correctly calculated to include all agriculture related
climate change impacts, including the foregone sequestration potential
of agricultural land use, it is clear that the overall impact of
agriculture to climate change is equivalent to far more than only 10%
of U.S. GHG emissions. A more complete accounting of these
contributions including each of the factors laid out above raises this
estimate to at least \1/3\ of U.S. direct GHG emissions, closer in
magnitude to total emissions from the transportation sector. This
estimate is in line with numerous recent estimates at the global scale,
which place agricultural emissions at \1/3\ or more of anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions.\7\ Any solution to the climate crisis must
focus not only on agriculture's potential to store more carbon in the
soil, but also on the need to reduce agriculture's GHG emissions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Id. See Crippa, M., Solazzo, E., Guizzardi, D., et al. Food
systems are responsible for a third of global anthropogenic GHG
emissions. Nat. Food 2, 198-209 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-
021-00225-9; See also, Sonja J. Vermeulen, et al., Climate Change and
Food Systems. Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 37 Ann. Rev.
Env't & Resources 195 (2012).

II. A Number of Agroecological Practices Provide Proven Ways to Reduce
GHG Emissions and Sequester and Store Carbon in Soil.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Inventory of U.S.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks 1990-2019 (2021) at Table 2-7. [2]
Id. Table 2-12. [3] Values adjusted using 20 year global warming
potentials for N
2
O and CH
4
. [4] Id. Table 2-8.
[5] Hayek, M.N., Harwatt, H., Ripple, W.J., et al. The carbon
opportunity cost of animal-sourced food production on land. Nat.
Sustain. 4, 21-24 (2021). Annualized, U.S. value from personal
communication with author. [6] U.S. EPA including emissions from
ammonia production, nitric acid production, composting, phosphoric acid
production, anaerobic digestion at biogas facilities, and 75% of
landfill emissions. Table ES-2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Several climate-friendly practices with demonstrated benefits are
available to reduce agriculture's GHG footprint. A large body of
scientific literature, in addition to traditional knowledge and
experience, support the environmental benefits of these practices,
making them excellent candidates for effectively and efficiently
increasing carbon sequestration, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and
building climate resiliency. However, due to financial and technical
barriers, adoption of some of the most effective climate-friendly
practices remains low. Lawmakers should focus greater attention on
incentivizing adoption of practices with the greatest climate benefits,
while also supporting continued research on how to most effectively
adopt these practices at scale across the nation, as these practices
offer a true climate solution.
Agroforestry has a strong potential for reducing the net climate
footprint of agriculture--with realistic rates of adoption leading to
carbon sequestration rates equal in magnitude to over \1/3\ of fossil
fuel emissions in the U.S.\9\ Agroforestry practices, including alley
cropping, silvopasture, and riparian forest buffers, integrate or re-
introduce woody vegetation into crop and animal farming systems where
the landscape would naturally support such vegetation. Alley cropping
systems integrate trees and shrubs into crop production, while
silvopasture refers to the integration of trees and shrubs with
livestock activities.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See Ranjith P. Udawatta & Shibu Jose, Agroforestry Strategies
to Sequester Carbon in Temperate North America, 86 Agroforestry Sys.
225 (2012).
\10\ See, e.g., Shibu Jose & Sougata Bardhan, Agroforestry for
Biomass Production and Carbon Sequestration: An Overview, 86
Agroforestry Sys. 105 (2012); see also Ranjith P. Udawatta & Shibu
Jose, Agroforestry Strategies to Sequester Carbon in Temperate North
America, 86 Agroforestry Sys. 225 (2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Improved nutrient management is another practice with enormous
climate benefits. Synthetic nitrogen fertilizer application and other
agricultural soil management practices account for more than \1/2\ of
greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture. In addition to representing
a large proportion of the environmental footprint of agriculture, these
emissions are responsible for over \3/4\ of all nitrous oxide emissions
across sectors in the U.S.\11\ Reducing nitrous oxide emissions from
agriculture is particularly urgent as the warming potential of nitrous
oxide is 265-298 times greater than carbon dioxide.\12\ Improving
nutrient management practices, including precision application, cover
crops and longer and more varied crop rotations (which naturally
provide nutrients and thus reduce fertilizer needs), using natural
rather than synthetic fertilizer, riparian buffers, and soil
amendments, can greatly reduce the climate footprint of agriculture by
reducing nitrous oxide emissions while also preventing nutrient runoff
and avoiding air and water pollution from excessive fertilizer use.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See EPA, Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks
1990-2018, 2-4 (2020), https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/
2020-04/documents/us-ghg-inventory-2020-main-text.pdf.
\12\ Id. at 1-10, Table 1-3.
\13\ See Nat. Res. Conservation Serv., Conservation Practice
Standard Conservation, Nutrient Management Code 590 (2012), https://
www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb1046433.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Diversified conservation crop rotations and cover crops can also
help increase soil carbon sequestration by introducing a wider range of
inputs into soil, maintaining soil cover throughout the year, and
minimizing soil disturbance and erosion.\14\ By building organic
matter, these practices, in addition to reducing the need for synthetic
fertilizers, can improve water quality, improve water retention and
thus reduce the need for water inputs, and mitigate nitrous oxide
emissions. In addition, these practices can reduce the vulnerability of
crops to pests and pathogens, thereby reducing the need for pesticides
that are harmful to pollinators and water quality.\15\ Similarly, cover
crops significantly increase soil carbon by increasing carbon inputs
from plants and reducing erosion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See, e.g., Christopher Poeplauab & Axel Dona, Carbon
Sequestration in Agricultural Soils via Cultivation of Cover crops--A
Meta-analysis, 33 Agric., Ecosystems & Env't 200 (2015); Jinshi Jian,
et al., A Meta-analysis of Global Cropland Soil Carbon Changes Due to
Cover Cropping, 143 Soil Biology & Biochemistry 107, 735 (2020); see
also R. Lal, Soil Carbon Sequestration and Aggregation By Cover
Cropping, 70 J. Soil & Water Conservation 329 (2015); C. Tonitto, et
al., Replacing Bare Fallows With Cover Crops in Fertilizer-Intensive
Cropping Systems: A Meta-analysis of Crop Yield and N Dynamics, 112
Agric., Ecosystems & Env't 58 (2006); Meagan E. Schipanski, A Framework
for Evaluating Ecosystem Services Provided By Cover Crops in
Agroecosystems, 125 Agric. Sys. 12 (2014); Jason P. Kaye & Miguel
Quemada, Using Cover Crops to Mitigate and Adapt to Climate Change. A
Review, 37 Agronomy Sustainable Dev. 4 (2017).
\15\ See Giovanni Tamburini, et al., Agricultural Diversification
Promotes Multiple Ecosystem Services Without Compromising Yield, 6
Sci. Advances 2020 eaba1715 (2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Protecting land in conservation programs and expanding enrollment
in such programs are among the most effective strategies to reduce the
climate footprint of agriculture. In particular, avoiding conversion of
grasslands has been identified as the most impactful agricultural
activity in the U.S. to mitigate climate change.\16\ Additionally,
preventing conversion of natural lands is critical for protecting
biodiversity and allowing wildlife habitat to remain intact.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See Joseph E. Fargione, et al., Natural Climate Solutions for
the United States, 4 Sci. Advances eaat1869 (2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Each of these practices has proven climate benefits. They can
increase the amount of carbon removed from the atmosphere, increase the
amount of carbon stored in soil, and/or reduce agricultural emissions
of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and methane. These practices will
also often increase resilience to extreme weather, reduce environmental
and public health harms, and, in most cases, over time, improve
producer productivity or profitability. However, they are now used on
only a small portion of U.S. grazing and crop land. It must be a policy
priority to greatly accelerate adoption of these practices, as well as
increasing investment in research into their benefits and technical
assistance to help with their adoption. Research, outreach and
technical support, and financial assistance to increase adoption of
these practices together ameliorate agriculture's overall climate
impact.
III. Carbon Markets Are Not an Effective Climate Solution.
There is a tremendous amount of growing interest in the use of
carbon markets in agriculture as a way to reduce GHG emissions and
increase soil carbon stocks. While there may be effective ways private
companies can invest in climate-friendly farming--for example, paying
farmers within their supply chain to reduce their emissions or to
sequester more carbon in the soil--adoption of carbon market or
``offset'' schemes raises a number of concerns. Several of the
challenges are technical, such as those related to measurement and
verification, additionality, and permanence. Other challenges are more
historical, social, and economic, such as those related to equity,
access, and intersections with pollution- or emissions-reduction
mandates. Almost all of these issues are inextricably tied to the
realities of our current agricultural system and cannot be easily
addressed or dismissed. Together, these concerns raise grave doubts as
to whether private carbon offset markets can and should be part of any
climate solution for the agriculture sector.
A. Market Schemes Are Impermanent, Based on a Scientific Fallacy, and
Uncertain.
As an initial matter, it is critical to recognize that climate
change is attributed to the removal of large amounts of fossil carbon,
which would have remained sequestered in the absence of anthropogenic
activities. In contrast to these slow-cycling fossil stocks, carbon in
biogenic pools including vegetation and soils is inherently impermanent
and perpetually vulnerable to decomposition. Thus, as a matter of
logic, market schemes that depend on impermanent carbon sequestration
and storage cannot be used to offset fossil fuel emissions. Rather,
these permanent emissions require a permanent solution.
Moreover, offset-based schemes are based on a scientific fallacy
that equates increases in soil carbon stocks with past and ongoing
losses of fossil carbon. They allow industry to buy credits for carbon
storage in soil to be used to discount fossil fuel emissions. However,
these are not at all equivalent. Building soil organic carbon is
important in part because it helps us recover from the debt of decades
of soil organic carbon losses from agricultural intensification.
Offsets are based on the false premise that restoration of
anthropogenic soil carbon losses should be counted as an offset for
ongoing fossil emissions--before we've come close to repaying the
enormous debt of carbon losses from agricultural activity. Soil carbon
will never be able to offset ongoing losses of fossil carbon. Soil
carbon is inherently impermanent compared to fossil carbon and is
increasingly vulnerable to loss as global change accelerates losses of
soil organic carbon through warming. And while improvements in methods
to characterize and quantify permanence are critical to improve our
understanding of soil carbon storage, it is important to note that
improvements in measurement themselves do not enhance permanence or
alter that foundational difference in permanence between soil organic
carbon and fossil carbon.
In addition, carbon sequestration in agricultural lands is complex
and nuanced, and currently, more scientific research needs to be
prioritized for offset market schemes to be credible, effective, and
fair. There are looming uncertainties and challenges around measurement
and verification and additionality that render these schemes
questionable as a climate solution.
Measurement and verification issues may relate to (1) verifying
practice adoption, (2) measuring outcomes for improving efficacy and
optimizing incentivized practices, or (3) measuring outcomes for direct
payments related to the magnitude of an outcome (e.g., payments per
unit carbon sequestered or per unit emission reduced). We are doubtful
that programs that are based not on adoption of practices but
purportedly on precise determinations of emission reductions or soil
organic carbon changes over time can--at least in the near term--be
credible and effective at a reasonable cost. The current gold-standard
of detecting real changes in soil organic carbon over time requires
extensive, direct sampling of soil cores followed by in-lab analyses
using, for example, loss on ignition. There remain unresolved questions
as to the necessary frequency, depth, and spatial distribution of soil
samples necessary for accurate measurements (not to mention the
additional measurements required for information related to permanence,
additionality, or any other components of soil health). Even with
extensive sampling, detecting small changes in soil organic carbon over
time is challenging.
Some programs seek to pair some amount of actual sampling with
cheaper and less time-consuming approaches including spectroscopic
measurements, modeling, and surrogate measurements.\17\ These
additional approaches are highly attractive to industry due to their
reduced costs of implementation, yet they currently lack the accuracy
and precision needed in a market context to substitute for direct
measurements. As a result, we have low confidence in estimating
specific, local changes in soil organic carbon from modeling based on
management practices alone without direct measurements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Oldfield, E.E., A.J. Eagle, R.L. Rubin, J. Rudek, J.
Sanderman, D.R. Gordon. 2021. Agricultural soil carbon credits: Making
sense of protocols for carbon sequestration and net greenhouse gas
removals. Environmental Defense Fund, New York, New York. edf.org/
sites/default/files/content/agricultural-soil-carbon-credits-
protocolsynthesis.pdf. See also Emily Bruner & Jean Brokish, Illinois
Sustainable Ag Partnership, Ecosystem Market Information: Background
and Comparison Table (2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Carbon market schemes must also consider the concept of
additionality, i.e., how much additional carbon is stored in the soil
relative to what would have been stored in the absence of the scheme,
or how much emissions are reduced through implementation of a practice
relative to emissions that would have occurred in the absence of the
scheme.\18\ Determining the baseline for additionality determinations
can be difficult. For example, producers already implementing climate-
friendly practices may not be able to further increase soil carbon.
However, they could switch to higher GHG emitting conventional
practices, so arguably the continuation of sound practices is
additional. Determining the baseline may also be difficult if emissions
could or should be reduced through other means. For example, there
tends to be more opportunity for additionality with practices that
directly increase sequestration in soils compared to practices that
reduce certain GHG emissions (e.g., manure methane from CAFOs) or
reward avoided conversion of non-croplands, as these outcomes may (and
we believe should) be achieved through alternative non-payment
approaches. In evaluating additionality, it is important to recognize
that soil carbon gains in these schemes are generally helping to
restore lost soil carbon stocks due to prior agricultural activities
and that these gains may still leave soil carbon stocks depleted
relative to what would be stored in soil in the absence of agricultural
activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ See Sharon Billings, et al., Soil Organic Carbon is Not Just
for Soil Scientists: Measurement Recommendations for Diverse
Practitioners, 31 Ecol. Appl. e02290 (2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, offset schemes focus exclusively on soil carbon storage
and thus reflect a narrow view of soil functions. Carbon storage is
only one of the many ecological functions of soils and incentivizing
continual increases in soil carbon everywhere independent of
considerations of other ecosystem processes is neither realistic nor
necessarily beneficial for soil fertility, biodiversity, plant
productivity, GHG emissions, or other ecosystem functions. Proposed
offset schemes in agriculture are typically based on the false premise
that soil carbon should be constantly increasing everywhere and that
increases in soil carbon are always indicators of improved soil
function. While soil erosion and degradation should be addressed, those
cannot be adequate surrogates for a broad climate solution and any such
ecological justifications should be examined carefully.
Thus, given the additional challenges and fallacies surrounding
these carbon markets, these schemes cannot and should not be used to
offset GHG compliance obligations, and do not provide an effective and
credible climate solution.
IV. Carbon Markets Are Not Equitably Accessible and Raise Environmental
Justice Concerns.
There are about two million farms, 400 million acres of cropland
and 800 million acres of pasture and rangeland in the country.\19\ Due
to a long, enduring history of discriminatory and exploitative
practices--including systemic denial of farm loans and other assistance
to Black, Indigenous People of Color (BIPOC) producers by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture--most of this land is owned by white farmers
and ranchers. Discriminatory practices and policies continue to plague
the agricultural sector.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service Census of
Agriculture 2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With this problematic history in mind, solutions to the climate
crisis should be designed to benefit and be accessible to small and
historically disadvantaged producers. Any system that pays producers to
adopt climate-friendly practices should be available to all producers
and must not become another mechanism through which the bigger and
white establishments reap the benefits while smaller farms and BIPOC-
owned and other historically excluded operations are left out. It must
also ensure that producers who have been using sustainable practices
for years are not excluded from receiving benefits simply because their
soil is already carbon rich or because they have already implemented
strategies for reducing emissions.
Congress should prioritize providing technical assistance and
outreach by diverse service providers with linguistic and cultural
competency, partnering with community-based organizations and local
community leaders who have earned trust of farmers and producers,
employing BIPOC experts to lead trainings on issues unique and salient
to local communities, and where possible, and make trainings and
technical assistance opportunities credit-bearing in partnership with
land-grant universities. In lieu of market schemes, Congress should
provide resources BIPOC farmers need to succeed--as a starting point,
support and funding for completing baseline soil health assessments,
debt relief, access to equipment, non-GMO seed, and access to
affordable land are chief priorities.
In addition, historically, environmental justice communities have
not benefited from market-based policies though they are the most
burdened by pollution-generating facilities. Equitable climate policies
must consider non-GHG co-pollutants and address local environmental
impacts to environmental justice communities. Thus, any market-based
proposal must be informed by input from the most impacted communities.
* * * * *
Congress faces a once-in-a-generation opportunity and obligation to
invest in agricultural solutions to the climate crisis and empower
farmers and ranchers to play key roles in addressing the warming
climate. Given the true climate impact of the agriculture sector and
the lingering questions and concerns on the validity and effectiveness
of carbon market schemes to provide sound climate change solutions and
direct benefits to our nation's farmers and ranchers, we urge Congress
to consider policy solutions and programs that incentivize adoption of
climate-stewardship practices that are evidenced to sequester carbon
and reduce GHG emissions. These practices not only effectively reduce
agriculture's climate footprint, but they also help build resilience,
improve water and air quality, and protect biodiversity. Support for
these practices and programs ensures that farmer livelihood and
agricultural resiliency are not tied to a volatile carbon market, where
the transaction costs are prohibitively high and the price of carbon
too low to ensure robust participation within the sector. Funding for
these practices, and for more research and technical assistance related
to them, provides a true solution to the growing climate crisis.
Respectfully submitted,

Earthjustice.
______

Submitted Questions
Response from Debbie Reed, Executive Director and Member, Board of
Directors, Ecosystem Services Market Consortium and Ecosystems
Market Research Consortium
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. Private voluntary carbon and ecosystem services markets
rely on standards to quantify, verify, and in the case of ESMC, certify
environmental outcomes that can be monetized into saleable credits.
These standards are crafted by international standard setting
organizations and rely on the most up to date climate science available
in order to verify claims are true representations of environmental
improvements. The recent rush to satisfy consumer demand for more
climate-friendly products has led to widespread claims of environmental
stewardship from companies and organizations seeking to capitalize on
this increasing market. Some claims are more dubious than others,
leading to accusations of `green washing' in the public discourse.
Ecosystem services markets that adhere to scientifically rigorous
quantification and verification standards for the credits they generate
bolster the integrity of environmental claims and protect buyers
(corporate food companies) and sellers (farmers and ranchers) of
environmental credits from unfair ``green washing'' labels.
By selling certified credits (credits that have been verified by
impact registries such as Gold Standard, Verra, etc.), it is possible
agricultural producers could highlight their participation in certified
carbon markets to their customers, and potentially command a premium
for those products. At the moment, ESMC is solely focused on fully
launching its market program in 2022 but, as with any burgeoning
market. we would anticipate further innovations and technological
advancements to follow as entrepreneurs continue to compete for credits
in this new market.
Response from Leonardo Bastos, Senior Vice President--Head of Global
Commercial Ecosystems, Bayer Crop Science
Question Submitted by Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress from
California
Question. Would you agree more technical assistance is needed to
help create a successful carbon market program? Could you please
elaborate on what Congress and this Administration can do to help
address the issue?
Answer. Yes, more technical assistance for farmers is important if
we are to incorporate climate-smart practices into production systems
so that farmers are successful in producing more sustainably. Farmers
have shown that they invest in more sustainable practices if there is a
clear positive impact on their yields. Academic research and data show
that climate sustainable practices do in fact positively impact yields,
but sustainable practices need to be implemented in ways that consider
the realities farmers face.
Bayer has endorsed the Growing Climate Solutions Act because we
think it will help provide farmers with technical assistance and
trusted advisors who can help them make the choices that work best for
their operations. But this Committee also has an opportunity to work
with USDA and voluntary private markets to provide increased technical
assistance in ways that could be targeted to help farmers with a
variety of climate-smart agriculture and carbon issues. We at Bayer
would be happy to help you in whatever way we can be of assistance.
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. This is such an important question because it gets to the
heart of the ways that farmers will adopt climate sustainable practices
at a large scale and see a financial benefit for doing so. Consumer
awareness is key to drive demand for products with lower carbon
footprints. There are nascent and niche markets for these products that
are currently limited but have the potential to grow as more consumers
from various market segments see value in carbon-smart products.
What we know is that consumers have shown that they will consider
paying a premium for environmentally sustainable products, and supply
chain partners want to deliver those products. Low-cost measurement and
tracking of carbon reductions associated with a product is a key tool
for helping farmers keep the added value attached to their sustainably
produced product and realize a profit from consumer demand.
Response from Brian Luoma, President and Chief Executive Officer, The
Westervelt Company; on behalf of National Alliance of Forest
Owners
Question Submitted by Hon. David Scott, a Representative in Congress
from Georgia
Question. You had eloquently stressed the importance of a working
forest and the significant role it plays in climate benefits by
displacing more carbon intensive alternatives. Do you agree then that
the Federal Government should do all it can to ensure that carbon
markets do not adversely affect the fiber supply of forest dependent
manufactures who play a critical role in maintaining a working forest?
Answer. At The Westervelt Company, we own and manage both forests
and mills. Forest owners seek to optimize the use of their resources.
Forests that are highly productive for products will continue to
provide wood for mills.
But almost all private working forest owners own land that isn't
ideal for growing 2x4s--whether that's marginal lands or regions where
marketable timber may not be the top priority, or in communities that
no longer have the local manufacturing infrastructure to use trees.
These forests are used for other purposes and may be used for carbon.
One of the reasons we talk about markets for forest carbon and wood
construction in tandem is because they are part of one system, and we
have to take a systemic approach to fiber production and carbon storage
and sequestration. The bottom line is that, when it comes to carbon, we
are looking for additional markets, not replacement markets.
U.S. forest owners know how to grow trees--we're the best in the
world. If a voluntary carbon market can bring a new revenue stream to
forest owners, especially on marginal lands not suited for lumber
production, forest owners will be able to make the significant
investments necessary to optimize for both wood construction as well as
carbon sequestration and storage potential.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Kim Schrier, a Representative in Congress
from Washington
Question 1. Mr. Luoma, in your testimony, you mention the challenge
of increasing participation and confidence in forest carbon markets.
From your perspective, how can Congress support this effort? What
role do you see the Federal Government playing in forestry markets
specifically?
Answer. The Federal Government should help private markets succeed,
not take them over. For example, the Forest Service's Forest Products
Lab is a successful, long-standing partnership that helps drive
innovation in the marketplace, including the development of lifecycle
analysis for wood in the built environment. We encourage this kind of
collaboration and would like to see more of it.
The government can also play an important role in providing high
quality data, analysis and information sharing to help inform markets.
The Forest Service's Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program does
this for private working forests in a variety of ways. We can further
improve FIA to provide timely, useful data to inform carbon markets.
This data will help drive collaboration between the public and private-
sector and ensure that all parties have access to the same rigorous and
up-to-date data sets.
There are likely other relevant roles of government that can help
bolster markets for forest carbon and increased wood utilization. We
have a long history of partnerships between USDA and producers. We
should draw from that to help us build partnerships that strengthen
markets.
The House Agriculture Committee has three clear pathways to further
climate-smart policies supporting private working forests and forest
products:

1.  Help expand markets for forest carbon, increasing accessibility
and credibility. If there is a strong market signal for our
forests to sequester and store more carbon, we will do just
that.

2.  Encourage more sustainably sourced wood construction in the built
environment. It reduces the carbon footprint of the built
environment and supports forest retention and overall
carbon mitigation.

3.  Improve forest carbon data. Markets for carbon and markets for
climate-smart construction need data to prove that climate
benefits are real. We have some of that data, but not all
of it. The U.S. government can collect and give credence to
the data so that markets, forest owners, and consumers all
have faith in it.

Question 2. And given that around 40% of U.S. forests are publicly
owned, what opportunities do you see for public-private partnership in
the forestry carbon offset/market space?
Answer. I'm sure there is a good deal of room for innovation in the
carbon market space, but publicly owned forests are outside my area of
expertise.
Questions Submitted by Hon. Doug LaMalfa, a Representative in Congress
from California
Question 1. How is the risk of wildfires managed while marketing
carbon credits? For example, the Colville IFM Project, which burned
from the ``Bootleg Fire'' in August, represented 14 million tons of
offsets for the California compliance market. Are there liabilities for
buyers of these credits? Are there liabilities for landowners when they
lose a project to natural disasters?
Answer. Fire has always been a natural part of forest ecology in
North America. Severe wildfires like those we see in national headlines
are not, and they are a significant source of emissions. The EPA
estimates that annual wildfires emit around 140 million metric tons of
carbon annually, although that number varies from year to year.
Wildfire is a challenge in drier forests in the West, but it is not a
significant factor in the South where we operate. Fire is not
unexpected, so all forest carbon protocols include a buffer pool. A
buffer pool includes extra sequestered and stored carbon that
participants draw on in case of a loss. Buffer pools act like an
insurance policy and don't count toward carbon removals unless they are
used.

Question 2. Additionally, it seems that forests need to be working
forests in order to be effective in sequestering carbon. If land is set
aside and then never touched, there is going to be a fire risk. What do
you see as some alternatives that working forests could use to cover
the risk of wildfire as they sell carbon offsets?
Answer. At The Westervelt Company, we own and manage both forests
and mills. Forest owners seek to optimize the use of their resources.
Forests that are highly productive for products will continue to
provide wood for mills. One of the reasons we talk about markets for
forest carbon and wood construction in tandem is because they are part
of one system, and we have to take a systemic approach to fiber
production and carbon storage and sequestration.
Forest management is a critical part of successful carbon projects.
In fact, one type of carbon project, Improved Forest Management (IFM)
uses active forest management practices to achieve carbon offset goals.
For this reason, many carbon projects adopt many practices that can
also help them reduce fire risk.
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. Forestry has long pursued a certification path to ensure
sustainable practices in forest management. The U.S. is a global leader
in sustainable forest management. Multiple, credible third-party
certification systems are available in the United States to ensure
sustainable management practices in support of a diverse suite of
environmental benefits across carbon, water, and wildlife among others.
This includes programs to certify forests to a forest management
standard, chain of custody certification programs, and responsible
sourcing programs provided by the Sustainable Forestry Initiative, the
American Tree Farm System, and Forest Stewardship Council. In
accordance with the clarification made in the 2018 Farm Bill, all
qualified certification programs should be given equal treatment in any
Federal procurement or other climate change policy involving private
working forests. These programs are not specifically directed at
``climate-smart'' activities, but they demonstrate how certification
can be widely used and understood across a sector.
Response from David Antonioli, Chief Executive Officer, Verra
Question Submitted by Hon. Al Lawson, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from Florida
Question. My district is home to a number of major universities
including HBCUs. Mr. Antonioli, you stated that in order to meet zero
global emission by 2050, the nation would need to rapidly scale up
infrastructure to meet the demands of the voluntary carbon market. What
types of programs should we be focusing on at an academic level to help
prepare the future workforce to meet the demands in this growing
market?
Answer. We appreciate the positive outcomes that comes with the
increased demand for a workforce trained in skills related to
greenhouse gas and emissions management across many sectors of the
economy. A wide variety of business, finance, policy, management, and
science-based infrastructure will support an efficient scale-up of
voluntary carbon market activity. We recommend programs covering
greenhouse gas-related science and emission reduction practices, as
well as programs that increase expertise in monitoring, quantification
and verification of these practices. (This latter area is the only one
mentioned here that Verra itself is directly involved in in the context
of training for Validation and Verification Bodies).
GHG management sits within a broader context of climate change
science, mitigation and adaptation studies which are also critical
areas of knowledge to ensure that the voluntary market contributes to
national and global climate action imperatives. Finally, skills in
carbon footprint analysis, carbon accounting and inventories are also
critical for private and public sector actors.
Question Submitted by Hon. Eric A. ``Rick'' Crawford, a Representative
in Congress from Arkansas
Question. Everything we are talking about today is intended to
support farmer generated climate solutions. Many of us know the
operational lift and financial risk that goes into adopting new
practices. We need to maximize the portion of every incentive that
reaches the farmer. One inhibitor that we see in the market today is a
free, registry compliant, and accessible model for quantifying
emissions reductions and sequestered carbon. The USDA has invested
heavily in COMET-Farm, but it cannot be used today, without
modification, to satisfy protocol requirements. What investment and
research in COMET-Farm is needed to ensure carbon markets remain easily
accessible to growers?
Answer. While Verra has not analyzed in detail, or interacted with
the USDA about COMET-Farm, we are aware of challenges in using the tool
in its current form for the voluntary carbon markets. This includes the
inability to quantify the uncertainty associated with emission
reductions estimates, which is critical to ensuring the accuracy of the
estimates. As a result, this has implications for ensuring that changes
in practices lead to real emission reductions and removals.
Another aspect that might enable the COMET-Farm to foster access to
carbon markets is enhancing the transparency of the underlying datasets
and calculations used to make estimates of changes in greenhouse gases
when using the tool.
Verra's VM0042 Improved Agricultural Land Management methodology
has an accompanying module (VMD0053 Model Calibration, Validation, and
Uncertainty Guidance for the Methodology for Improved Agricultural Land
Management, v1.0) related to the use of models in agricultural
greenhouse gas projects. We suggest that the COMET-Farm technical team
review VMD0053 to identify areas of alignment and expansion for the
COMET-Farm tool.
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. The GHG accounting methodologies (protocols) used by Verra,
and the VCS (Verified Carbon Standard) make use of a variety of
practices and tools to support quantification and other practices that
farmers engage in at their sites. All of these practices can be easily
communicated through the project documentation that is required under
the VCS Program and which can be found in the Verra Registry. In short,
the registry provides a transparent means for project developers
(either farmers or companies they are working with to register their
activities and issue credits) to demonstrate the work they are doing on
the ground and the results they are generating (i,e., the carbon
removals they are achieving).
Beyond the GHG benefits farmers are generating, there are other
certification programs they can use to tell a broader story, about how
their new practices are increasing resilience against floods and
drought, enhancing habitat for wildlife, and improving water quality,
to name a few. Verra's Sustainable Development Verified Impact Standard
(SD Vista) \1\ and the Climate, Community & Biodiversity (CCB)
Standards \2\ can be used to demonstrate such non-carbon benefits, and
the certifications can also be used to label carbon credits issued
under the VCS Program in a simple and easy-to-use manner. These
certifications are also found on the Verra Registry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://verra.org/project/sd-vista/.
\2\ https://verra.org/project/ccb-program/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Response from Callie Eideberg, J.D., Director, Government Relations,
Environmental Defense Fund
Question Submitted by Hon. Al Lawson, Jr., a Representative in Congress
from Florida
Question. It has been well documented in this hearing that many
voluntary carbon markets have programs that are time consuming,
technical, and could require outside help. Because of this a
disproportionate number of large operators are benefiting from these
programs while small- and medium-scale operators struggle to gain
market entry.
In your opinion Ms. Eideberg, what can we do to ensure that carbon
programs like these are assessable and beneficial to small family-owned
farming operations, particularly minority and socially disadvantage
farmers?
Answer. Environmental Defense Fund offers the following
recommendations to ensure that carbon market benefits flow to
historically underserved producers and communities. Primarily, USDA
should prioritize input from organizations that directly serve
historically underserved producers. Additionally, there are several
design considerations that can be incorporated to support the equitable
access to market opportunities:

Conduct targeted outreach to organizations that directly
serve historically underserved producers to raise awareness of
program funding. Offer pre-development grants to support
proposal development and submissions, include organizations'
staff time in project budgets, and consider deadlines to allow
appropriate timelines for project development and proposal
writing.

Avoid burdensome application requirements and ensure that
eligibility criteria are defined broadly so as not to
disadvantage producers of color, small-scale producers and the
organizations that serve them due to scale or other operational
attributes--such as equipment availability or crop type that
differ along racial lines.

Connect to communities of color and build capacity for
future engagement through the Historically Black colleges and
universities and minority serving institutions. Develop a USDA
internship program directly tied to climate-smart agriculture,
possibly coordinated through the Climate Hubs, to contribute
toward building a future workforce, as well as harness the
innovation and brainpower of capable future farmers, ranchers,
foresters, and landowners.

Consider how best to include producers with a variety of
land ownership structures, small and low revenue operations,
and operations that lack clear title to their land.

Allow funding for technical assistance and take a broad view
of what qualifies for technical assistance when it serves the
purpose of enabling the participation of historically
underserved producers, which may require funding in greater
amounts to support additional staff, equipment, and other needs
required to be able to participate in climate-smart commodity
certification and marketing initiatives.

Consider carving out a specific amount or percentage of
climate-smart ag funding each year to be used toward projects
and overcome barriers to participation in climate-smart
commodity markets through collective action. For instance,
support producer cooperatives that can pool resources and
collectively generate climate-smart commodities, and prioritize
proposals that aggregate, or facilitate aggregation, of several
small, emerging or socially disadvantaged producers who can
pool GHG contributions and MRV processes.

Consider ways to reduce the burdens of data management on
small and disadvantaged farmers who may not have the enabling
technologies and resources available, while maintaining the
integrity of the overall program. For example, rely more
heavily on standard emissions factor values for practices
implemented, fund their access to farm management information
systems that can get producers started on the path to data-
driven decision, and fully fund any direct measurements.

Track and disclose public funding recipients regularly and
adapt program funding quickly if required to target diverse
populations.
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. EDF recently launched a new farm finance hub with resources
to help farmers and their financial partners realize the full value of
conservation investments. The website provides resources for finance
and insurance professionals, farmers and advisors, and policymakers.
business.edf.org/farm-finance/.
Response from David Milligan, President, National Association of Wheat
Growers
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. Thank you for this question. The ability for farmers to
capture an equitable share of the financial benefits tied to the
commodity they produce will be critical for the expansion of these
programs and efforts for low carbon, or climate-smart commodities and
related ecosystem service credits. As farmers undertake new and
different conservation practices and management strategies, they come
at a cost--maybe different seeds, equipment, time and labor needed--and
the overall approach must make financial sense for the grower. As
growers, we cannot undertake more up-front costs that don't have a
corresponding economic benefit and still stay in business. That isn't a
sustainable farming operation.
Today, the systems within commodity production are IP or identity
preserved systems that allow growers to receive additional value for
their specific crop traits and within wheat production, it is quality
or protein content of the crop that can add value to the crop, or at
least not result in a discount.
I cannot stress enough the importance of what you are asking.
Growers are historically price takers, and we must consider the impact
of these programs to equitably share value back to the grower. There
are also efforts like Field to Market that are working on supply chain
sourcing projects that operate on a mass-balance commodity accounting
approach, and may provide some up front financial incentives but don't
necessarily offer the opportunity for growers to sell their crop for
additional value.
Response from Jeanne Merrill, Policy Director, California Climate and
Agriculture Network
Question Submitted by Hon. Dusty Johnson, a Representative in Congress
from South Dakota
Question. Farmers are working hard to respond to company and
consumer demands for more climate-friendly products, but they often are
not rewarded in the market for the investments they make at the field
level. As this Committee works to build additional market certainty and
incentives that properly recognize the value that producers are
creating, are there tools or practices that are already working in the
marketplace that help farmers and ranchers to communicate the
investment and see the financial benefits of decisions they are making
at the farm level throughout the supply chain? As an example, in my
home state, companies such as the Farmers Business Network are
providing a way to certify low-carbon grain--and command a premium in
the marketplace--already (including in partnership with POET and a
pasta manufacturer) and can offer models for us to learn from.
Answer. Thank you, Congressman Johnson, for the opportunity to
address your question, following the recent House Committee on
Agriculture hearing on voluntary carbon markets in agriculture and
forestry.
The marketplace certification system that offers the most financial
benefit and stable marketplace for farmers and ranchers who are making
changes to their practices to produce climate-friendly products is the
certified organic agriculture program, regulated by USDA. Increasingly,
organic producers are making the connections between their low-input
farming systems with their related benefits of increased carbon
sequestration and reduced overall greenhouse gas emissions. The science
supports these claims.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ For a review of the science on organic agricultural production
and greenhouse gas emissions reductions, please see: https://
calclimateag.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Climate-Change-Solutions-
2018.pdf.
Editor's note: references annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, there are opportunities for a diversity of farm operations
to move towards climate-friendly production practices and possibly seek
support in the marketplace for those benefits. To explore this further,
we recently worked with Ferd Hoefner, former Policy Director with the
National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition (NSAC) and other
agricultural professionals to put together a memo outlining
opportunities to use the existing authority of the Commodity Credit
Corporation (CCC) to advance a diversity of climate change and
agriculture measures, including market-based support for climate-
friendly agricultural products. The complete memo can be found here:
https://calclimateag.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/USDA-CCC-Climate-
Resilience-and-Equity-Options-CalCAN-NSAC-10-19-21.pdf.
Below is an excerpt from the memo on market-based measures, which
could advance climate-friendly agricultural products with initial
funding from the CCC. We welcome the opportunity to discuss this
further with you and your staff. Thank you for your consideration.
* * * * *

------------------------------------------------------------------------

-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Specific Power #5--``Increase the domestic consumption of
agricultural commodities (other than tobacco) by expanding or aiding in
the expansion of domestic markets or by developing or aiding in the
development of new and additional markets, marketing facilities, and
uses for such commodities.''
------------------------------------------------------------------------

In connection with the Grass-based Agriculture option under
specific power #1, expand the domestic market for grassfed
beef, lamb, goat, and dairy, pasture-raised pork, and pastured
poultry to reap the climate benefits of these grass-based
production systems by investing CCC dollars in market research.
In addition, revision of FSIS label approval process to allow
for investigation of potentially misleading claims would help
further grow and protect the market for these products.

https://www.jdsupra.com/legalnews/fsis-advises-on-
animal-raising-label-70754/
https://sustainableagriculture.net/blog/fsis-
grassfed-update-label-claim/
https://www.ams.usda.gov/services/auditing

In connection with the Small Grains/Pulses/Alternative
Oilseeds option under specific power #1, fund commodity
production and marketing R&D projects to grow local and
domestic markets for small grains, pulses, and alternative
oilseeds grown in diversified, resource-conserving rotations
(as defined by the farm bill and NRCS). Include research on the
nutritional & GHG effects of adding these commodities to the
feed rations.

https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/
renewingthecountryside/pages/129/attachments/original/
1569524314/Muckey_Final.pdf?1569524314
https://news.cals.wisc.edu/2020/10/29/project-to-
expand-supply-chains-for-regional-grains-to-local-
cafeterias/
https://practicalfarmers.org/2019/12/using-oat-
variety-trial-results-to-guide-management-decisions/
https://www.grownyc.org/files/gmkt/Grains/
marketing_v7_web.pdf

In connection with the Agrisolar option under specific power
#2, fund production and marketing R&D for commodities (crops
and livestock) grown or raised using win-win agrisolar systems.
In addition, use CCC dollars to work with private-sector
partners to develop and stand up one or more process-verified,
climate-smart label for agrisolar commodities.

https://www.epa.gov/greenerproducts/introduction-
ecolabels-and-standards-greener-products
https://www.ams.usda.gov/services/auditing/process-
verified-programs
https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/5/2474/pdf
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/
0013916521995473

Expand mandatory funding for value-added projects supporting
agricultural commodities and products produced using methods
that improve soil health, sequester carbon, and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, building on the excellent work being
accomplished by USDA RBCS through the farm bill's Value-Added
Producer Grant Program. VAPG fosters market-based, sustainable
farm income by enabling farmers and ranchers to retain a
greater share of the consumer food dollar. VAPG includes a
specific Congressional authorization for support for
commodities and products that add value based on how they are
produced, using market differentiation strategies. Focusing
that authority on climate-smart agriculture through new
investment in this authorized program and market
differentiation authority via the CCC would help expand
domestic markets and create improved income streams for
producers.

https://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/business-
programs/value-added-producer-grants
https://sustainableagriculture.net/wp-content/
uploads/2021/03/2021-NSAC-VAPG-Farmers-Guide.pdf

[all]
