- TRADE POLICY AND PRIORITIES

[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

TRADE POLICY AND PRIORITIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON LIVESTOCK AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 17, 2021

__________

Serial No. 117-23

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Printed for the use of the Committee on Agriculture
agriculture.house.gov

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
47-126 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2022

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE

DAVID SCOTT, Georgia, Chairman

JIM COSTA, California                GLENN THOMPSON, Pennsylvania,
JAMES P. McGOVERN, Massachusetts     Ranking Minority Member
FILEMON VELA, Texas                  AUSTIN SCOTT, Georgia
ALMA S. ADAMS, North Carolina, Vice  ERIC A. ``RICK'' CRAWFORD,
Chair                                Arkansas
ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
ANTONIO DELGADO, New York            DOUG LaMALFA, California
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              RODNEY DAVIS, Illinois
CHELLIE PINGREE, Maine               RICK W. ALLEN, Georgia
GREGORIO KILILI CAMACHO SABLAN,      DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
Northern Mariana Islands             TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
ANN M. KUSTER, New Hampshire         DON BACON, Nebraska
CHERI BUSTOS, Illinois               DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota
SEAN PATRICK MALONEY, New York       JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
TOM O'HALLERAN, Arizona              CHRIS JACOBS, New York
SALUD O. CARBAJAL, California        TROY BALDERSON, Ohio
RO KHANNA, California                MICHAEL CLOUD, Texas
AL LAWSON, Jr., Florida              TRACEY MANN, Kansas
J. LUIS CORREA, California           RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               MARY E. MILLER, Illinois
JOSH HARDER, California              BARRY MOORE, Alabama
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   KAT CAMMACK, Florida
KIM SCHRIER, Washington              MICHELLE FISCHBACH, Minnesota
JIMMY PANETTA, California            JULIA LETLOW, Louisiana
ANN KIRKPATRICK, Arizona
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia

______

Anne Simmons, Staff Director

Parish Braden, Minority Staff Director

______

Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture

JIM COSTA, California, Chairman

ABIGAIL DAVIS SPANBERGER, Virginia   DUSTY JOHNSON, South Dakota,
JAHANA HAYES, Connecticut            Ranking Minority Member
J. LUIS CORREA, California           SCOTT DesJARLAIS, Tennessee
JOSH HARDER, California              VICKY HARTZLER, Missouri
RO KHANNA, California                DAVID ROUZER, North Carolina
CYNTHIA AXNE, Iowa                   TRENT KELLY, Mississippi
BOBBY L. RUSH, Illinois              DON BACON, Nebraska
STACEY E. PLASKETT, Virgin Islands   JAMES R. BAIRD, Indiana
ANGIE CRAIG, Minnesota               JIM HAGEDORN, Minnesota
SANFORD D. BISHOP, Jr., Georgia      TRACEY MANN, Kansas
------                               RANDY FEENSTRA, Iowa
BARRY MOORE, Alabama

Daniel Feingold, Subcommittee Staff Director

(ii)

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Costa, Hon. Jim, a Representative in Congress from California,
opening statement..............................................     1
Prepared statement...........................................     3
Johnson, Hon. Dusty, a Representative in Congress from South
Dakota, opening statement......................................     4
Thompson, Hon. Glenn, a Representative in Congress from
Pennsylvania, opening statement................................     6

Witnesses

Stenderup, Kent, Managing Partner, Stenderup Ag Partners; Member,
Board of Directors, Blue Diamond Growers, Bakersfield, CA......     7
Prepared statement...........................................     9
Vander Woude, Simon, Dairyman, Member-Owner and Chairman, Board
of Directors, California Dairies, Inc.; First Vice Chairman,
Executive Committee, National Milk Producers Federation,
Merced, CA.....................................................    13
Prepared statement...........................................    15
Redhouse, Latashia, Director, American Indian Foods Program,
Intertribal Agriculture Council, Vernal, UT....................    23
Prepared statement...........................................    25
Sorenson, Jen, President, National Pork Producers Council,
Washington, D.C................................................    28
Prepared statement...........................................    29
Scott, Kevin, President, American Soybean Association, St. Louis,
MO.............................................................    34
Prepared statement...........................................    36

Submitted Material

Gallo, Sarah, Vice President, Agriculture and Environment,
Biotechnology Innovation Organization, submitted letter........    63

TRADE POLICY AND PRIORITIES

----------

WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 2021

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign Agriculture,
Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.
The Subcommittee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in
Room 1300 of the Longworth House Office Building and via Zoom,
Hon. Jim Costa [Chairman of the Subcommittee] presiding.
Members present: Representatives Costa, Spanberger, Hayes,
Harder, Khanna, Axne, Rush, Plaskett, Craig, Bishop, Johnson,
DesJarlais, Hartzler, Rouzer, Kelly, Bacon, Hagedorn, Mann,
Feenstra, Moore, and Thompson (ex officio).
Staff present: Lyron Blum-Evitts, Daniel Feingold, Prescott
Martin III, Caleb Crosswhite, Jennifer Tiller, Erin Wilson, and
Dana Sandman.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. JIM COSTA, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM CALIFORNIA

The Chairman. The Subcommittee on Livestock and Foreign
Agriculture will now come to order. I want to thank my
colleagues, Members of the Subcommittee, for their
participation this morning. The topic that is going to be
discussed is trade policy and priorities, which, for American
agriculture, is always a critical issue that we are engaged in.
And, as we look at the challenges that we face with American
agricultural trade over the last decade, I would say, and then
prior to the pandemic, and then the effects of our supply chain
being turned upside down with the closure of restaurants and
schools. Last spring we have seen how fragile that very
complicated, complex food supply chain can turn on its head,
and of course the impact to prices in terms of not only our
producers and processors throughout the country, but our
consumers, who feel them when they are at the grocery store.
And, of course, we see that being impacted today, and I am sure
that will be part of the conversation that we have.
I want to thank Members of the Subcommittee for your
participation, and I want to thank the witnesses as well. We
have four witnesses that will provide a good regional
perspective of how they view the trade policy and priorities,
and make good suggestions to all of us. And, after my opening
remarks, we will receive testimony from our witnesses, and
then, following our normal procedure, we will recognize Members
based upon alternating Democratic, Republican, Democratic,
Republican, after the testimony has been presented to us.
Members will be recognized in the order of their arrival that
staff will inform me on what their order of arrival was, and I
will rely on that to be the judgment.
And, of course, everybody is familiar with the 5 minutes
you have to ask questions or make statements. Sometimes Members
like to do both. But obviously, given the hybrid manner in
which this hearing is being held, those who are participating
from your desktop, or wherever you might be, please mute
yourself. We all sometimes forget that we are multitasking, and
you may be doing something else, and you are live, and that,
obviously, is not helpful for the Subcommittee's hearing
purpose.
In consultation with the Ranking Member, my friend from
South Dakota, pursuant to Rule XI(e), I want to make the
Members of the Subcommittee aware that we may have Members of
the full Committee join us today, and oftentimes the Chairman
and the Ranking Member do that, and when they do, we certainly
give them the opportunity to comment. So, without objection,
the Chair may recess the Committee, subject to call of order of
the Chair at any point during this hearing. It is an
informational hearing. I don't think we are going to get into
any big disputes that that would be required. So let me start
with my opening statement.
I would like to thank our witnesses in advance. We know
that trade is a critical part of American agriculture. We held
a hearing on this last month. We are listening to some of the
impacts that the--problems with--our supply chain are having in
terms of not only getting products into our country, but also
the fact, as an example, the Port of Los Angeles and Long Beach
that handle 40 percent of the container imports that we find,
that, unfortunately, some of those containers ships are
departing empty, and I think that is a challenge that we have
to address.
The President, obviously, has attempted to focus on making
changes to that effect. There are pieces of legislation that
are attempting to try to relieve this bottleneck that we are
having within our supply chain. But when you look at, again, my
home state as an example, 44 percent of the agriculture that we
produce in California is exported. That is a big number, it is
almost half. And a lot of these products have a shelf life, in
terms their perishable nature, and the notion that they can
simply wait is not acceptable.
This hearing today presents an opportunity for us to hear
from a diverse group of agricultural stakeholders about their
trade priorities and barriers that they face, and it is
important for we, as Members of Congress, and this
Subcommittee, that focuses not just on livestock but foreign
trade, that we are listening to, and do, whatever we possibly
can to deal with these current challenges. And I think when we
talk about the efforts that the Biden Administration is
following, how we can complement those efforts.
I want to acknowledge that our witnesses' testimony on
supply chain concerns were raised multiple times last month.
This issue has been focused on. We are still--I don't think we
completely have a handle on all the things I think we need to
be doing to deal with this critical supply chain problem, but I
think we need to continue to be focused, and remind people of
the importance of remedying this problem. And these slowdowns
just don't impact consumers, but they hurt our farmers, our
dairymen and -women, our agricultural workers. It has a ripple
effect that obviously we are feeling today.
Constructing a productive agricultural trade agenda is
important, whether it was the last Administration or this
Administration, and I think that with the incredible production
that American agriculture is capable of producing, we need to
make sure that we work hand in glove with American agriculture,
and different challenges we know are being faced by farmers in
different regions of our country. So that is why I am looking
forward to hearing from the witnesses today on how we can
better improve our trade policy from over the past few years.
We have engaged in a number of agreements, talks with
nations around the world, including Japan, China, Canada, and
Mexico. Exciting news that we have reached an agreement with
Japan, that I think the Administration is announcing today, on
how we can coordinate that effort. I was a supporter of the
Trans-Pacific Partnership some 4 or 5 years ago that was worked
on by multiple Administrations, and unfortunately we dropped
out of that, in my view. But I did support the previous
Administration's efforts with the U.S.-Canada-Mexico Trade
Agreement. Obviously, now we need to make sure that the
commitments from that trade agreement are complied with,
whether we are talking about phytosanitary standards, or a host
of other efforts between our neighbors to the north, and to the
south, Canada and Mexico.
Now we find ourselves in a situation where China's
continuously changing regulations that cover the rules of
engagement for U.S. food and agricultural business is once
again staring us in the eye. The expanded registration
requirements for U.S. facilities under Decree 248 is just one
example, and I think these relationships need to be worked on.
I am pleased this week that the Biden Administration had a
high-level discussion, and the fact is, is that we have to stay
on top of this.
Agriculture and trade must be considered as we look at the
global adoption of sustainable alternatives not only to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions as it relates to climate change, but
many of the people on the panel that are testifying will tell
you incredible things that they are doing to, in fact, reduce
their own carbon footprint. I look forward to hearing how these
initiatives may be advanced through trade. The panel before us
has in-depth knowledge. I have read their testimony, look
forward to hearing it, and asking questions. So I think this is
a good point of productive discussion on how we can expand
global trade.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Costa follows:]

Prepared Statement of Hon. Jim Costa, a Representative in Congress from
California
Good morning. To start I'd like to thank our witnesses, Ranking
Member Johnson, and the other Members of the Subcommittee. Trade is a
vital part of our agriculture industry here in the United States. It is
an essential tool for our farmers and ranchers and so many rely on
strong trade relationships to ensure fair access to the global
marketplace.
This hearing presents a great opportunity to hear from a diverse
group of agricultural stakeholders about their trade priorities and the
barriers they face to help keep us as Members of Congress aware and
informed as we continue to discuss the agricultural trade policy
strategy. We can then use that information to work with our
counterparts abroad, and the Biden Administration, to develop a trade
agenda that benefits farmers.
I want to acknowledge that in our witness's testimony supply chain
concerns were raised multiple times. This is an issue that I have been
very focused on and I know that we have had a few hearings on supply
chain concerns in the Agriculture Committee, but I think it is
important to continually remind people of the importance of remedying
this problem. These slowdowns don't just impact end-consumers, they
also hurt farmers and trade flows.
Constructing a productive agricultural trade agenda is important
for many reasons. My home State of California is a great example of the
range of agricultural products that are grown and exported from the
United States. California is the most diverse agricultural state, it is
the number one state in citrus production, provides close to 20 percent
of American dairy production and provides 99 percent of the country's
pistachios and 80 percent of the world's almonds. Having such a wide
range of products within my state has given me perspective on the
different challenges that farmers face.
That is one reason why I am looking forward to hearing from our
witnesses today. We have an opportunity to hear from a range of
commodity groups on how trade policy effects their products and how we
can improve and alter our trade agreements to benefit a broad swath of
American producers.
Over the past few years, we have engaged in a number of trade
agreements and talks with nations around the world, including Japan,
China, Canada, and Mexico. It is vital that we learn from those
agreements what has benefited farmers, and what may need improvement as
the new Administration reviews the performance of these trading
relationships. And the trade issues that arise are changing all of the
time--such as China's continuously changing regulations that govern the
rules of engagement for U.S. food and agricultural businesses. The
expanded registration requirement for U.S. facilities under Decree 248
is just one example that I've been hearing about recently. So, these
relationships require constant nurturing. I'm pleased that this week
alone, the Biden Administration is engaged in high level meetings with
all of the nations I just mentioned.
Another issue that I believe must be a part of every discussion is
climate change. When we think about agriculture and trade, we must
consider how we can advance global adoption of sustainable alternatives
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. I know that many of the
organizations represented on today's panel have worked to improve their
sustainability and set goals for continuous improvement. I look forward
to hearing how those initiatives may be advanced through trade.
The panel before us provides a depth of knowledge and varied
perspective on how our trade agenda can benefit American farmers and
ranchers.
I look forward to a good and productive discussion on how we can
all work together to expand global access to American agricultural
goods. Before the introduction of our witnesses, I'd like to recognize
the Ranking Member, Mr. Johnson of South Dakota, for any remarks he'd
like to make.

The Chairman. And I would like to recognize my friend, the
Ranking Member from South Dakota, Mr. Johnson, for any remarks
he would like to make at this time.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. DUSTY JOHNSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM SOUTH DAKOTA

Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
also for this hearing, and for the topic. It is hard to
overstate the importance of market access to American
agricultural producers, so thank you to you and the Committee
staff. Of course, thank you also to the witnesses before us.
American farmers and ranchers, they produce the highest
quality crops, livestock, poultry, and dairy in the world, and,
not for nothing, they produce them efficiently. That value
proposition is well known across the globe, and that is why 20
percent of American agriculture production is exported. And
since we have one of the nation's foremost leaders in soybeans
with us today, I should note that that is doubly true for
soybeans. Half of America's soybeans, and 60 percent of South
Dakota's soybeans, are sold overseas.
And that international demand, of course, that exerts
upward pressure on price. That means billions, billions of
dollars for American producers. Trade accounts for an average
of $56 of value for each hog marketed in this country. You just
think about how much real money that is, and how that ripples
throughout rural economies, from the farmgate to main street.
Just an enormous impact.
So the price American farmers and ranchers receive for
their production depends, in no small part, on the strength of
America as an exporter, and, frankly, as a negotiator. Can we
secure fair deals with other countries? And at the end of the
last Administration we made some positive progress on a Phase
One agreement that included numerous sanitary, and
phytosanitary, and biotech provisions that increase the
accessibility and the predictability in the Chinese market.
Again, critically important. And we don't want to let that
progress get lost between Administrations, and so we want to
continue to be proactive and ambitious.
An important step here would be for this Administration to
prioritize trade, and our trading relationships, and work to
give agriculture a better seat at the table. This
Administration's approach to trade, it has to become more
ambitious, because every day that our country doesn't lead,
others will fill the gap. It took, I think we all realize, 9
months for a Chief Agricultural Negotiator to get appointed,
and we are still awaiting a nominee for Under Secretary of
Foreign and Agricultural Affairs. And I think it is important
that the priorities of all of our witnesses, and frankly,
American agricultural producers across the country, are
represented as we are talking about expanded market access,
increased exports, and a more level playing field.
And then I think the Chairman did a good job mentioning the
supply chain, so I will touch on that. This Administration must
continue to seek pragmatic solutions to the supply chain
crisis, which is putting a serious strain on our American
agricultural producers, and, frankly, the entire U.S. economy.
The full Committee heard from a slate of witnesses a few weeks
ago about the combination of challenges contributing to the
crisis, and the breaking of consumer confidence, that includes
the repercussions of that, and the cause of that, can be
increased inflation, skyrocketing energy cost, a shortage of
available goods and labor.
And while our supply chain falters, our trading
relationships falter. I am glad to hear many of our witnesses
will be speaking to the importance of passing the Ocean
Shipping Reform Act of 2021 (H.R. 4996), which I am leading
with Representative Garamendi. And I am grateful for the
support of so many on this Committee for that legislation, and
it is that support, that growing support, more than 200
national organizations, last time I checked, more than 70
Members of the House that is going to keep that momentum
building.
So, by way of closing, Mr. Chairman, I would just note I am
looking forward to the remarks of our witnesses, and to
learning about their priorities, as well as their thoughts for
how we can move forward. Thank you, sir.
The Chairman. I thank the gentlemen for his opening
comments, and I just want to note that Congressman Garamendi
and I began working on that effort with the legislation to make
changes in ocean shipping and Federal Maritime Commission, and
how they operate, and on the issues of demurrage, and also some
of the other problems that we are having at our ports and
harbors. And I want to thank the Ranking Member for his
efforts, along with mine, with the Problem Solvers' Caucus to
get their endorsement on that important legislation. It is part
of an overall effort that I think we have to be engaged in.
The Chair will now recognize, if the gentleman from
Pennsylvania would like to make any opening comments. If not,
we will proceed onto our witnesses.

OPENING STATEMENT OF HON. GLENN THOMPSON, A REPRESENTATIVE IN
CONGRESS FROM PENNSYLVANIA

Mr. Thompson. No, I absolutely would like to make some
opening comments. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, this
important hearing, is critically important. I echo the
sentiment of Ranking Member Johnson, and echo his calls for
this Administration to prioritize trade. We know that in the
Great Recession, 2009, it was trade that resulted in
agriculture being the only industry that did not really fail
and falter the way that others did. And it is so incredibly
important.
I also ask my colleagues to commit to hosting Ambassador
Tai sooner than later, and once approved, our Chief Agriculture
Negotiator. We need those voices at the table. It is long
overdue. Yes, we need to have them before the full Agriculture
Committee so we can have a good conversation, and to be able to
work with them in a committed way for trade.
We need our trading partners to stand by their existing
commitments, and we have issues with that. Recent travels in
Georgia, Florida, there are some abuses that Mexico is doing in
and around--circumventing the USMCA, really hurting our fruits
and vegetables, and our trading partners need to be held
accountable. On the Northern Tier, where I hail from, it is
Canada circumventing a great change to their isolationist dairy
policy, which they did eliminate what we asked them to
eliminate, but then they created, like, a IVa to circumvent it,
and that is not acceptable.
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Thompson. And it is really disturbing that we don't
have, as of yet, an official Chief Agriculture Trade
Negotiator, because they needed to be at the table to help with
the oversight of that. And so the Administration needs to step
up and work overtime to mitigate the many problems impacting
our supply chains, much of which impacts our exports, and the
viability of our producers.
I have been a little, actually, disturbed with all the
conversation coming out of the White House, and they are
focused on those--what looks like the Japanese armada parked
off the coast of your great state, Mr. Chairman, with the focus
being how fast can we go unload those foreign manufactured
goods, get them on trucks, so that Americans can buy them, and
then we are sending--what seems to be happening is--and maybe
we will hear a little more about this today--we have these
shipping containers going back empty, while we have agriculture
commodities sitting at the ports, paying fees to be staged
there. And so we need the Administration to wake up and to
recognize it is shipping both ways. It is just not getting them
unloaded and distributing those foreign manufactured goods, but
we need to be able to have--be shipping our commodities, our
agriculture commodities, those things that those great
Americans, those American farmers, and ranchers, and foresters,
produce each and every day.
I may have to step out here. I actually have a meeting with
the Chairman of the full Committee, and I apologize for that,
but I look forward to further reviewing witness' testimony, and
gathering information from the responses to Member questions.
And with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. Well, I thank the Ranking Member for his
comments, and let me just assure you that in my conversations
with the Secretary of Agriculture, they are very acutely aware
of the situation with the container problem, and we brought
this to their attention earlier this year. It is one of the
reasons this legislation that we are supporting with
Congressman Garamendi is important, so that we can have various
options to prevent these ships from returning empty. Everyone
recognizes that is a problem, and we intend to do something
about that. As far as getting Ambassador Tai before the full
Committee or the Subcommittee, we are working on both, and I--
for all the right reasons that you articulated.
And finally, there is a bit of a two-way street, I believe,
and that is that, while the Administration has moved with
nominations, the Senate has a clock of their own, it seems as
it comes to confirming these appointments, and so that is part
of the challenge that we face. And so, with that said, let us
begin with our first witness. Mr. Kent Stenderup is a third-
generation farmer in Arvin, California, in the southern San
Joaquin Valley. Prior to the last reapportionment, I used to
represent him, and the incredible producers down in that
portion of Kern County. Their family operation is well known,
third generation farm. It consists of a diversified
agricultural portfolio that includes trees, vines, and row
crops. He and his family have for years participated in many
different ways. He is a Board Director of Blue Diamond Growers,
and he is testifying on their behalf. So, without further ado,
I would like to recognize our first witness for 5 minutes, Mr.
Kent Stenderup. Kent?

STATEMENT OF KENT STENDERUP, MANAGING PARTNER, STENDERUP AG
PARTNERS; MEMBER, BOARD OF
DIRECTORS, BLUE DIAMOND GROWERS, BAKERSFIELD, CA

Mr. Stenderup. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and Members of
the Committee. Thank you for holding this timely hearing on
this very important subject. My family has been honored to have
Chairman Costa as our Assemblyman, and also as our Congressman
for a few terms.
The Chairman. It is good to see you in those golden fields
of Arvin.
Mr. Stenderup. Yes, that is being hopeful. It happens once
every 5 years. We get snow down to about--feet.
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Stenderup. Also, welcoming Member Josh Harder, who is a
very important ag leader in our valley also. As it is been
mentioned, I am Kent Stenderup, and I am the Managing Partner
for the family farm. We have 800 acres of almonds, 900 acres of
row crops. We also grow some Thompson seedless grapes that are
used for white grape juice concentrate, and that concentrate is
non-added sugar for a non-corn fructose natural sweetener. It
is used for jams, jellies, and fruit juices, and we are in
the--and the way that our growers co-op, I happen to be on that
co-op board also. We are in the process of filing a
countervailing and dumping charge against Argentina with the
Department of Commerce and the USTR.
So as you can hear, my family believes in the co-op
business model, but, I am here today to testify on behalf of
Blue Diamond Growers as a Director and Grower Member. Blue
Diamond Growers is a nonprofit grower-owned cooperative
organized in the year 1910. Over half of the 6,000 almond
growers in California belong to Blue Diamond Growers. I am the
immediate past Chair of the Almond Board of California, which
is the Federal Marketing Order overseen by USDA that benefits
our industry. It is very much appreciated that you are holding
this important trade hearing on policy and priorities. Trade is
the lifeblood of U.S. ag.
Blue Diamond is the world's leading almond marketer and
processor. We employ over 1,900 employees, with our
headquarters in Sacramento. Blue Diamond ships almonds to all
50 states, and also including India, Spain, China, Japan, just
to name a few destinations. And yes, we too support Elaine
Trevino as the Ag Trade Ambassador at USTR. The President
nominated her, and now we hope the Senate will confirm her. She
has agricultural support. Get those markets open worldwide. And
also the empty position at the Under Secretary of Trade and
Foreign Ag.
It is important that the Committee support the Foreign
Agricultural Service as much as possible. This Committee is
encouraged to do all possible and necessary to support FAS, its
employees, and its necessary budget. It is hoped and
recommended that the Committee recognize the importance and
benefit that U.S. agriculture receives from the Market Access
Program, also known as MAP. The program is an outstanding
example of the real partnership between government and ag
exporters. If you are not familiar, this is an important cost-
sharing program. This program helps our members promote and
advertise in countries where it would not otherwise be
possible.
Since Blue Diamond sells and exports its members' almonds
under the Blue Diamond brand, it is penalized with stricter
rules and increased matching requirements. This is the Trade
Association having those benefits over something known as a co-
op model. May it be respectfully suggested that this Committee
investigate this, and correct this difference? Cooperative
farmers should not be treated differently than farmers whose
products are promoted by the trade associations. This
discrimination should end, and will with your help.
Mr. Chairman, and Members of the Committee, thank you very
much for the opportunity to present this testimony, and for
your attention. I will be pleased to answer any questions you
may have. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Stenderup follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kent Stenderup, Managing Partner, Stenderup Ag
Partners; Member, Board of Directors, Blue Diamond Growers,
Bakersfield, CA
Mr. Chairman and Members of this Committee, thank you for holding
this timely hearing on this very important subject. It is appreciated.
My name is Kent Stenderup, and I am the managing Partner of
Stenderup Ag Partners, a family-owned farm in Arvin, California. We
grow 850 acres of almonds, 900 acres of row crops including potatoes,
carrots, sweet potatoes, processing tomatoes and processing onions.
We also grow 420 acres of Thompson Seedless grapes. These are
processed into the best white grape juice concentrate available. White
grape juice concentrate is in high demand as a non-added-sugar, non-
corn fructose natural sweetener. It is used as an ingredient in a
variety of products such as jams, jellies, fruit juices, confectionery
products, energy bars and more.
I am here today to testify on behalf of Blue Diamond Growers and as
a director and grower member. Blue Diamond Growers is a nonprofit
grower owned cooperative which was organized in 1910. This year is our
111th anniversary. Over half the 6,000 almond growers in California
belong to Blue Diamond Growers.
For your background, I am also a Director of Delano Growers Grape
Products cooperative and have a strong background in the specialty crop
and fresh produce sectors.
I am the immediate past President of the Almond Board of
California, which is the Federal Marketing Order overseen by USDA that
benefits our almond industry.
It is very much appreciated that you are holding this important
hearing on Trade Policy and Priorities, since trade is the life blood
of U.S. agriculture and the California almond industry. Blue Diamond
exports its members almonds to over 100 countries worldwide.
Blue Diamond is the world's leading almond marketer and processor.
We employ over 1,900 employees. The average size of our family farm
members is under 100 acres. Its headquarters is in Sacramento,
California. We have processing plants in Sacramento, Salida and
Turlock. Our grower members deliver their almonds to our receiving
stations in Sacramento, Salida, Chico, Arbuckle, and Fresno.
Blue Diamond almonds are sent to all 50 states and to India, Spain,
Germany, China/Hong Kong, UAE, Japan, Italy, and the Netherlands to
name the top ten destinations. Of course, both Canada and Mexico are
very good markets. Worldwide, Blue Diamond exports almonds and almond
products to over 100 countries.
With your permission, may the next few minutes be focused on
important trade issues that it is urged this Committee address. Since
resolving trade issues is critical to the success of the California
almond industry and all U.S. agriculture, please direct your attention
to putting the Agriculture Trade Ambassador in place at USTR. The
President has nominated Mrs. Elaine Trevino to take this position. She
is very well qualified and has widespread support in agriculture. While
it is the job of the Senate to confirm her, it is requested that you do
all possible to make it happen. This position needs to be filled to
work on opening markets worldwide.
Second, the empty position of Under [S]ecretary for Trade and
Foreign Agriculture Affairs at USDA needs to be filled. The current
acting Under [S]ecretary is doing an excellent job, but the position
needs to be filled.
Please allow me to identify four important markets and the current
problems in each that need to be addressed by the Agriculture
Ambassador at USTR and the Under [S]ecretary for Trade at USDA.
First, it is important to note that the Foreign Agriculture Service
at USDA and all its foreign offices are doing a wonderful job
supporting all U.S. agriculture exports and especially California
almonds. This Committee is encouraged, and it is recommended that it do
all possible and necessary to support the Foreign Agriculture Service
all its employees and its necessary budget.
The three countries and one trading bloc of immediate concern are
India, China, European Union, and Mexico. Please let me describe the
situation in each.
India
India is a critically important market for California almonds, with
shipments in 2019 valued at approximately $733 million. India is the
number one export destination for U.S. almonds. California almonds have
represented the leading agricultural product traded between the two
countries, and the growth of India's market stands as a testament to
the cooperative work of the U.S. Government and Blue Diamond over the
past 4 decades to establish, maintain, and grow this market. A primary
objective is to eliminate the retaliatory duties currently in place.
Then the actual duty should be reduced.
The following table provides an overview of India's current tariff
structure for in shell and shelled almonds. India currently has imposed
additional duties on U.S. almonds in retaliation for U.S. actions on
steel and aluminum. The U.S. has taken this case to the WTO where it is
pending.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product                              Tariff
------------------------------------------------------------------------
In-Shell Almonds                      42 Rupees/kilogram
Shelled                               120 Rupees/kilogram
Flour/Meal                            30%
Prepared/Preserved                    30%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: World Trade Organization, Tariff Download Facility.

The following table provides a summary of exports to India in key
categories over the most recent 4 years (2017-2020).

U.S. Exports to India (Value, US$000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product            2017          2018         2019         2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
In-shell        583,623      543,361      691,922      783,492
Shelled         74,331       56,203       40,831       40,717
Pres./Prep.            246            0           30          103
------------------------------------------------------------------------

On July 1, 2017, India implemented a new, nation-wide goods and
services tax (GST). On the positive side, this action brought new
transparency and predictability to doing business within India.
Unfortunately, in implementing the new regime, the government placed
dried fruits and nuts in a category subject to a 12 percent GST. There
had been an expectation among the trade that these products would be
placed in the five percent GST basket, which the Indian Government in
fact has selectively done for other commodities including cashews,
walnuts, and raisins. While the new GST regime is not without positive
elements, as previously noted, it is requested that India will subject
all dried fruit and nuts, including almonds, equitably to the five
percent GST level.
China
China has in the past ranked as the number one almond export
destination. It is number one, when both direct and indirect channels
are considered. While China is currently a significant market for
California almonds, both through direct and indirect channels, the
country holds significant potential for future market growth,
particularly if all existing tariffs can be eliminated. The highest
priority for China must be the elimination of the retaliatory duties
currently in place. Almonds must be a high priority for duty reduction
in China.
The following table provides an overview of China's most favored
nation (MFN) tariff structure for products within the almond complex.
It must be noted that China currently imposes additional duties on U.S.
almond exports.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product                              Tariff
------------------------------------------------------------------------
In-Shell Almonds                                   55%
Shelled                                   55%
Flour/Meal                                   45%
Prepared/Preserved                                   30%
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: World Integrated Trade Solutions.

The following table provides a summary of exports to China in key
categories over the most recent 4 years (2017-2020).

U.S. Exports to China (Value, US$000)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product            2017          2018         2019         2020
------------------------------------------------------------------------
In-shell Almonds         24,360       21,138       66,644      149,314
Shelled Almonds         74,893       98,369      106,536      191,770
Pres./Prep. Almonds         1,687        3,840          841        4,101
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Australia enjoys preferential tariff access for its almonds under
its Free Trade Agreement that entered into force in December 2015. The
following table provides a comparison of the rate charged to U.S.
products versus like Australian products. As noted, the tariffs on
Australian products reached zero in January 2019 which gives them a
definite advantage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Current      Current     Date When    Date When Duty
Product       Tariff for   Tariff for   Duty Free       Free for
U.S.      Australia     for U.S.       Australia
------------------------------------------------------------------------
In-Shell                 55%           0%          N/A  January 1, 2019
Shelled                  55%           0%          N/A  January 1, 2019
Flour/Meal               45%           0%          N/A  January 1, 2019
Prepared/                30%           0%          N/A  January 1, 2019
Preserved
------------------------------------------------------------------------

With the elimination of China's import duties on almonds and almond
products, it is estimated that direct exports of almonds to China could
reach $800 million within 5 years. This estimate considers the growing
demand from China's expanding middle class, together with the increased
incentive to ship products directly to China. China did grant an
exclusion for some processed almond products under the existing
procedure. This exclusion should be granted for all Blue Diamond
almonds and almond products.
European Union
The European Union (EU) is both a leading market and, to a lesser
degree, a competitor for California almonds. While dwarfed by the size
of U.S. production, Spain is the world's 2nd largest almond producer.
The following table provides an overview of the most favored nation
(MFN) duty structure presently facing almonds entering the EU:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
Product                              Tariff
------------------------------------------------------------------------
In-Shell Almonds                      2% for first 90,000 MT *
5.6% for subsequent volumes
Shelled                               2% for first 90,000 MT *
3.5% for subsequent imports
Flour/Meal                            8.3%
Prepared/Preserved                    9% pkgs > 1kg,
10.2% pkgs
No discussion on trade issues can overlook the immediate and
urgent challenge that shipping supply chain issues are posing
to our exports. In just the first 7 months of this year, those
challenges cost the U.S. dairy industry nearly $1 billion in
additional expenses, lost sales, and eroded value. If further
Congressional and administrative actions are not swiftly taken
to tackle this crisis more fully, the impacts on American-made
products will only continue to mount with farmers ultimately
bearing the brunt of that. Passage of the Ocean Shipping Reform
Act, coupled with additional steps by the Administration to
tackle the near-term problems facing export flows, would
provide much-needed relief for dairy farmers and manufacturers.

We cannot stand still; the United States must pursue trade
agreements that favor our nation. Collectively, too much time
has been spent dwelling on losses from trade rather than on its
benefits and how to generate more of the latter. The U.S. dairy
industry has urged the Administration to start negotiations
immediately with the United Kingdom, with several of the
countries party to the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-
Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) as well as others in Southeast
Asia, and in the Middle East--steps that would allow our
industry to grow exports. Where pursuit of a comprehensive deal
may not be immediately feasible, it is critical that U.S. trade
policy efforts nevertheless deliver expanded access for U.S.
dairy products by securing improvements in both tariff and non-
tariff barriers.

The Phase One trade agreement with China achieved important
progress on several non-tariff-barrier (NTB) issues such as
dairy facility registrations and access for high-value products
such as extended shelf-life milk. However, retaliatory tariffs
continue to impose a significant burden on U.S. dairy exports.
The U.S. should secure long-term relief from these tariffs and
work to ultimately achieve removal of them so that the U.S.
dairy industry can reap the full benefit of the Phase One
agreement and grow its market share and export volumes.

The Phase One U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement has helped U.S.
dairy keep pace with its competitors enjoying the EU FTA and
CPTPP benefits, but a comprehensive agreement is necessary to
not only fully level the playing field, but to also provide
Japan's largest customer, which is the United States with
better access to the Japanese market by creating meaningful
opportunities for key U.S. dairy products left out of Phase One
such as milk powder and butter.

Implementation and enforcement of our trade agreements,
including the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), will be
essential to preserve the opportunities the U.S. has already
worked so hard to procure for U.S. dairy exports. With respect
to USMCA, it is critical to fully secure the agreement's
benefits, particularly with respect to Canada's dairy tariff
rate quotas (TRQs) and dairy policy reforms, as well as
Mexico's implementation of USMCA and the development of
potential new protectionist dairy regulations.

The U.S. must continue to address key market access
barriers, including FTA compliance concerns in Colombia, and
with numerous other countries erecting new barriers to trade.
Those include concerns in Egypt, Indonesia, and certainly in
the European Union where the continual creation of new import
mandates and the perpetual misuse of geographical indications
(GIs) are habitually wielded in ways that harm access for U.S.
exports.

The World Trade Organization (WTO) is critically important
for the U.S. dairy industry. To strengthen and preserve its
core role on global trade rules and enforcement, the WTO needs
to be revitalized, both in terms of negotiating reforms that
lead to market liberalization and the reduction of
protectionist non-tariff trade barriers, and of providing a
functioning dispute settlement system.

U.S. dairy is fully committed to building upon its good
track record on sustainability and supports the U.S.
Government's approach to fostering pro-trade, pro-innovation,
and pro-inclusive sustainability. U.S. leadership on the global
stage will continue to be necessary to counter protectionist,
anti-trade narratives.

I would like to underscore the importance of pursuing new trade
opportunities abroad and believe the time is now ripe for doing so,
given the progress achieved by the Administration and Congress on many
of their domestic policy priorities.
Importance of Trade to U.S. Dairy
America's dairy industry is an economic force that employs nearly
one million Americans and adds over $750 billion to the U.S.
economy.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.idfa.org/dairydelivers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trade is essential to the health of the dairy industry. America's
dairy farmers and processors have established themselves as the world's
preeminent suppliers of high-quality, sustainably produced dairy
products, exporting more than $6.5 billion in dairy products in 2020 to
customers around the world. Approximately 16% of U.S. milk production
last year was exported overseas in the form of a wide variety of dairy
products from cheese to ice cream to milk powder.
The U.S. dairy industry manufactures high-quality Made-In-America
products that are beloved by consumers across the globe. In fact, in
2019, a cheese from the U.S. won ``Best in the World'' at the World
Cheese Awards for the first time ever. American dairy products can
compete toe-to-toe and win against any country.
Importantly, these exports drive growth across the U.S. economy.
Dairy exports alone create more than 85,000 U.S. jobs and have a nearly
$12 billion economic impact.\2\ Those sales play an indispensable role
in supporting the health of America's dairy farms as well as the
manufacturing jobs of dairy processors. Impairing export sales
therefore harms not only farmers, but also workers in companies
supplying inputs and services, in downstream processing plant jobs, and
in cities with large port facilities heavily dependent on trade.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://medium.com/dairy-exports-mean-jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When our exports increase, everyone in the dairy supply chain
benefits. U.S. trade agreements have played an indispensable role in
increasing U.S. exports. Beginning with the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994 and continuing through the Phase I Agreement
with Japan, trade agreements have enabled U.S. dairy exporters to
compete on either a more level playing field or at an advantage with
international competitors in terms of tariff access, removal of non-
tariff barriers and clear and consistent rules for trade. By way of
perspective, in 1993, the year before NAFTA, the United States sold
just $618 million worth of dairy products overseas; in 2020, the U.S.
sold $3.5 billion to just its FTA partners. Yet as global demand for
dairy continues to grow and American dairy producers work hard to
retain their farms, further progress is needed.
It is therefore essential that Congress and the U.S. Government
take a proactive approach to tearing down both tariff and non-tariff
trade barriers that hinder U.S. exports, particularly in markets where
America's farmers are at a disadvantage to our competitors.
Export Shipping Supply Chain Challenges Must Urgently be Addressed
One of the most pressing concerns for the dairy industry at present
is the immense challenge posed in moving our American-made products
from U.S. dairy manufacturing facilities to foreign customers. Freight
rates have soared while availability and predictability of the
necessary equipment to move U.S. dairy products to overseas buyers has
plummeted. Carriers, facing a financial incentive to return to Asia as
swiftly as possible to restock U.S. shelves with more imported
products, are shipping empty containers across the Pacific at record
rates of over 70%. A colleague of mine testified earlier this month
before the full Committee about the havoc this is wreaking on our
exports. The company that ships the dairy products my cooperative makes
to markets around the world has been moving heaven and earth to work to
deliver our shipments to the foreign customers counting on them. They
are important ingredients in supply chains that help feed consumers in
Asia and elsewhere. But--unfortunately--they are not irreplaceable; and
our competitors in the EU and New Zealand are not facing the same level
of volatility in supplying those markets.
To address this crisis, it is critical that Congress pass the Ocean
Shipping Reform Act and that the Administration take further steps to
deliver near-term relief to the supply chain snarls and market failures
that are bogging down the export of American-made products.
U.S. Dairy Needs Expanded Market Access Opportunities in Key Markets
The U.S. Government will need to adopt a forward-leaning posture
and actively negotiate additional trade agreements with key export
markets to retain existing export sales and achieve additional export
growth. The U.S. dairy industry supports the negotiation of trade
agreements that help level the playing field for American dairy
products and provide access for the entire ``bucket of milk'' \3\ our
farmers produce by expanding opportunities for all types of dairy
products. Accomplishing this will allow our industry to not just retain
existing sales and dairy jobs, but to build further on our industry's
American success story by further growing exports and expanding dairy
jobs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Incorporating the entire ``bucket of milk'' is a reference to
including a wide variety of American-made dairy products in future
trade agreements. Historically, much emphasis has been placed on
enhancing market access for cheese products, with less emphasis on
market access for products like butter and milk powders. The U.S. dairy
industry is positioned to compete in the global marketplace across all
categories of products, and our free trade agreements should reflect
that, going forward.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the U.S. evaluates new trade agreement partners, it is important
to ensure that U.S. negotiating time is best concentrated on agreements
likely to yield net agricultural benefits for the United States and to
position the United States to better compete against key competitors.
We strongly caution against sinking scarce U.S. resources into
negotiations with countries unlikely to lead to net dairy and
agricultural export gains for the United States.
The U.S. focus needs to be on key markets in which we compete head-
to-head with other major dairy suppliers. Unfortunately, America's
biggest dairy export competitors--Europe, New Zealand, and Australia--
have negotiated FTAs with many of our partners in Southeast Asia, Japan
and elsewhere or are in the process of doing so, often leaving the U.S.
as the only major supplier that will be left without an FTA. The tariff
advantages provided by these FTAs put the U.S. dairy industry at a
distinct disadvantage, and we are at risk of seeing our competitiveness
erode in critically important markets. Standing still means sliding
backwards.
For this reason, and for the potential export growth opportunities
they represent, we would like to see the United States pursue
agreements with the United Kingdom, Southeast Asia, Japan, China, and
countries of the Middle East.
The UK dairy market is a prosperous one with a significant segment
of its dairy consumption coming from imports, representing strong
potential to expand U.S. market share. However, numerous tariff and
non-tariff barriers imposed by the EU have long hindered U.S. dairy
exports to the UK. The UK's exit from the EU presents an opportunity to
move beyond the EU's complex trade policies which act as major
disincentives to U.S. exports yet were largely inherited by the UK.
U.S. dairy producers and businesses have worked hard to make
advancements in Southeast Asia, in particular Vietnam, and believe
increased sales throughout Asia are key to the industry's future
success. However, in this region in particular, U.S. gains are
threatened by the progress our competitors have been achieving in
negotiating FTAs that erode U.S. competitiveness.
Comprehensive trade deals like FTAs present the best opportunities
for eliminating the range of tariff and non-tariff barriers that have
impeded U.S. exports. However, in markets where the pursuit of a
comprehensive deal may not be immediately feasible, U.S. efforts to
tackle trade barriers to U.S. dairy exports need not and should not
wait. Bilateral dialogues and negotiations can make significant headway
in alleviating tariff and non-tariff barriers to U.S. exports and
should be pursued vigorously. Even as U.S. trade policy efforts embrace
a wider set of objectives, it is nevertheless critical that they
deliver actual progress for agricultural goods trade flows. Agreements
that are limited to rules areas and non-goods trade will not achieve
that goal.
Well-crafted trade agreements that tackle the full range of U.S.
interests--for workers, for companies, for farmers--take time to
develop and implement into law. That means time is of the essence if
the U.S. is to get back in the game and work to provide the
opportunities our country needs to remain competitive on the global
landscape. The Administration and Congress must work together to
promote and expand trade opportunities for U.S. agriculture and the
American people; there is no other viable alternative. While we delay,
our competitors are increasingly opening markets and blocking our
exports through non-tariff barriers. While we continue to import
products from all over the world, the world is not nearly as open to
the United States. Robust, forward-looking trade agreements are the
avenue to address that disparity.
China's Potential Will Depend on the Removal of Retaliatory Tariffs
Over the past decade, China has become a critically important
market for U.S. dairy exports. Sales last year alone totaled over $539
million, ranking China the third largest export market for U.S. dairy
products, despite the harmful impact of China's retaliatory tariffs in
response to USTR Section 301 duties.
Our industry welcomed the conclusion of the U.S.-China ``Phase
One'' economic and trade agreement in 2020 that resolved numerous
regulatory impediments for U.S. dairy exports to the Chinese market.
However, despite tariff exemptions for select products, retaliatory
duties still place U.S. exports at a disadvantage when compared to our
major trade competitors. While there remains tremendous potential in
this market as demand for dairy products continues to expand, China has
not prioritized purchasing significantly larger shares of its dairy
needs from the U.S. to date, despite its Phase One agricultural
purchase commitments. The impacts of this are seen most clearly in the
major dairy commodity categories of milk powder and cheese. I therefore
urge that Congress work with the Administration to press for removal of
all retaliatory tariffs on dairy and to secure as an interim step year-
long retaliatory tariff exemptions for dairy products.
Japan Exports Also Depend on Expanded Market Access
Japan ranks seventh among our export markets for dairy products,
valued at $322 million in 2020. U.S. dairy farmers applauded the
strides made for dairy in the Phase One U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement as
they were vital to heading off an erosion of U.S. market share in this
key market to the EU and parties in the CPTPP, especially for cheese,
whey, and lactose products. However, more remains to be done to
maximize opportunities for U.S. dairy farmers and processors, and to
provide market access for other products not substantially covered by
the Phase One deal such as milk powder and butter. The dairy industry
is therefore urging U.S. trade negotiators to build upon the Phase One
deal and deliver the complete range of market access opening through a
comprehensive FTA, which would also deliver non-tariff commitments to
create dependable trading conditions in the future.
A 2019 U.S. Dairy Export Council study found that if the U.S. has
at least the same market access as its competitors, the U.S. could
roughly double its share of the Japanese market over the next 10 years.
USMCA Enforcement Will be Key to Obtaining its Benefits
USMCA made tremendous strides to modernize trade rules and
facilitate the smooth flow of U.S. dairy products throughout North
America, but the benefits of USMCA will only flow if Canada and Mexico
properly implement the agreement. This will require proactive
monitoring and enforcement of USMCA implementation, including through
enforcement actions such as that taken against Canada's administration
of its TRQs for dairy products.
The U.S. dairy industry strongly supports U.S. Trade Representative
Tai's decision to initiate the TRQ enforcement action and deeply
appreciates the robust bipartisan support that Congress has voiced for
this important follow-through step. Canada has not administered its
TRQs fairly, as required by its USMCA obligations. Unfortunately, this
is consistent with Canada's long history of undermining its market
access commitments to protect its tightly controlled dairy market.
Canada's TRQ system discourages full utilization and valuation of
agreed upon quantities. USMCA dispute settlement is the right course of
action to address Canada's unfair restrictions and we are gratified
that USTR has been aggressively proceeding with the case.
The decision to pursue dispute settlement also delivers a strong
message against the erection of future barriers in Canada and other
markets. Our trading partners need to know that failure to meet their
agricultural trade commitments with the United States will result in
robust action to defend U.S. rights.
In this context, we urge Congress to work proactively with USTR and
USDA as they monitor Canada's implementation of other dairy related
USMCA provisions, such as those eliminating Canada's discriminatory
Class VII dairy pricing policy and requiring export surcharges on a
variety of dairy protein exports. Here as well, Canada's actions have
given cause for concern. Canadian exports of milk protein isolates
(MPI) and certain skim milk blends manufactured under the new Class IVa
have been increasing in a manner that appears designed to intentionally
circumvent USMCA's dairy protein export disciplines. Curbing Canada's
use of global markets to dispose of the excess dairy protein generated
by its government-controlled supply management system was a core USMCA
objective.
Vigilant monitoring and aggressive enforcement will also be
necessary with our other USMCA partner, Mexico. Mexico is the largest
export market for U.S. dairy products, and the U.S. trade relationship
with Mexico is of the utmost importance. Unfortunately, of late there
has been a proliferation of poorly designed Mexican regulations that
threaten to disrupt trade and erode the U.S. role as a reliable
supplier. These overly burdensome regulatory proposals pose a
particular threat to U.S. milk powder and cheese exports to Mexico.
Close attention must also be paid to Mexico's implementation of USMCA
side letter provisions on geographical indications (GIs) and common
food names.
The U.S. should ensure that discussions with Mexico treat its surge
in regulatory and customs enforcement issues as a collective concern,
and not simply as one-off issues. We need to restore smooth and
predictable trading conditions with Mexico to ensure that the U.S. and
Mexico remain an integrated market and that the promise of USMCA is
fulfilled.
The U.S. Must Knock Down Key Market Access Barriers
U.S. dairy exports continue to face a number of significant
impediments, both in our FTA partners and in other markets. We urge the
United States Government to take aggressive action to knock down these
barriers.
Colombia Safeguard
As noted previously, our trading partners need to know that failure
to meet their agricultural trade commitments with the United States
will result in robust action to defend U.S. rights. For example, our
FTA partner Colombia is now contemplating an unwarranted safeguard
action that could undercut U.S. dairy access to its 11th largest export
market. The U.S. dairy industry appreciates USTR raising this issue at
an August Ministerial-level meeting and encourages continued U.S.
engagement to ensure the safeguard investigation follows the specific
procedures as enumerated in the U.S.-Colombia bilateral trade agreement
and that trade is not disrupted.
Burdensome New Regulatory Requirements
To preserve access opportunities for U.S. dairy flows, Congress
should work with the Administration to address burdensome and
unwarranted new regulatory requirements that U.S. dairy exports have
had to contend with.
Egypt has erected one such barrier in connection with its Halal
requirements, by requiring all dairy exports to be certified Halal by a
single and exclusive certifying body partially owned by the Egyptian
Government, subject to non-transparent conditions and charges. U.S.
dairy exporters successfully Halal certify their products to multiple
markets around the world; however, Egypt's requirements are out of step
with those of other countries and could seriously limit or altogether
halt many exports.
Likewise, Indonesia's plant registration requirements are posing an
unwarranted limitation on U.S. exports. In order to export to
Indonesia, dairy plants are required to register with the government on
an approved list. Indonesia's process is exceedingly slow and
unpredictable and represents a severe bottleneck to expansion of U.S.
exports to Indonesia, our sixth largest export destination. For
instance, multiple U.S. dairy facilities applied to ship to Indonesia
as long ago as the start of last year and yet have still seen no action
taken on their applications. The U.S. Government should work with its
Indonesian counterparts and interagency partners to secure prompt
approval of the pending applications and to streamline a process for
facility registration in this key market.
Volatility in EU Trade Conditions
The EU's long history of unwarranted trade barriers has over the
past few years taken the form of overly prescriptive EU requirements
that mandate assurances of compliance with specific EU regulations and
that mandate that U.S. processes for oversight mirror those used in the
EU. These include new dairy and composite certification requirements,
an anti-microbial resistance ``reciprocity'' requirement, and others.
Even when long and arduous government-to-government discussions resolve
a concern, the time involved, and the frequent introduction of new
requirements create market instability and uncertainty that puts
hundreds of millions of dollars of trade at risk. The EU's insistence
that its trading partners must mirror process requirements and not
simply outcome requirements fail to comply with the EU's trade
obligations and needlessly increases the volatility of supplying the EU
market.
Geographical Indications (GIs) and Common Food Names
One area that has become a significant barrier confronting U.S.
export opportunities to numerous markets in recent years has been the
misuse of GIs by the European Union. In principle, GI protections are
used to describe specialized products made in a specific region in
order to protect the unique nature of that product. However, the EU has
used GIs to restrict the use of generic terms by which millions of
consumers recognize some of their favorite foods; use of GIs to create
this result must be firmly rejected as the protectionist and anti-trade
policy that it is.
The U.S. Government must secure firm and explicit trade commitments
assuring the future use of specific generic food and beverage names
targeted by EU monopolization efforts and rejecting the use of GIs as
barriers to trade in products relying on common names. USMCA's common
food name side letter provisions established a building block precedent
affirming market access rights for a non-exhaustive list of commonly
used product terms. To effectively combat the EU's trade-distorting and
WTO-illegal actions, the U.S. Government must proactively and
consistently expand upon this pilot model with other trading partners
to ensure that market access rights protections for American-made
common food name products are strengthened and cloaked barriers to
trade are rejected.
Revitalization of the World Trade Organizations is Needed to Strengthen
this Trade Pillar
The World Trade Organization is critically important for the U.S.
dairy industry. By establishing the rules for global dairy trade, and
more broadly agricultural trade, the WTO can help shape government
policies that reduce protectionist trade distortions and bring
predictability and lower risks for American dairy exports. But the WTO
needs to be revitalized, both in terms of negotiating reforms that lead
to market liberalization and the reduction of protectionist non-tariff
trade barriers, and of providing a functioning dispute settlement
system.
The U.S. dairy industry strongly supports U.S. leadership in
ensuring that the WTO has a functioning dispute settlement system. With
a myriad of questionable non-tariff barriers to U.S. dairy exports,
effective enforcement of current trade agreements requires the WTO to
have an effective dispute settlement system.
With the WTO's 12th Ministerial occurring later this month, there
is an opportunity to establish a future negotiating agenda for
agriculture that leads to enhanced transparency of government policies,
including tariff treatment, market-based and sustainable trade
liberalization, and reduced trade distortions. NMPF has joined with
other U.S. agricultural stakeholders in calling for U.S. leadership and
identifying policy priorities for the WTO. Enforceable and transparent
rules that are enabled by a reformed WTO could lower barriers and
market distortions. Care is needed in the upcoming Ministerial,
however, to ensure that we have an effective, credible, and well-
functioning dispute settlement process, while ensuring that any future
framework for agriculture negotiations has a commensurate level of
ambition for market access compared to domestic support and improves
the transparency of government policies.
Dairy is an Agricultural Leader on Improving Sustainability
Given heightened global interest in sustainable food systems, the
U.S. dairy industry is well poised to meet the environmental and animal
welfare demands of the international community. American dairy farmers
have been environmental stewards for decades, tending with great care
to their land and water, and they value a proactive approach to
sustainability.
As a testament to dairy's endeavors, greenhouse gas emissions to
produce a gallon of milk dropped nearly 20% over the 10 years from 2007
to 2017 and the environmental footprint of a gallon of milk has
significantly decreased since 1944 (e.g., 90% less land, 65% less
water, 63% smaller carbon footprint per unit of milk). This puts us at
the forefront on sustainability globally with the lowest greenhouse gas
footprint per gallon of milk of any region in the world according to
the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
To continue and enhance our efforts to combat climate change, the
dairy industry has launched the Net Zero Initiative to reduce the
industry's climate impact to become carbon-neutral by as early as 2050
and minimize the water quality impacts of dairy farming. The U.S. dairy
industry has also developed the industry-driven Farmers Assuring
Responsible Management (FARM) \4\ program for animal care standards,
which became the first internationally certified dairy animal welfare
program in the world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://nationaldairyfarm.com/what-is-farm/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
U.S. dairy is fully committed to building upon its good track
record on sustainability and supports the U.S. Government's approach to
pro-trade, pro-innovation, and pro-inclusive sustainability. We
appreciate the leadership the U.S. Government demonstrated in charting
this type of positive sustainability agenda during this year's Food
Systems Summit process and most recently during its COP26 engagements
and look forward to continuing to play an active role on both fronts as
subsequent project streams unfold in the coming year.
With climate and sustainability issues commanding ever-increasing
focus around the world, it will be essential for the United States to
continue to serve as a leader globally on these issues, both for their
own sake and to combat other voices that are driving more
protectionist, anti-trade, anti-developed country, and anti-livestock
narratives. Those voices include the EU and unfortunately even some
officials at leading international institutions such as the World
Health Organization.
Conclusion
The U.S. dairy industry recognizes the importance of expanding
overseas market opportunities to bolster our farmers, processors, and
manufacturers here at home. We have worked hard to establish the U.S.
as a reliable and environmentally sustainable supplier of safe and
nutritious products to meet growing foreign demand for high-quality
American dairy products, and we want to be able to capitalize on these
extensive efforts through improved access to these markets.
New trade agreements will be necessary not only to expand market
access, but to preserve it, as our competitors grow their own networks
of FTAs and in the process threaten to render U.S. exports
uncompetitive. The health of the dairy industry, including the many
farmers and manufacturing workers it employs throughout its supply
chain, will depend on such agreements, on ensuring vigorous enforcement
of those agreements, and on bilateral efforts to address trade
barriers.
The U.S. dairy industry--from farmers to exporters and all the
related jobs tied to our sector--needs the opportunity to help meet
rising global dairy demand, and consumers around the world need the
great American-made products we produce.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide comments on these important
issues to this Committee. Thank you.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Vander Woude, and
points well taken. And let the record stipulate the fact that
you being a constituent of the Chairman has nothing to do with
the generous time clock I gave you.
Mr. Vander Woude. Thank you.
The Chairman. Our next witness that we have before us is
the person--Latashia, here we go, our third witness. Get on the
right page. Latashia, we are very pleased that you would have
the opportunity to testify with us--Redhouse. Latashia Redhouse
is the Director of the American Indian Foods Program, which is
a part of the Intertribal Agricultural Council. Native
Americans historically have played an important role--
obviously, historically, we often, too often, in my opinion,
forget that critical role, and we are very pleased that the
Intertribal Agricultural Council is testifying before the
Subcommittee today. Ms. Redhouse is an enrolled member of Dine
Nation, and was raised in southeastern Utah. Please present
your testimony, Ms. Redhouse.

STATEMENT OF LATASHIA REDHOUSE, DIRECTOR, AMERICAN INDIAN FOODS
PROGRAM, INTERTRIBAL AGRICULTURE COUNCIL, VERNAL, UT

Ms. Redhouse. Thank you so much, Chairman Costa, Ranking
Member Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee on Livestock
and Foreign Agriculture. Thank you for inviting me to provide
you all with some information regarding livestock and foreign
agriculture trade. My name Latashia Redhouse. I serve as the
Director of the American Indian Foods Program at the
Intertribal Agriculture Council. I am a member of the Dine
Nation, and I am tuning in from the United Arab Emirates, where
I am representing Tribal producers at Dubai's Expo World 2020
and Te Aratini Festival of Indigenous and Tribal Ideas.
The Chairman. Well, that is impressive. What time zone are
you on?
Ms. Redhouse. Wow, yes. I am awake, I think.
The Chairman. What time is it in Doha?
Ms. Redhouse. It is 7:37 p.m.
The Chairman. Okay. Very good. Well, we are happy to have
your testimony. Please proceed.
Ms. Redhouse. Okay. Thank you. Today my testimony will
focus on the possibilities--foreign barriers to livestock and
foreign agriculture trade across Indian Country. The
Intertribal Agriculture Council was founded in 1987 to pursue
and promote the conservation, development, and use of our
agricultural resources for the betterment of our people.
Land-based agricultural resources are vital to the economic
and social welfare of many Native American and Alaskan Tribes.
The harmonies of man, soil, water, air, vegetation, and
wildlife that collectively make up the American Indian
agriculture community influence our emotional and spiritual
well-being. Prior to 1987 American Indian agriculture was
practically unheard of outside reservation boundaries. IAC's
responsiveness to on the ground needs and extensive networks
contribute across the spectrum of Tribal food systems,
development, and further governmental and partner outreach
efforts through Indian Country. Federal, state, and
organizational partners draw upon IAC's expertise to inform
programming and policies that directly impact Indian Country
and beyond.
Tribal agricultural production and food systems are
essential economic development and community drivers in Indian
Country. According to the 2017 Census of Agriculture, nearly
80,000 Tribal producers are operating on over 59 million acres
of land, while generating over $3.5 billion in economic
activity. Some estimates suggest that adequate investments in
Indian Country, including increased Federal funding for foreign
trade, and the removal of structural barriers to global market
access, could allow for the agriculture sector across Indian
Country to grow to a valuation of $45.4 billion, spurring
economic growth that will contribute to the physical
infrastructure necessary, while providing the pathway to Tribal
self-determination, food sovereignty, and economic growth. I
would like to mention that Chairman Costa, Member Correa,
Member Harder, Member Khanna, Member Hartzler, Member Moore,
and Ranking Member Johnson each represent states which are
among the top ten for American Indian and Alaska Native
producers, according to the 2017 Census of Agriculture.
The American Indian Foods Program is a program offered by
IAC, with a contract with the USDA Foreign Agricultural
Service. The partnership was developed as a platform for--
produced by American Indian certified food and ag businesses to
showcase products and share Tribal cultures with the world. The
program is designed to work with American Indian-owned
businesses to provide export education, and to facilitate
global market penetration, while developing sustainable
economics based on food production. The program is designed to
allow for domestic port to American Indian-owned businesses
interested in entering the international marketplace, while
developing sustainable economics based on food production.
The program also promotes and authorizes the use of the
Made/Produced by American Indian certified trademark to assist
American Indian producers in improving their market access,
thereby increasing the economic base of the Indian producer and
their community, while protecting American Indian producers and
consumers from fake and falsely advertised Indian-made
products. By converting the $3.3 billion in raw food products
currently already sold by producers on Indian reservations,
today we predict that Indian Country could alone become an
economic powerhouse, with an estimated $9 billion in premium
food products.
While the IAC/AIF provides support to agricultural
businesses seeking growth in the international marketplace,
many IAC/AIF members continue to experience increased
uncertainty and risk as the pandemic limits activities and
future trade developments. Persistent labor and supply chain
issues, coupled with the market uncertainties that both predate
and accompany the--these pandemic impacts are driving this
increase in uncertainty, along with the additional uncertainty
and trauma of operating in a global pandemic that has
disproportionately impacted Native people. During this
difficult time, Native producers' priorities understandably
shifted away from seeking international markets to supporting
their Tribal communities. 93 percent of Tribal producers
responding to IAC's COVID-19 response survey indicated that the
pandemic had impacted their international sales.
As Tribal communities began to emerge from pandemic-related
uncertainties and look again to international markets, some
longstanding policy and administrative problems must be
remedied if Tribal producers are going to be able to access
international markets. One of the longstanding problems is the
reality of infrastructure needs in Indian Country agriculture,
which for many years have gone underfunded, or unfunded.
Because of decades of being underserved by Federal programs,
Native producers began their pathway to accessing international
markets with fewer resources than their non-Native
counterparts. As a result, lagging behind in market access,
despite producing specialty and niche products that would do
very well internationally.
The reality of Federal underservice to Native producers,
and the need for Native producers to have better pathways to
access international markets was one of the driving factors
behind the Congressional adoption of Section 3312 of the
Agricultural Improvement Act of 2018, or 2018 Farm Bill. The
provision, one of the 63 Tribal-specific provisions included in
the final legislation, required the Secretary of Agriculture to
seek greater inclusion and participation of Native farmers,
ranchers, and producers on international trade missions, and to
report back to Congress about the status of Native producers in
trade missions. These missions represent critical opportunities
to promote Native produced products, many of which are highly
desirable on an international market. Despite this----
The Chairman. If you would please close here?
Ms. Redhouse. Yes.
The Chairman. The Chairman is being very generous with the
time this morning, I am not sure why, but please conclude.
Ms. Redhouse. Yes. Yes. So those are our barriers, and if
there are any questions, or anything that I could share, feel
free to reach out. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Redhouse follows:]

Prepared Statement of Latashia Redhouse, Director, American Indian
Foods Program, Intertribal Agriculture Council, Vernal, UT
Introduction
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the
Subcommittee Livestock on Foreign Agriculture, thank you for inviting
me to provide you all with some information regarding livestock and
foreign agriculture trade. My name is Latashia Redhouse. I serve as the
Director of the American Indian Foods program at the Intertribal
Agriculture Council. I am a member of Dine Nation and am tuning in from
the United Arab Emirates where I am representing Tribal producers at
Dubai's Expo World 2020 convention. Today my testimony will focus on
the possibilities for and barriers to livestock and foreign agriculture
trade across Indian Country.
Intertribal Agriculture Council (IAC)
The Intertribal Agriculture Council (IAC) was founded in 1987 to
pursue and promote the conservation, development and use of our
agricultural resources for the betterment of our people. Land-based
agricultural resources are vital to the economic and social welfare of
many Native American and Alaskan Tribes. The harmonies of man, soil,
water, air, vegetation and wildlife that collectively make up the
American Indian agriculture community, influence our emotional and
spiritual well being. Prior to 1987, American Indian agriculture was
practically unheard of outside reservation boundaries. IAC's
responsiveness to on-the-ground needs and extensive networks contribute
across the spectrum of Tribal food system development and further
governmental and partner outreach efforts throughout Indian Country.
Federal, state, and organizational partners draw upon IAC's expertise
to inform programming and policies that directly impact Indian Country
and beyond.
Tribal agriculture production and food systems are essential
economic development and community drivers in Indian Country. According
to the 2017 Census of Agriculture, nearly 80,000 Tribal producers are
operating on over 59 million acres of land while generating over $3.5
billion in economic activity. Some estimates suggest that adequate
investments in Indian Country, including increased Federal funding for
foreign trade and the removal of structural barriers to global market
access, could allow for the agriculture sector across Indian Country to
grow to a valuation of $45.4 billion, spurring economic growth that
will contribute to the physical infrastructure necessary while
providing the pathway to Tribal self-determination, food sovereignty,
and economic growth.
I would like to mention that Chairman Costa, Member Correa, Member
Harder, Member Khanna, Member Hartzler, Member Moore, and Ranking
Member Johnson, each represent states which are among the top ten for
American Indian/Alaska Native producers according to the 2017 Census of
Agriculture.
American Indian Foods (AIF)
The American Indian Foods (AIF) program of the Intertribal
Agriculture Council (IAC) began in 1998 under contract with the USDA
Foreign Agricultural Service. The partnership was developed as a
platform for Made/Produced by American Indian certified food and ag
businesses to showcase products and share Tribal cultures with the
world. The program is designed to work with American Indian owned
businesses to provide export education and to facilitate global market
penetration while developing sustainable economics based on food
production.
The program is designed to offer domestic support to American
Indian owned businesses interested in entering the international
marketplace while developing sustainable economics based on food
production. The program also promotes and authorizes the use of the
Made/Produced by American Indian certified trademark to assist American
Indian producers in improving their market success, thereby increasing
the economic base of the Indian producer and their community, while
protecting American Indian producers and consumers from fake and
falsely advertised Indian-made products.
By converting the $3.3 billion in raw food products currently
already sold by producers on Indian Reservations today, we predict that
Indian Country could become an economic powerhouse with an estimated $9
billion in premium food products, alone.
Barriers to Foreign Trade Across Indian Country & Possible Solutions
While the IAC AIF provides support to agricultural businesses
seeking growth in the international marketplace, many IAC AIF members
continue to experience increased uncertainty and risks as the pandemic
limits activities and future trade developments. Persistent labor and
supply chain issues, coupled with the market uncertainties that both
pre-date and accompany these pandemic impacts, are driving this
increased uncertainty, along with the additional uncertainty and trauma
of operating in a global pandemic that has disproportionately impacted
Native people. During this difficult time, Native producers' priorities
understandably shifted away from seeking international markets to
supporting their Tribal communities; 93% of Tribal producers responding
to IAC's COVID-19 response survey indicated that the pandemic had
impacted their international sales. As Tribal communities begin to
emerge from pandemic-related uncertainties and look again to
international markets, some long standing policy and administrative
problems must be remedied if Tribal producers are going to be able to
access international markets. One of the longstanding problems is the
reality of infrastructure needs in Indian Country agriculture, which
for many years have gone underfunded or unfunded. Because of decades of
being underserved by Federal programs, Native producers begin their
pathway to accessing international markets with fewer resources than
their non-Native counterparts, and as a result lag behind in market
access despite producing specialty and niche products that would do
very well internationally.
The reality of Federal underservice to Native producers and the
need for Native producers to have better pathways to access
international markets was one of the driving factors behind the
Congressional adoption of Sec. 3312 of the Agricultural Improvement Act
of 2018, or 2018 Farm Bill. This provision, one of the 63 Tribal
specific provisions included in the final legislation, required the
Secretary of Agriculture to seek greater inclusion and participation of
Native farmers, ranchers, and producers on international trade missions
and to report back to Congress about the status of Native producers in
trade missions. These missions represent critical opportunities to
promote Native-produced products, many of which are highly desirable on
the international market. Despite this progress in the 2018 Farm Bill
and directive to the Secretary, Native producers remained
underrepresented in international trade missions in 2019. This
provision was a recognition by Congress of the importance of
international trade missions in placing producers in front of potential
customers and easing pathways to international trade, and should be
implemented as soon as possible. Organizations like IAC, which
maintains a robust network of technical assistants across Indian
Country, can help USDA identify potential applicants for trade missions
to fulfill the promise of this farm bill provision.
Another issue we encounter is that foreign trade participants may
not understand the certification, licensing, and registration protocol
in the U.S. and various countries (for exports). Reproduction by
competitors or unethical sellers who take advantage of producers' lack
of knowledge remains a challenge as well. Participants with minimal
resources may be irreparably harmed by failed business deals and the
support to navigate these issues. Oftentimes, producers do not have the
cash flow to cover packaging, repackaging, or labeling costs. A
possible solution could include expanding educational efforts to
increase availability of resources on export requirements, as well as
marketing strategies and business planning. USDA FAS in-market
specialists are added resources to offer guidance and market
recommendations.
Native producers also face other unique challenges, such as
appropriative non-Native food businesses that seek to market their
products by claiming Native ancestry or cultural food practices. These
unscrupulous food business entities mimic unique Tribal food products
without legitimate claim to Tribal citizenship. Those businesses should
not be allowed to participate in programs that allow them to access
markets with products that perpetrate frauds on Tribal food producers
or food businesses.
We propose that the USDA provide tools and resources to analyze
risk management and best practices, including international logistics
(shipping, insurance, distribution, etc.).
Opportunities for Expanding Foreign Market Access to Tribal Producers
in Farm Bill 2023
One possible avenue for expanding foreign market access to Tribal
producers is through the Trade Title of the upcoming 2023 Farm Bill.
The Trade Title programs are a vital part of food production for
all food industries, especially in Indian Country. A growing number of
Tribes and individual Indian producers are engaged in trade of food and
agriculture products and have participated in the USDA Market Access
Program (MAP) via the Intertribal Agriculture Council's American Indian
Foods Program, which provides export-readiness training assistance and
the incorporation of products into international food trade shows.
Tribal food products have high market demand in overseas markets;
however, the hurdles necessary to engage in such markets are complex
and limit Tribal participation. Improvements to the Trade Title can
help support and build Tribal food businesses and provide new markets
for unique and traditional Tribal foods, while protecting producers and
increasing economic development.
We advocate for supporting and maintaining Tribal food and
agriculture businesses' entry into foreign markets by expanding Indian
Country's access to the Market Access Program (MAP) and protecting
unique Tribal foods against fraud. MAP could be expanded by
substantially increasing the funding available to the existing
agreements that facilitate coordination and administration of the MAP
program. This should be done with the intent of increasing Tribal food
business participation in the program so that Tribal audiences and more
Tribal food and agriculture businesses can benefit from the program.
The impact of such engagement will further solidify local food
economies and food businesses and stabilize Tribal economies.
We believe that the USDA should institute a system by which
fraudulent foods that mimic Tribal foods and Tribal food businesses can
be uncovered and prevented in the marketplace. Food fraud is on the
rise throughout the world, and unscrupulous food business entities are
already trying to mimic or replicate unique Tribal food products. Those
businesses should not be allowed to participate in programs that allow
them to access markets with products that perpetrate frauds on Tribal
food producers or food businesses.
We also advocate for improving interdepartmental coordination and
Tribal Government and individual Indian producer inclusion on all U.S.
trade missions. This should include recognizing Indian Country as the
USDA develops a stronger relationship with the Department of Commerce
on food and agriculture trade. A special interdepartmental coordination
group with USDA, Department of Commerce, Department of State, and other
applicable agencies should be created to ensure that Tribal food
production is properly supported and encouraged on Tribal lands and is
thereafter made a part of the U.S. trade missions and efforts to
promote agricultural trade.
To further increase Tribal producers' presence on the world
agriculture stage, Tribal Governments, Tribal food businesses, and
individual Tribal food producers should be included on all foreign
trade missions undertaken by the United States to further facilitate
the access of Tribal food products to such markets.
Last, we believe that it should be within Tribal nations' power to
trade directly with Indigenous Tribes and Nations from Canada and
Mexico. Tribal nations are sovereign nations and have the right to
regulate their own trade agreements, especially those with other
Indigenous entities.

The Chairman. Well, we appreciate that, and you are a very
good witness, and obviously you are well representing the
American Indian Foods Program as its Director, and we really
appreciate the Intertribal Agriculture Council's participation
in this morning's hearing, and I am sure there will be
questions. So, thank you.
Our fourth witness today is Ms. Jen Sorenson. Ms. Sorenson
is President of the National Pork Producers Council. In the
past decade she has been with Iowa Select Farms, an Iowa
farming business that markets more than five million hogs per
year. She grew on her family's livestock farm, raising pigs and
row crops, and we are looking forward very much to your
testimony. So, Ms. Sorenson, would you please begin?

STATEMENT OF JEN SORENSON, PRESIDENT, NATIONAL PORK PRODUCERS
COUNCIL, WASHINGTON, D.C.

Ms. Sorenson. Good morning, Chairman Costa, Ranking Member
Johnson, and Members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify on U.S. Pork Producers trade policies. I
am the Communications Director for Iowa Select Farms in West
Des Moines, Iowa, and President of the National Pork Producers
Council, which represents the interests of over 60,000 pork
producers across the United States.
Exports are crucial to the U.S. pork industry. Last year we
exported nearly $8 billion of pork, and those exports accounted
for \1/3\ of the average price received for every hog marketed,
or $56. Those exports also supported well over 100,000 American
jobs. The past few years have been incredibly difficult for hog
farmers. After more than 3 years of trade retaliation that
limited pork producers' ability to compete effectively around
the globe, the COVID pandemic unleashed unprecedented
challenges for the entire food supply chain. We have largely
bounced back, and U.S. pork exports are on track to hit record
highs, but still face some challenges.
Our exporting success can be largely attributed to high
market access outcomes negotiated under free trade agreements.
U.S. pork exports have increased more than 1,800 percent in
value, and over 1,700 percent in volume, since 1989, the year
the United States implemented its FTA with Canada, and started
opening international markets for value-added ag products. Not
only to FTA/tariffs, they also are a great avenue for U.S.
agricultural science-based standards to be accepted, and for
broader non-tariff market access issues to be resolved.
Policies that foster the free flow of goods and expand
export markets, mostly through FTAs, are critical to the
continued success of America's pork producers, U.S.
agriculture, and the overall American economy. The bottom line
is the United States needs more FTAs which eliminate or
significantly reduce tariffs and non-tariff barriers to U.S.
exports.
U.S. pork producers have four trade priorities. First,
preventing African Swine Fever from reaching our shores. An ASF
outbreak in the U.S. would have catastrophic effects on U.S.
pork domestically and abroad, and would negatively affect other
protein sectors, such as corn and soy. This is why it is
imperative we focus on prevention and planning. Second, better
market access for U.S. agriculture in Asia through the
negotiations of FTAs, including entering the comprehensive and
progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Recently we have seen some successes in the Asia/Pacific
region. Vietnam agreed to give better market access to U.S.
pork through the reduction of tariffs. Vietnam agreed to reduce
the MFN tariff for frozen pork from 15 percent to ten percent,
with the reduction to enter into force on July 1, 2022. We are
encouraged by the negotiations with Vietnam, and hope they lead
to broader trade discussions. We want to thank the 70+ Members
of Congress who signed the letter urging for these reductions
in tariffs. Similarly, the Philippine Government announced it
would increase its minimum access volume, its quota, and slash
tariffs on pork to curb food price inflation caused by ASF
outbreaks in that country. Since then, our exports there have
increased by over 100 percent.
Third, we welcome the recent announcement that the U.S. and
EU have come to an agreement on the Section 232 steel and
aluminum tariffs. We hope this leads to similar negotiations
with China, ultimately eliminating the 25 percent retaliatory
duty assessed by China on U.S. pork. And fourth, we must do
more as a nation to address the severe supply chain issues
affecting all parts of the U.S. economy. We are witnessing
enormous backlogs at ports throughout the country. We hope to
see swift passage of the Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 2021,
which will address some of the issues plaguing U.S. exports.
However, our supply chain issues go well beyond the ports, as
we face tremendous labor shortages that affect not only our
farms, but all aspects of the food chain.
In conclusion, expanding access to new and existing markets
is critical to the success and future growth of our industry.
U.S. pork producers need Congress and the Administration to
work together to quickly address these issues, enabling hog
farmers to continue contributing to the rural and overall U.S.
economy. Thank you so much for the opportunity to testify, and
I look forward to questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sorenson follows:]

Prepared Statement of Jen Sorenson, President, National Pork Producers
Council, Washington, D.C.
Introduction
The National Pork Producers Council (NPPC), representing 42
affiliated state associations, works to ensure the U.S. pork industry
remains a consistent and responsible supplier of high-quality pork to
domestic and international markets. Through public-policy outreach,
NPPC fights for reasonable legislation and regulations, develops
revenue and market opportunities and protects the livelihoods of
America's more than 60,000 pork producers.
The U.S. pork industry is a significant contributor to the economic
activity of U.S. agriculture and the broader U.S. economy, marketing
more than 131 million hogs in 2020. Those animals provided farm-level
cash receipts of more than $22 billion.
To produce those hogs, pork producers used roughly 1.1 billion
bushels of corn and the soybean meal from 455 million bushels of
soybeans in 2020. They also used roughly 5 million tons of distillers
dried grains with solubles (DDGS), a major byproduct of corn ethanol
production.
Economists Daniel Otto, Lee Schulz and Mark Imerman of Iowa State
University estimated that in 2016, the U.S. pork industry was directly
responsible for the creation of more than 37,000 full-time-equivalent
jobs in pork production and generated roughly 126,000 jobs in the rest
of agriculture. In addition, the pork sector was responsible for
124,750 jobs in meatpacking and processing and 33,400 jobs in
professional services such as financial services, insurance and real
estate. In total, the U.S. pork industry supports nearly 514,000 mostly
rural jobs in the United States.
Most importantly, U.S. pork producers in 2020 provided more than 28
billion pounds of safe, wholesome, and nutritious meat protein to
consumers worldwide.
Pork Exports
Trade is vitally important to America's pork producers, who
annually export over a quarter of production to more than 100
countries. The pork industry exported $7.9 billion of pork in 2020, and
those exports accounted for about $56 of the average price received for
each hog marketed and supported 110,000 American jobs, according to
Iowa State University economists.
Despite COVID-19 and many other challenges, including trade
retaliation from two of its top foreign markets, the U.S. pork industry
exported a record amount of pork in 2020, and it is poised to set a new
record this year. In fact, through September 2021, America's pork
producers already had shipped to foreign destinations $6.7 billion
worth of product compared with about $6.1 billion at the same point
last year, a 9.6 percent increase.
Annual exports of U.S. pork have been increasing for the past
several years, generally because of improving economies and rising
middle classes in countries around the world. Other factors also have
driven those increases, including in some nations the emergence of
robust hotel and restaurant industries--particularly as world travel
has become relatively easier and cheaper--and disease challenges. A
number of important U.S. export markets in Southeast Asia, for example,
have been battling African swine fever (ASF) for the past several years
so have needed to increase pork imports.
Trade Deals Key to Increasing Exports
The biggest reason for U.S. pork export growth over the past 2
decades is trade initiatives, whether free trade agreements (FTAs),
less-formal trade and investment framework agreements (TIFAs) or one-
off market access deals. Through such initiatives, the United States
moved from a net importer to a net exporter of pork in 1995.
In fact, as a result of trade agreements, U.S. pork exports have
increased more than 1,850 percent in value and nearly 1,750 percent in
volume since 1989, the year the United States implemented its FTA with
Canada and started opening international markets for value-added
agriculture products.
Since 2000, pork exports to FTA countries have increased 649
percent, and in countries where the United States has negotiated
preferential market access and where tariffs were slashed, pork exports
increased tremendously. The chart below shows the trajectory of U.S.
pork exports over the past 2 decades.
In addition to FTA's granting better market access for U.S. pork,
the agreements usually are the best avenue for U.S. agricultural
science-based standards to be accepted and for broader non-tariff
market access issues to be resolved.
Policies that foster the free flow of goods and expand export
markets--mostly through free trade agreements--are critical to the
continued success of America's pork producers, U.S. agriculture and the
overall American economy. The bottom line: The United States needs more
FTAs, which eliminate or significantly reduce tariff on and non-tariff
barriers to U.S. exports.
Annual U.S. Pork Exports

Success of FTAs
Proof of that can be seen in the robust trade among the United
States, Canada and Mexico under the 1994 North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), which set a zero-tariff rate for pork, and, now, the
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), which updated the 25 year old
NAFTA. In fact, Canada and Mexico are the top two destinations for U.S.
goods and services, accounting for more than \1/3\ of total U.S.
exports (Jan.-Sept. 2021) and supporting 14 million American jobs.
Those jobs produce the nearly $1.4 billion of goods that are shipped to
Canada and Mexico each day.
While trade between the United States and Canada has been good
since before the countries signed their FTA, trade between the United
States and Mexico before NAFTA was somewhat anemic, totaling only $50
billion each way in 1993. Today, U.S. exports to Mexico are valued at
$212 billion and support 1.5 million U.S. jobs. U.S. agricultural
exports to Mexico have grown nearly 292 percent since NAFTA was
implemented.
With regard to U.S. pork trade, Mexico and Canada were the No. 3
and No. 4 export markets, respectively, for the U.S. pork industry in
2020. From 1993, the year before NAFTA was implemented to 2020, U.S.
pork exports to Mexico increased 16-fold, from just 98 million pounds
to almost 2.1 billion pounds, and exports to Canada went from 36.4
million pounds to nearly 500 million pounds.
The United States has seen similar results after negotiating other
FTAs, with the U.S. pork industry seeing growth in exports to
Australia, Chile, Colombia, the DR-CAFTA countries--Dominican Republic,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama--Peru, Singapore
and South Korea.
It must be pointed out that, contrary to critics--both here and
abroad--FTAs do not negatively affect U.S. partner countries. The
Mexican pork industry, for example, has grown significantly since NAFTA
went into effect and U.S. pork exports to Mexico began increasing.
Estimates are that from 1995 to 2020 pork production in Mexico
increased by 60 percent. That rise was accompanied by--and often was
the result of--improvements in disease prevention and eradication and
in slaughter and processing plants and by a significant increase in
Mexican consumer demand. Its surge in pork production also prompted
Mexico to start exporting pork, including to the United States.
Looking East
More recently, the U.S. pork industry has turned much of its
attention toward the Asia-Pacific region because of its strong economic
growth and the population's cultural preference for pork.
In early 2020, for example, China and the United States struck the
historic ``Phase One'' trade deal that helped boost U.S. pork exports
to the Asian giant, which took in nearly $2.3 billion of American pork
last year, making it the No. 1 value market for the U.S. pork industry.
The United States is sending record amounts of pork to China
despite that country's tariffs, including a 25 percent retaliatory
duty--it had been 60 percent--on U.S. pork in response to U.S. tariffs
on $34 billion of Chinese goods, including steel and aluminum and
concerns with forced intellectual property transfers. U.S. pork tariffs
are a cumulative 33 percent compared with eight percent for the rest of
the world. The United States could be exporting more pork if not for
the continued tariffs.
Additionally, the Phase One deal with Japan went into effect on
Jan. 1, 2020, which put U.S. pork on a level playing field with other
major pork exporters, kept U.S. product flowing there--the U.S. pork
industry's No. 2 market in 2020--and helped regain some of the access
lost in Japan after the United States withdrew from the Trans-Pacific
Partnership (TPP).
In April 2021, after years of NPPC working with the U.S. and
Philippine Governments, the Philippines announced it would increase its
Minimum Access Volume (MAV) and slash tariffs on pork to curb food
price inflation caused by ASF outbreaks in the country. U.S. pork
exports to the Philippines have increased by 100 percent to over $122
million since then. Although these are great results for U.S. pork
producers, who have already seen the benefits, the tariff reductions
are not permanent and are set to expire within 12 months. The U.S. pork
industry continues to urge the Philippines Government to make the
tariff reductions permanent. This is a major downside of not having a
comprehensive trade agreement--tariffs reductions are seldom permanent.
Also this year, Vietnam agreed to give better market access to U.S.
pork through the reduction of tariffs. Although details have not been
finalized, the pork industry is encouraged by the negotiations with
Vietnam and hopes they lead to broader trade discussions.
Now, the U.S. pork industry, through the advocacy of NPPC, is
urging the Biden Administration to join the TTP's successor, the
Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership
(CPTPP), whose 11 member-countries combined have 500 million consumers
and a gross domestic product of $11.5 trillion, representing 13.5
percent of global GDP.
U.S. pork producers were strong proponents of the TPP, which in
addition to the United States included 11 Pacific Rim countries,
including Japan, which at the time of the TPP negotiations was the U.S.
pork industry's No. 1 value market despite the United States not having
a trade agreement with it. In fact, the prospects of shipping much more
pork to the Asia-Pacific region under the TPP were so good, they helped
prompt construction of five new pork packing plants across rural
America.
Trade Promotion Authority and Preferential Trade Programs
Almost every one of the FTAs the United States has concluded were
made possible by the enactment of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA)
legislation. TPA gave U.S. negotiators the ability to extract the best
deals possible from trading partners. Without it, no country would be
willing to make tough concessions to the United States for fear that
Congress could subsequently demand more. That is why NPPC and nearly
every other agricultural organization in the United States are in favor
of Congress expeditiously reauthorizing TPA, which expired July 1 of
this year. TPA lets U.S. trade representatives negotiate from a
position of strength and prompts U.S. trading partners to cut to their
bottom-line negotiating position.
The U.S. Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) recently expired,
too. GSP, which provides nonreciprocal, duty-free treatment of goods
exported to the United States from beneficiary countries, also gives
U.S. trade negotiators leverage when discussing market access with GSP-
eligible countries.
Supply Chain Issues Affecting U.S. Pork Trade
There also are a number of domestic issues that could hamper
exports, including a severe labor shortage--particularly at packing
plants, which process and package product for export--and disruptions
at America's shipping ports.
With regard to U.S. ports, the United States is facing a massive
backlog of containers waiting to be loaded into vessels and dozens of
ships waiting to offload cargo at West Coast ports. Such disruptions
are particularly acute for agricultural goods, many of which are
perishable, including pork. A majority of farm products exported to the
Asia-Pacific region route through the ports in Long Beach, Los Angeles
and Oakland, Calif., and Seattle and Tacoma, Wash.
In 2020, the U.S. pork industry sent 52 percent of its exports--$3
billion worth--through the West Coast ports. But shipping delays are
increasing costs to the industry and making the United States an
unreliable trading partner.
Frequent last-minute cancellations of U.S. pork shipments have
undermined certainty and eroded trust with buyers in whom the pork
industry has invested heavily to earn. Some large international
retailers and restaurant chains are looking at sourcing pork from other
countries rather than waiting for U.S. product. If shipping delays
continue, more retailers are likely to follow suit.
Congress and the Administration must address the ports issues or
shipping delays may also negatively impact future trade negotiations
with Southeast Asian trading partners. NPPC supports the ``Ocean
Shipping Reform Act of 2021'' introduced by Reps. John Garamendi (D-CA)
and Dusty Johnson (R-SD), which would address the issues plaguing U.S.
exports.
On the labor front, like much of agriculture, the pork industry is
dealing with a lack of available workers. The shortage of labor was a
problem before COVID and has been exacerbated by it, with some farms
facing job vacancy rates as high as 30 percent despite offering record-
high wages and benefits. Many pork packing plants do not have enough
workers to run second and/or Saturday and Sunday shifts, meaning supply
is having a hard time keeping up with demand, including export demand.
Reforming the existing H-2A visa to include year-round agricultural
workers--currently, it allows only temporary seasonal labor--without a
cap on the number of visas available, is the only solution given rural
America's declining population.
Finally, a wild card issue is ASF. While the swine-only disease
actually has helped boost U.S. pork exports to some countries that are
dealing with it, such as China, ASF now is in the Western Hemisphere
(the Dominican Republic and Haiti) for the first time in more than 40
years and poses a bigger threat to the United States than it did when
it was confined mostly to Southeast Asia and Eastern Europe.
The U.S. pork industry is working with USDA and other Federal
agencies to help stop the spread of ASF and to prevent the disease from
reaching the U.S. mainland. USDA recently asked the World Organization
for Animal Health (OIE) to recognize Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin
Islands, which neighbor the Dominican Republic and Haiti, as a
``protection zone,'' a classification that allows the United States to
maintain its current animal health status should a case of ASF be
detected on either U.S. territory. Such an OIE designation is critical
because it would let the United States, as an ASF-free country,
continue exporting pork.
NPPC commends Agriculture Secretary Vilsack for dedicating $500
million in USDA Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) funds for prevention
of and preparation for ASF, a pig-only disease that would be
devastating for the U.S. pork industry. The effects of ASF would
reverberate through the farm economy, devastating not only for the pork
industry but also other U.S. proteins and the corn and soy farmers who
feed producers' animals. This is why NPPC also has been asking Congress
for increased funding of $20 million for additional staff for the USDA
Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service's Veterinary Services field
force, $30 million to fully fund the National Animal Health Laboratory
Network (NAHLN) and funding for additional Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) agents and canine teams as authorized in P.L. 116-122,
the Protecting America's Food and Agriculture Act of 2019.
Conclusion
The importance of trade to the U.S. pork industry--indeed to the
entire U.S. economy--cannot be overstated. America's pork producers get
more than a third of their income from exports, and those exports
contribute significantly to U.S. agriculture's positive balance of
trade.
Free, fair and reciprocal trade has helped the United States become
an economic powerhouse. To maintain that station, the country must
expand trade in existing markets and open new ones, and it must resolve
issues that could negatively affect the ability to trade.
For the U.S. pork industry, that means: joining the CPTPP;
expanding market access in Southeast Asian countries such as Vietnam;
getting China to remove its retaliatory tariffs on pork; renewing TPA;
addressing the country's aging ports and labor shortage; and keeping
the United States ASF-free.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Ms. Sorenson, for your
focused testimony. And I will say that the efforts of this
Subcommittee, and other Members, on the critical challenges
facing the supply chain, I really look at it in two categories:
and that is; one, short-term things that we can do to remedy
the situation; and long-term efforts. The legislation that we
have referenced, and that you noted, that Congressman Garamendi
is carrying I think is very important. I put that more in the
longer-term, along with the President's signing of the
infrastructure package that will allow us an opportunity to
expand our ports and harbors.
But there are other parts of the supply chain that more
immediately need our addressing, in terms of the ability to
make trucking available, and other efforts to get these goods
to ports. So it is all of the above, both the short-term and
the long-term, that we need to be focused on, and we are going
to try everything we can to focus on those comments that you
made. So thank you very much.
I would like to now defer to my colleague, the Ranking
Member here from South Dakota, to introduce our fifth and final
witness, who happens to be a constituent of his. Mr. Johnson.
Mr. Johnson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and yes, our next
witness is a South Dakotan, and I want to just share two
thoughts about him. First off, he has a tremendous legacy of
leadership on the farm. He is the fourth generation on the
farm, and he has done a good job of raising the fifth, and I
have to say, I mention the sixth generation coming up behind
him as well. I have been on his family's land, and he has
taught me about the impacts of drought on soybeans, and on
corn, there on his property, and it is a remarkable legacy of
leadership on the farm.
But there is also a remarkable family legacy in advocacy.
He is appearing before you today as President of the American
Soybean Association, and he has done a good job in the last
year on that front, but you shouldn't be surprised when I
mention that his son, Jordan, is the President of the South
Dakota Soybean Association. I guess, clearly that acorn didn't
fall very far from the tree. By the way, it is Jordan's
birthday today, so thank you to our witness for taking time
away from his son. So without any further ado, Mr. Chairman, I
am happy to introduce Mr. Kevin Scott, the President of the
American Soybean Association.
The Chairman. Well, that is an excellent introduction, my
friend, and obviously you can extend, from the entire
Subcommittee, a happy birthday wish to your son.
Mr. Scott. Thank you.
The Chairman. Please begin.

STATEMENT OF KEVIN SCOTT, PRESIDENT, AMERICAN SOYBEAN
ASSOCIATION, ST. LOUIS, MO

Mr. Scott. Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and
Members of the House Agriculture Committee Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture Subcommittee, it is an honor to testify
before you today on trade policy and priorities of American
soybean growers. My name is Kevin Scott, and I am a soybean
farmer from South Dakota. I also have the privilege of serving
as President of the American Soybean Association, which
represented U.S. soybean farmers on national policy matters.
International trade is a pillar of the U.S. soybean
industry. More than 50 percent of U.S. soy was exported to
foreign markets last year. Continued access to existing
markets, and new ones, is critical to our long-term success. We
need your support, and the Administration's support, to assure
the free, fair trade that will keep U.S. soy farmers
competitive. In the time allowed, I would like to discuss a few
of our key trade priorities, though a full account can be found
in my written testimony.
Let me begin with China. China is the largest importer of
soybeans in the world, and by far the biggest export market for
U.S. soy. In 2020 and 2021 China imported almost 32 million
metric tons of soy from the U.S. Exports to Mexico, our second
largest export market, was just under 5 million metric tons, by
comparison. We represent more than 35 percent of China's soy
imports, with one in three rows of beans grown in the U.S.
shipped to China to fill that demand.
However, as the Committee is aware, U.S. soybean exports to
China came to a halt during the 2018 trade war. At the height
of disruption, U.S. soy's footprint in the Chinese market
reached a little over 12 percent. The same year, Brazilian
imports captured nearly 75 percent of the China market. Soy
growers began building the China market for U.S. beans more
than 40 years ago. They are keenly aware of what it takes to
establish new markets, and likewise that markets, once lost,
are extremely difficult to rebuild.
The China Phase One deal has been critical to providing
relief from retaliatory tariffs levied by China on U.S. soybean
imports, but the agreement expires after 2021. There is still
work to be done, particularly regarding ag biotech, which has
been a major barrier to bringing new soybean traits to U.S.
producers. We encourage USTR to hold China accountable to its
biotech commitments made under the Phase One agreements.
U.S. soybean growers need predictability and certainty that
we can retain market access in China. The past several years
have been extremely difficult for our industry, and we are now
forced to compete with Brazil and Argentina, who, recognizing
our trade friction with China, increased soy production, and
cut into global markets well beyond China.
Turning to Mexico, and the importance of free trade
agreements, under NAFTA, U.S. soybean exports to Mexico
tripled, and again Mexico is now our number two export market.
When President Trump announced his intent to renegotiate NAFTA,
ASA's ask was do no harm. We were pleased USMCA maintained our
existing market access, but recent events in Mexico are
concerning. The government has not approved a new biotech
product for import since 2018, and recently it rejected a
pending biotech corn application without scientific
justification. These actions are contrary to ag biotech
provisions in USMCA to which Mexico committed, provisions we
feel are the gold standard.
Right now U.S. soybean exports to Mexico are unhindered,
but the consequences of these actions, or lack thereof, could
impact future trade. If new seed varieties cannot get approval
in both Mexico and China, developers may decide not to
commercialize new traits. We urge President Biden to address
these issues directly with President Lopez Obrador. The U.S.
was once a leader in establishing new free trade agreements,
but our last new free trade agreement entered into force in
2012, despite the U.S. having negotiated the Trans-Pacific
Partnership. That is nearly 10 years of inactivity for codified
market expansion that could have helped U.S. agriculture.
While the U.S. remains idle, our international competitors
forged ahead. Six new and significant regional trade agreements
now include preferential tariff treatment for ag products from
our competitors. We encourage the Administration to negotiate
re-entry into CPTPP, and for USTR to use FTAs to maximize our
strategic position in the global economy, and give U.S.
agriculture much needed market access in emerging markets.
Last, we would love to see a doubling of MAP and FMD funds.
This only scratches the surface of ASA's trade priorities.
Again, a full list is in my written testimony. Thank you
sincerely for holding this hearing, and the opportunity to
testify.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]

Prepared Statement of Kevin Scott, President, American Soybean
Association, St. Louis, MO
Introduction
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the House
Agriculture Committee Livestock and Foreign Agriculture Subcommittee,
it is an honor to testify before you today on trade policy and the
priorities of American soybean growers. My name is Kevin Scott. I am a
soybean farmer from Valley Springs, South Dakota, and I have the
privilege of serving as President of the American Soybean Association
(ASA). Our association, founded in 1920, represents all U.S. soybean
farmers on domestic and international policy issues important to the
soybean industry. ASA has 26 affiliated state associations representing
more than 500,000 farmers in 30 soybean-producing states.
The U.S. soy industry has a profound, positive impact on the U.S.
economy. We have long been U.S. agriculture's #1 export crop, and a by-
the-numbers look demonstrates soy's value to our domestic economic
health. USDA projects 86 million acres of soy will be harvested in
2021, with a record production forecast of 4.4 billion bushels. Soybean
production alone accounts for close to 150,000 jobs, more than $6
billion in wages and $86.5 billion in revenues, according to a recent
study\1\ by the United Soybean Board/Soy Checkoff and National Oilseeds
Processors Association. This does not even include secondary soy
markets and supporting industries like biodiesel, grain elevators, feed
mills, ports, rail, refining, barges, etc., which bring soy's national
revenue impacts to a significant $115.8 billion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://soygrowers.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/
1USB_QSSB_Economic_Impact_of_
Soybeans_National.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As that price tag would convey, international trade is one of the
pillars of the U.S. soybean industry. Exports to foreign markets were
more than 50% of U.S. soy production this last marketing year.
Continued access to those existing markets, new markets, and
international food aid markets are critical to sustaining U.S. soybean
growers' success. To that end, ASA works to promote U.S. soy's quality
and uses overseas through both its World Initiative for Soy in Human
Health (WISHH)--ASA's long-term market development program--and partner
organization, the U.S. Soybean Export Council (USSEC). Support from the
Administration and Congress is vital to assure the free and fair trade
needed to keep U.S. soybean growers competitive and bolster ASA's
efforts with both WISHH and USSEC.
China
China is the largest importer of soybeans in the world and is the
biggest export market for U.S. soybeans. In marketing year (MY) 2020/
21, China imported 99.8 million metric tons (MMT). Comparatively, U.S.
soybean exports to Mexico--our second largest export market--only
totaled 4.9 MMT for that same year. Right now, U.S. soy represents more
than 35% of China's soy imports, and one in three rows of beans grown
in the U.S. is shipped to China to fill that great demand. Further,
USDA expects China's demand for imported soybeans to increase to 100.0
MMT in MY2021/22 because China's hog herd has now largely recovered
African Swine Fever, which has plagued the country the last 3 years.
It is critical to note that soy exports to China are still down
compared to MY2016/17 levels. As the Committee is aware, U.S. soybean
exports to China not only plummeted--but essentially halted--during the
trade war with China that began in spring 2018 and escalated that
summer. In 2017, China was a $14 billion+ market for U.S. soy.
Contrarily, at the height of the disruption, U.S. soy's footprint in
the Chinese market reached only 12.5%. That same year, Brazilian
imports captured nearly 75% of the Chinese market. U.S. soy growers
started building the China market for U.S. beans more than 40 years
ago. Thus, soy growers are keenly aware of the time, financial and
related investments it takes to establish new markets and are likewise
aware that markets, once lost, are extremely difficult to rebuild.
The China Phase One deal was instrumental in providing relief from
the tit-for-tat, retaliatory tariffs levied on U.S. soybean imports by
China in 2018, and that reprieve--while not yet permanent--has been
beneficial for U.S. soybean growers. Now, the Phase One agreement will
expire at the end of 2021. While soy and other trade has resumed to
more normal levels, there is still work to be done, particularly
regarding biotechnology, which has been a major barrier to bringing new
soybean traits to U.S. producers.
China continues to maintain an asynchronous approval process for
biotech events, and there is often a backlog of unapproved traits. For
reference, approvals typically take 6 years, and the regulatory
procedures and timelines are opaque and unpredictable. ASA has for
years implored our leaders insist China make real progress in
establishing a more predictable, timely and transparent approval
system.
Under Annex 16 of the Phase One agreement, China is required to
reform its agricultural biotechnology approval process. This includes a
requirement to reduce the average approval time to 24 months, base its
safety evaluation processes on international standards and
recommendations, and implement new procedural steps designed to
facilitate approval of biotechnology products considering the intended
use.
We encourage the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative to hold
China accountable to its biotech commitments made under the Phase One
agreement. The trait approval process should be a function of a
consistent and efficient regulatory system. However, without the U.S.
Government pressing the Chinese on this reform, it will take much
longer for new seed varieties to be made available to U.S. soybean
growers, which has implications for productivity, weed control,
quality, environmental footprint and more. Compounding the situation,
China's lack of willingness to quickly and efficiently approve traits
can preclude seed manufacturers from being amenable to developing more
new and improved seeds--a costly process--and those seeds from then
being ready and available for approvals by other countries, which are
proportionately smaller markets and not always ``worth the effort'' of
those manufacturers if not approved for use by China.
ASA remains concerned about the ongoing effects of Section 301
tariffs on the trade environment. As noted, the Phase One agreement did
not lift retaliatory tariffs on soybean exports but instead created a
waiver process under which importers can request U.S. soy be imported
at normal duty rates. While the waiver process is functional and
resulted in near record levels of exports in the 2020/21MY, the waiver
process is not guaranteed by China and could change at any time,
resulting in elevated tariff levels that would again significantly
impact U.S. exports.
Regarding products imported into the U.S., several critical inputs
from China are still subject to tariffs by the U.S. Government. These
include fertilizer inputs such as phosphate, as well as several key
chemistries on which soybean growers rely for crop protection. We
encourage the Administration to closely reexamine the efficacy of these
tariffs and expand the exclusion process for products widely used in
agriculture to avoid compounding their negative impacts.
The outlook for U.S.-China relations is unclear, and our global
competitors are aware of this situation. ASA understands that there are
myriad geopolitical issues facing the U.S. when it comes to negotiating
with Beijing, and we are supportive of the U.S. Government finding a
long-term solution to these longstanding issues.
However, U.S. soybean growers need predictability and certainty
that we will retain market access in China. The past several years have
been extremely difficult for the U.S. soybean industry. While we have
regained some market share in China, we now are forced to compete much
harder with South American countries than before 2018, not just with
their exports to China but with their increased soy sales around the
world; those other countries, for instance Brazil and Argentina, have
increased soy production as a result of our ongoing trade friction with
China.
Mexico
Mexico offers a great example of a non-tariff tool that can be
highly effective: the free trade agreement (FTA). Under NAFTA, U.S.
soybean exports to Mexico tripled, and Mexico is now the #2 market for
whole U.S. soybeans, soybean oil and soybean meal. U.S. beans exported
to Mexico have grown exponentially, and those market gains speak to the
possibilities for American agriculture when utilizing these multi and
bilateral agreements.
Before the entry into force of the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), Mexico imposed a seasonal tariff of 15% on soybeans.
Under NAFTA, Mexico immediately reduced this tariff to 10% and
shortened the dutiable season from Aug. 1-Jan. 31 to Oct. 1-Dec. 31.
This tariff was phased out by 2003. Mexico had tariffs of 15% on
soybean meal, 10% on crude soybean oil, and 20% on refined soybean oil.
These restrictions were also phased out over 10 years.
When President Trump announced his intent to renegotiate NAFTA into
what became the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA), ASA's topline
message was ``do no harm.'' We were pleased to see the new agreement
maintained our existing market access and included improved language
around regulatory transparency, sanitary and phytosanitary issues, and
other technical matters.
Recent events in Mexico are, however, cause for concern. Under the
Administration of President Lopez Obrador, Mexico has not maintained a
science-based approval process for agricultural biotechnology. The
government has not approved a new biotechnology product for import
since 2018 and recently rejected a pending biotech corn application
without any scientific justification. Currently, there is a backlog of
25 biotechnology traits pending approval in Mexico. These actions are
contrary to provisions Mexico committed to regarding agricultural
biotechnology in USMCA, which we see as the ``gold star'' of
biotechnology provisions in existing FTAs.
I want to be clear: At this moment in time, U.S. soybean exports to
Mexico are unhindered. Yet, we continue to sell our product to Mexico
with a wary eye on the future. These actions, or lack thereof,
regarding Mexico's approval process are concerning to ASA for two
primary reasons.
First, Mexico's current approach to biotechnology and seeming
adoption of the ``precautionary principle'' model of regulation is the
exact opposite of what Mexico committed to uphold when it ratified
USMCA. If the U.S. does not hold our closest trading partner
accountable to its commitments, what message does that send to the rest
of the world?
Second, while there are no soybean traits of note pending in
Mexico, ASA is strongly concerned with the long-term consequences and
lingering effects of this lack of regulatory approval. The longer this
issue lingers in Mexico, the greater the odds are that this will have a
trickle-down effect on the availability of new biotechnology products
for U.S. soybean growers or increase the risk for trade disruption. If
a new seed variety cannot get approval in Mexico, developers--as
mentioned with China--may choose not to commercialize new traits, which
would decrease the availability of new varieties for our farmers. In
turn, this could have a negative effect on the sustainability of U.S.
farmers.
ASA strongly urges President Biden to address these issues directly
with President Lopez Obrador, and we stand ready and willing to help in
any way we can.
Bilateral and Multilateral Engagement
Trade promotion and market access are major priorities for the U.S.
soybean industry. Tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade are frequent
problems for our exports, and these barriers limit the potential for
predictable global market access for soybeans, soybean meal and soybean
oil. Barriers facing U.S. soybeans and soy products include tariffs and
quotas, unjustified or risk-unproportionate sanitary and phytosanitary
measures, and rules and regulations not based in science. These
obstacles distort markets and reduce the potential for U.S. soy
exports.
We have been heartened to see the Administration take actions with
the European Union in resolving the longstanding dispute on aircraft
subsidies, as well as resolution on the Section 232 tariffs on steel
and aluminum from the EU. However, we remain greatly concerned with the
current U.S. approach to bilateral and multilateral agreements. The
U.S. was once a leader in establishing new free trade agreements.
Nevertheless, the FTA landscape has changed considerably since the last
new U.S.-based FTA with Columbia was signed. While the U.S. has engaged
in negotiations of existing agreements such as USMCA and the updated
U.S. Korean Free Trade Agreement (KORUS), our last new FTA entered into
force in 2012, despite having negotiated the Trans-Pacific Partnership
(TPP). That is nearly 10 years of stagnation for codified market
expansion for U.S. agriculture.
While the U.S. has remained idle, our international competitors
have been extremely active in forging ahead with new multilateral
agreements. Six large, regional trade agreements have recently
concluded and include preferential tariff treatment for agriculture
products. These agreements include the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), the EU-Japan Economic
Partnership Agreement, the EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade
Agreement (CETA), the EU-Mercosur FTA, the EU-Ukraine Deep and
Comprehensive FTA, and the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
(RCEP).
American agriculture does not benefit from any of these agreements.
Our competitors will see preferential market access for their products
and increased market access while the U.S. sits on the sidelines.
ASA recognizes that the international landscape has changed since
the U.S. first negotiated the original TPP, and we are grateful for
Ambassador Tai's leadership both during those negotiations and now in
her role as the U.S. Trade Representative. Continued market access in
the Indo-Pacific region is of critical importance to the continued
success of U.S. soybean growers. Outside of China, several of U.S.
soy's top ten export markets are in the region: Indonesia, Japan,
Taiwan, Thailand and Bangladesh.
The importance of expanded market access for U.S. soybean exports
cannot be overstated, particularly if we are to diversify our export
markets and decrease our reliance on the Chinese market. An original
intent of TPP was to create a hedge around China, and ASA still
believes that agreement holds tremendous potential for U.S.
agriculture. We strongly encourage the Administration to reengage in
negotiations for reentry into the CPTPP. Furthermore, we encourage USTR
to look to multilateral free trade agreements to maximize the U.S.'s
strategic position in the global economy and to give U.S. agriculture
much-needed market access in emerging economies.
World Trade Organization Reform
ASA is encouraged to see the U.S. reengaging with the World Trade
Organization (WTO). The benefits of free and fair trade to U.S.
agriculture are greatly enhanced by well-defined rules and functional
international institutions. However, flaws in the WTO system have
become apparent over the past several years, and reform is badly
needed. It is up to the U.S. to lead our trading partners in reforming
the WTO. We are under no illusions about the difficulty of this task.
Success, however, would serve as a lasting achievement that would
benefit U.S. agriculture for years to come.
We understand there is skepticism toward the importance of the WTO.
However, ASA and U.S. soybean growers are supportive of the WTO and
want it to function well. ASA, alongside several other agricultural
stakeholders, have come together with a set of policy recommendations
for the U.S. in the leadup to the Twelfth Ministerial Conference of the
WTO, to be held the week after U.S. Thanksgiving in Geneva,
Switzerland.
Ultimately, WTO reform needs to include: (1) an effective dispute
settlement system, (2) compliance of WTO-member countries in
implementing current commitments, and (3) more market-oriented support
for farmers and reduced protection so U.S. agriculture can sell more
product to our global customers.
Emerging Markets
Last year, the U.S. formally launched negotiations for a
comprehensive free trade agreement with Kenya. While those talks are
currently paused while the Administration reviews its trade policy
priorities, U.S. soy sees tremendous potential in expanded access to
the African market. An FTA with Kenya would represent the U.S.' first
FTA with a sub-Saharan African nation. Should we gain market access in
that country, it could represent a shifting of the tide and present a
counter to the prevailing skeptical European attitudes toward modern
agriculture.
In 2017, our partner organization, USSEC, embarked on a strategy to
diversify U.S. soy's export markets and increase investments in
emerging markets around the world. Many of those countries import
relatively small amounts of U.S. soy or none at all (as is the case of
Kenya). At the same time, some of those emerging markets represent good
opportunities for growth in the medium to long-term future due to their
growing populations and middle class.
A 2019 report on U.S. soy export opportunities in Kenya found there
is a demand for soybean meal as the preferred protein source for animal
feed manufacturers. However, in-country production is limited, and
Kenya imports around 200,000 MT of soy per annum from Uganda, Zambia
and Malawi. With its growing population and economy, the demand for
animal feed in Kenya is expected to grow further. However, there is
currently a large obstacle facing U.S. soy. In 2012, Kenya implemented
an import ban on genetically modified crops following the publication
of an inflammatory--and since-retracted--report that claimed herbicide-
tolerant corn caused cancer in rats. This report, while responsible for
a flurry of anti-biotechnology activity, has been widely discredited
and, as mentioned, ultimately was retracted. However, the damage was
done, and the ban remains in place.
ASA strongly supports reengagement in bilateral talks with Kenya as
a way to ease this ban on imports of genetically engineered crops.
Furthermore, an FTA with Kenya could open the door to future
partnership with other African nations.
While Kenya may represent our current best hope for an FTA, U.S.
soy has not been idle on the African continent. Through ASA's long-term
market development program, WISHH, U.S. soy has been hard at work
increasing the demand for high quality soy protein used as livestock
feed to meet the world's protein needs. WISHH identifies markets that
demonstrate growth potential. Working with key in-country stakeholders,
WISHH then works within those systems to build resiliency in trade
while positioning U.S. soy as a protein partner for the future.
On the African continent, WISHH recently completed a 5 year project
in Ghana that aims to improve the quality of poultry feed and its
accessibility to poultry producers. Through working on the ground in-
market, WISHH worked with stakeholders at Kansas State University and
the Adventist Development and Relief Agency to educate farmers about
grain storage and quality. Through demonstrations, poultry farmers were
taught to maximize the efficiency of feed to decrease production costs
and increase flock health. This in turn showed the benefits of using
soy as the primary protein source for Ghanian chickens. As a result,
this project helps meet Ghana's protein needs through increased egg
consumption.
Looking outside the African continent, U.S. soy sees continued
promise in emerging markets in Southeast Asia. In Cambodia, fish are an
integral part of the diet, but wild-caught fish account for more than
75% of the domestic market. Local officials recognize the unsustainable
nature of the domestic fish market and have turned to aquaculture to
meet demand for freshwater fish.
Another WISHH project, CAST (Commercialization of Aquaculture for
Sustainable Trade), is working in-country to address this challenge.
The project is designed to accelerate production of high-demand fish
species for the Cambodian market and develop a lasting aquaculture
industry that recognizes the value of soy protein in feed. CAST will
impact all aspects of the aquaculture value chain, including 600
commercial fish farmers, input suppliers and the buyers of farmers'
fish production.
WISHH has also worked on aquaculture projects in Cambodia and
Tanzania. Development of these emerging markets is part of U.S. soy's
long-term market expansion vision. The in-country work done by WISHH
today will, we hope, pave the way for deeper inroads for U.S. soy in
these regions.
Congressional Action
The long-term success of U.S. soy abroad would not be possible
without the foresight of Congress to create programs at USDA to assist
trade associations in promoting our products on a global stage. ASA is
a longtime cooperator of these programs, particularly the Market Access
Program (MAP) and the Foreign Market Development Program (FMD).
Utilizing MAP and FMD funds, ASA--through WISHH and USSEC--has
leveraged those dollars to increase market access, address technical
barriers to entry, and create on-the-ground capacity and demand for
U.S. soy. These cost-share programs are an excellent example of public-
private partnership.
Over the life span of these programs, however, industry funds have
risen dramatically while funding from the U.S. Government has remained
stagnant. Seventy-seven percent of total annual spending on market
development and promotion now comes from industry dollars, which are up
from just 45% in 1996.
While these programs have been greatly successful, it is concerning
that government investment levels have remained mostly unchanged--even
as the number of cooperators to these programs has increased. FMD has
been funded at the same level--$34.5 million annually--for 18 years, or
since 1997, and MAP funding has been level at $200 million since 2006.
As we look toward the 2023 Farm Bill, ASA strongly support efforts to
double these funding numbers to $400 million for MAP and $69 million
for FMD.
Finally, ASA strongly encourages Congress to reauthorize Trade
Promotion Authority (TPA). TPA is an important tool in the toolbox for
the U.S. to engage in FTA negotiations. Ensuring TPA is in place will
not only allow the President a chance to codify both the priorities of
his Administration and Congressional intent in negotiating procedures,
but also it will give assurance to our trading partners that there will
be a straightforward procedure in the U.S. Congress for consideration
of a final deal. We urge Congress to begin discussions with the
Administration to move TPA reauthorization forward when Congress
reconvenes in the new year.
Conclusion
Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the House
Agriculture Committee Livestock and Foreign Agriculture Subcommittee,
thank you again for the opportunity to testify on behalf of U.S.
soybean farmers regarding our industry's priorities for international
trade policy. As you have read throughout my testimony, continued
market access and expansion is the lifeblood of the American soybean
grower. Through sound trade policy and actions by the U.S. Government,
U.S. soy farmers will continue to grow high-quality soybeans to meet
the increasing demands of the global economy and remain a positive
contributor to our U.S. economy.
The soy industry stands ready to work with the Committee and
Subcommittee, Congress, and the Biden Administration to implement a
trade policy that is beneficial to American workers, consumers and
farmers. Thank you.

The Chairman. Thank you very much, Mr. Scott, for your
focused testimony, and, as we begin to set the table next year
for the reauthorization of the farm bill, your comments, and
Mr. Stenderup's comments, as it relates to the Market Access
Program, and the success that we have had, I remember back in
2008 and 2010, as we try to expand its efforts. And so
certainly I think there are opportunities here, and I think it
was timely for you to note them in your testimony.
We have now gotten to that part of the hearing where
Members will be allocated 5 minutes, as I said earlier,
alternating between Republicans and Democrats, to make comments
and ask questions. And I will take the prerogative of the Chair
to begin, and to use my time to ask some questions and make
comments that I think you posed by the testimony you have
given.
Mr. Stenderup, you talked about the unique challenges of
specialty crops, which we in California, as you know, like to
think we do as well as anyone in the world, but what unique
challenges do you see, in terms of trade, that we can better
focus our efforts to maintain a competitive edge? Mr. Kent, are
you there?
Mr. Stenderup. Yes, I am, Chairman Costa, and thank you for
the question. Specialty crops have a unique challenge, and they
are--I am not going to say up against the program commodities,
but that is basically what it is, particularly when it comes to
MAP funding. And since you almost asked me, I too believe we
should double the MAP funding from the--I believe it is at $200
million now, and it should be easily--it could be utilized at
$400 million, and I truly believe that.
The unique challenges for specialty crops are there are
just so many specialty crops. They don't have the
infrastructure themselves to promote and distribute like the
program crops, the larger commodities. So we have had, with
Sonny Perdue, and then we have had good experience now also
with the current Administration as far as recognition of
specialty crops.
The Chairman. Let us keep that thought in mind as we
proceed with the reauthorization next year, and build a
coalition of support for that effort. Mr. Vander Woude, you
have, in your testimony, talked about the importance of our
trade agreements, not just with our neighbor to the south,
Mexico, but also with Canada, the challenges we have had with
dairy exports. Mexico, of course, is one of the larger
importers of white cheese, and of course as was noted, our
periodic problems with Canada. I am thinking there is an
opportunity here, though, and it has always been a challenge,
with European Union. How do we get past the inclusion of
geographical indicators in trade agreements between the EU and
other trading partners that impact our dairy industry?
Mr. Vander Woude. So, yes, it has been a common practice of
the EU to use GIs in a lot of their free trade agreements,
which, in effect, just locks us out by the products that we
produce here in the U.S. with what we consider to be common
food names. They get those locked out in so many other
countries that we lose access to those countries with those
products. And if you take gouda, and you try to sell it as a
garma cheese or something, nobody is going to know what it is.
They all know it is gouda. They all know that it is brie, or
whatever. And so it has been a common practice of the EU to
slap those into their free trade agreements with other
countries.
The Chairman. Well, in another capacity I work with members
of the European Union, and I am suggesting that maybe we look
at getting their--our counterpart of the committee jurisdiction
in the European Parliament to meet with ours to really see if
we can get past the politics, and work through some of this.
Ms. Redhouse, you mentioned in your testimony that some
longstanding policy and administrative problems need to be
remedied for Native producers to be able to have access to
international markets. I assume that is why you are in Doha. Do
you have anything specific you want to talk about to that
access?
Ms. Redhouse. Yes, definitely. So one of the biggest
hurdles--but I also should start off with echoing Kent's and
Simon's deep appreciation for the Market Access Program. As a
recipient of MAP, it has been really helpful in increasing our
visibility with different international markets. But, what we
are trying to advocate on behalf of our constituents is to
increase Tribal producers' presence on the world ag stage, and
some of our producers do have trouble with meeting different
regulation requirements, or different labeling requirements. It
is a huge hurdle to cover costs for a lot of those specific
activities, and so I think most often our producers find that
as just one of the biggest challenges to enter the
international marketplace.
The Chairman. Thank you. Two of the previous witnesses made
reference to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and I think that
was a missed opportunity, and suggested that we reconsider re-
engaging with the TPP. Are your organizations prepared to
support that effort formally?
Mr. Vander Woude. Dairy is willing to support that,
definitely.
The Chairman. Mr. Stenderup?
Mr. Stenderup. Yes, I agree with the re-inventing of the
TPP also.
The Chairman. Thank you. Well, my time has expired, and I
will recognize my colleague from South Dakota, Mr. Dusty
Johnson, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Johnson. Yes. I will ask the same question to Mr.
Scott, Ms. Sorenson, and Ms. Vander Woude, and they can respond
in that order with about 45 seconds or less apiece, if they
could. First off, I just want to know, for your products, where
do you think the best opportunity for expanding market access
via free trade agreements would be? And then secondarily, if
there is a particular marketplace where you feel like producers
have been disadvantaged because countries in Europe or Asia
have not stood still, they have advanced free trade agreements
with other marketplaces, and as a result, America is at a
relative disadvantage, talk to us about what those marketplaces
would be. So, Mr. Scott?
Mr. Scott. Well, yes, expanding those markets is critical,
and we kind of figured that out when the tariffs hit from
China, shut us down in that market, which was taking a huge
portion of our export. We decided then that diversifying our
basket, putting all our eggs in all--not in that one all--all
one basket we are--was important, and--so we had been pushing
hard to develop other economies and markets in the Asian
continent, all over, African continent, even some of the
European markets that we had been shut out of previously, we
want to continue to push for those. So market access and
development is critical for us.
Mr. Johnson. Is there one top priority you think USTR
should be most focused on, relative to soybeans?
Mr. Scott. Well, soybeans are a fantastic supply of protein
for especially protein-deficient countries, and so where there
is a need for building human health, those are critical issues
for us, and we want to supply that need.
Mr. Johnson. Ms. Sorenson?
Ms. Sorenson. Yes, thank you. I would start off by saying
our U.S. exports into China are still faced with a 25 percent
retaliatory duty, when our competitors are faced with only
eight percent. Second, we support entering TPP, or CPTPP, if
tariffs are reduced. So we are very passionate about entering
into this trade agreement. It has significant market potential
for U.S. pork producers, especially given the number of
countries at the table, and the 50 million consumers that are
part of the agreement.
So, yesterday's announcement on Vietnam was progress. That
tariff will be reduced to ten percent, but CPTPP countries are
at 7.5 percent, and will be reduced to 5.6 percent in 2022,
putting U.S. pork at a disadvantage.
Mr. Johnson. Very good, thank you. Mr. Vander Woude?
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes. I will say, for us, China is
definitely--it is everyone's market. We have a 30 percent
tariff rate quota there, compared to New Zealand at zero, so
that is a big one. Vietnam used to be our largest customer for
milk powders. Today we have been locked out of that country due
to tariff rate quotas. Southeast Asia is our target, especially
coming from the West Coast, for California dairies and American
dairies, Asia is our target for trade agreements, and we have
been--the TPP was something we worked very hard on, and we hope
that can be resurrected at some point to at least gain access
to some of those countries.
Mr. Johnson. So Southeast Asia is the most key market, Mr.
Vander Woude, from a dairy perspective. Do we feel like the
Administration has been proactive enough in advancing FTAs in
that region?
Mr. Vander Woude. No. No, not at this point.
Mr. Johnson. And then doubling back to Ms. Sorenson, I
think you gave a great answer about China, and the disparate
tariffs there. Are you getting much of a sense that we are
making progress vis-a-vis reducing those retaliatory tariffs
from China on pork?
Ms. Sorenson. The Phase One agreement and ASF has created a
really large demand for pork around the world, but I continue
to say the problem that needs a resolution is our trade
retaliatory tariff of 25 percent on U.S. pork. Again, we face a
33 percent tariff, where our competitors face eight, and that
is our biggest setback right now, as we look at the opportunity
that we have in China.
Mr. Johnson. And so when pork talks to the Administration,
do you get a sense that they have some urgency behind resolving
that issue, ma'am?
Ms. Sorenson. No.
Mr. Johnson. Very good. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman's time has expired. The Chair
will now recognize the gentlewoman from Virginia, Abigail Davis
Spanberger.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
thank you so much to our witnesses for being here today. This
hearing is a very timely one, and so I am grateful for your
testimony, and the answers to our questions. Across central
Virginia I have heard from dairy farmers, cattlemen, livestock
producers, small business owners, and families trying to buy a
gallon of milk, and about the challenges that they are facing,
day to day related to so many of the disruptions that we have
seen in the supply chain.
One way that we know we can reduce supply chain bottlenecks
is by supporting free and fair trade policies that protect
American workers and businesses, and reduce the barriers of the
flow of goods across the globe. That is why I was proud to work
alongside my House colleagues, and the former Administration,
to help secure bipartisan support, ultimately, for the passage
of the USMCA last Congress. And so, as this deal continues to
be implemented, I want to make sure that we are working to
confirm that all parties are upholding their end of the deal.
And to that end, Mr. Vander Woude, I would ask a question
of you first. Central Virginia is home to many dairy farms, and
certainly they are facing significant challenges, as the
industry is across the board. And I share your concerns related
to the enforcement of the dairy provisions in that deal, and so
my question for you is what more could Congress be doing to
support the industry, and ensure that all parties live up to
their commitments in that deal?
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes, thank you for the question. The
decision to--have a big impact, but for my counterparts in the
Northeast and the Upper Midwest, it is a big deal. We strongly
support the dispute settlement process, and we appreciate the
bipartisan Congressional backing that ultimately led to that
step. It is not only the enforcement area that we need to see
action on, though. For instance, in Mexico, overly burdensome
regulatory proposals threaten to disrupt trade. In Colombia
they are weighing imposing higher tariffs that would derail our
free trade agreement on milk powder exports, so this happens
not just with Canada and Mexico, it is happening all over the
place, and we appreciate the support we have gotten from the
USTR office thus far, but we continue to need not only support,
but action.
Ms. Spanberger. Okay. Thank you for that, and certainly I
would love to follow up in the future if there are any other
priorities or suggestions that your organization has into the
future. I do have a second question for you, and ultimately for
Ms. Sorenson. Mr. Vander Woude, in your testimony you mentioned
supply chain challenges, and the need to pass the Ocean
Shipping Reform Act. I am proud to cosponsor this bill. I
believe, and I think broadly people agree, that it will do a
lot to reduce port congestion. But beyond this bill, are there
other actions that you would suggest that Congress be attuned
to, or actions that Congress should be taking to contend with
these supply chain bottlenecks? And, Ms. Sorenson, I would love
to have your opinion on this question as well.
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes. So there are some things that the
Administration is considering, such as extending the--truck
drivers----
Ms. Spanberger. Sir, you paused for a moment. You--heard
extending.
Mr. Vander Woude. That is all you got? Okay. Sorry, I am on
hotel WiFi, extending the hours of operation for truck drivers
extending the age limit for truck drivers down to 18----
Ms. Spanberger. Okay.
Mr. Vander Woude.--if possible, extending weight limits----
Ms. Spanberger. From our infrastructure bill package----
Mr. Vander Woude. Okay. Yes.
Ms. Spanberger.--and that pilot program. Yes.
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes. Weight limits, and just a lot of--
and then, here in California, we also have environmental
restrictions at our ports that maybe could just be loosened for
a little while, as we have lost access to a lot of equipment
due to cancellations and that sort of stuff. We have had 60
percent cancellations in the last month. We are the largest
exporter of milk powders in the world, and 60 percent of our
loads got canceled last month, which strands equipment. So we
have run out of people and equipment to export the products
that we need to export.
Ms. Spanberger. Wow. Okay. Thank you. Ms. Sorenson?
Ms. Sorenson. Yes, thank you for the question. The supply
chain disruptions, in particular the ports, are of grave
concern to us. We do not want to be potentially viewed as
unreliable trading partners. Trading relationships take a long
time to form, and we want to deliver a product that has been
ordered. So when we are shipping chilled pork, we do not want
to have to freeze it down because of a backlog at the ports. I
think it goes well beyond the port issues as well.
We are also seeing labor challenges throughout our farms,
our packing industry, and transportation, and we continue to
ask Members of Congress for an H-2A program that allows for
year-round uncapped labor. So the challenges definitely extend
beyond the ports, through the entire food supply chain.
Ms. Spanberger. Thank you so much, and Mr. Chairman, thank
you for letting me go over a little bit. Thank you to our
witnesses. And certainly, Ms. Sorenson, I hear you loud and
clear on the H-2A visa portion. I think many of us on this
Committee were strong supporters of the Farm Workforce
Modernization Act (H.R. 1603), and will continue to advocate
for that bill's passage into the future, so thank you so much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. Thank you, Congresswoman Spanberger. The next
Member will be Congressman Rouzer, the next Democratic Member
will be Congressman Harder.
Mr. Rouzer. Well, thank you much. I have a million things
on my mind that I could ask about and limited time, but let me
bring up the subject that we have not talked a great deal about
this morning, but I think is very important, trade promotion
authority. Are all of our witnesses in favor of trade promotion
authority?
Mr. Scott. Absolutely.
Mr. Rouzer. Anyone opposed? Let me ask you that way. So,
that being the case, what priorities do you think should be
voiced in the discussions between Congress and the
Administration, assuming that those conversations are commenced
at some point? Is there anything about the last trade promotion
authority that needs to be modified or changed?
Mr. Scott. In my opinion, trade promotion authority is a
critical thing that the President has in his back pocket,
basically, and can further these free trade agreements. The
Soybean Association has fought for TPA for many years, and for
every Administration we do the same, so it is just something
that is good for free trade.
Mr. Rouzer. Any other witness have a comment?
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes. I think we would like to encourage
that there is maybe a little more interaction between Congress
and the Administration, that way nothing gets missed in the
process.
Mr. Stenderup. And also--possibly add that the positions
that are still not filled, to get them filled, and certified,
ratified, whatever you have, so we can get going on some of
these things, particularly the supply chain challenges right
now, and tariffs. Thank you.
Mr. Rouzer. Anyone else?
Ms. Sorenson. I would just say--I would agree with my
fellow soybean, milk, and almond farmers on their statements.
Thank you.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you. Kevin, I am curious, what is the
relative number of soybeans that go to China, as compared to
other markets, such as Mexico and Europe?
Mr. Scott. So, 60 percent of the world's soybeans go to
China, and from the U.S. it is 30 percent of our--one in three
rows of our soybeans goes there, so it depends on how much they
are getting, but Brazil is also the competitor, and they would
supply that much also, or more. And so one in three rows is
what we kind of consider.
Mr. Rouzer. I am curious, what is the potential of the
African market for soybean exports? How much growth opportunity
is there?
Mr. Scott. Well, we are working in Africa. WISHH, which is
World Initiative for Soy and Human Health, is a group that
works with ASA, and they are in Ghana currently, and there had
been a 5 year project there developing their soy aquaculture,
and poultry mission there. And we are--basically, WISHH starts
the program. They get the country ready for actually knowing
what a soybean is, how to use it, and how to improve their
protein production, and ag production. Those kinds of things
are all fantastic for human health, and that is where we start,
and then we have another marketing organization that takes over
when it is a commercially viable business.
Mr. Rouzer. Ms. Sorenson, what has been your level--excuse
me. What has been your level of involvement in USDA discussions
as to how the Department plans to use the CCC funding set aside
for African Swine Fever prevention and preparedness, and are
you confident the funds will be put to the highest priority
use? Bring us up to date on anything you may know there.
Ms. Sorenson. Yes. Thank you for the question. USDA has
indeed shared their preliminary plans on how they plan to
utilize the funds. We understand their top priority is to
minimize the risk of African Swine Fever from moving into the
mainland, which definitely aligns with the top priority of the
industry, grave concern of African Swine Fever landing on our
shores. We support utilizing those funds to enhance the
capability of our National Animal Health Laboratory Network,
increase the inventory of equipment for large animal
depopulation and disposal in the National Veterinary Stockpile.
This is a critical need for the industry. And we are confident
that USDA priorities align with our priorities.
Mr. Rouzer. That is good to hear. Mr. Scott, real quick one
back. When China cut everything off for soybeans, were there
any other markets that you really made some headway with, or
began to get a foothold in? And then my time has expired.
Mr. Scott. Well, sure. Thank you for the question. When
China shut down our imports, it, of course, crashed our market,
and so people become very interested in a cheap source of
protein. And at that time, our prices were not very good, it
wasn't great for U.S. soy farmers, but Egypt developed a
fantastic soy aquaculture, so feeding fish. They would feed
fish, and they were a big improvement in market. But also all
the Asian countries, Taiwan, also Vietnam, just many others,
took advantage, actually, of the supply of soybeans, and it
developed a great market, and we have tried to foster those
markets, and continue in them.
Mr. Rouzer. Thank you, I yield back.
The Chairman. Mr. Harder, your 5 minutes.
Mr. Harder. Terrific. Thank you so much, Mr. Johnson, and
thank you, Chairman Costa, for holding this hearing. It is
great to see all our witnesses here today on such an important
issue. As Chairman Costa knows well, the Central Valley that we
both represent, our ag relies heavily on trade and exports to
thrive. I mean, we are the fruit and nut basket not just of
California, and not just of the whole nation, but of the world,
and so we need to make sure that we are getting our products to
market in order to make sure that we can continue to succeed.
I really appreciated the testimony from Mr. Vander Woude,
that he shared. These supply chain challenges that we are
facing right now just in the dairy industry are costing $1
billion in additional expenses just in the first 7 months of
this year. The neighbors that we have in the Valley simply
can't afford that. So huge excitement to have this hearing
talking about some of the situations at our ports, and I know
we are working hard to make sure that we resolve those.
I would love just to hear a little bit more from Mr. Vander
Woude. It is wonderful having California dairies represented,
and it is great to see you, sir. I appreciated the tour of your
dairy a few weeks or months ago, and walked away very impressed
by your operation. I am very grateful for your hospitality, and
thank you so much for your testimony today. I would love to
hear a little bit more about some of the markets that you think
Congress and this Administration could be focused on that were
not focused on today. I know you mentioned a little bit in that
testimony. What are the top priority markets for you and the
dairy industry at this moment?
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes. So I think once we pulled out of TPP
last, recently we did make a deal with Japan last year, and we,
as California, felt we got short suited in that one. We are
large producers of butter and dried milk powder. When you have
milk, you can either turn it into cheese, or you can turn it
into butter and milk powder, and we make butter and milk
powder, and we were locked out of that Japan free trade
agreement. We want to make sure that as those--if those one-on-
one agreements happen, all milk is included, and Japan was very
strategic in blocking us. We didn't think that was a very fair
way to go about it, so we need the full bucket of milk in any
free trade agreement.
Obviously Southeast Asia from western ports makes a lot of
sense. China's kind of the 500 pound gorilla in the room. We
all know they are hard to deal with, but we need to keep
working with them to try to find some way to get our products
in there, and try to get at least closer to the advantages that
New Zealand--where most of our products go today, and there is
a lot more access for us there, if we can get some better
access.
Mr. Harder. Just to dive deeper on Japan, I saw a few hours
ago that the Administration announced a framework for those
discussions. I guess it is still a little early to see how that
will develop, but what are your concerns if we do not continue
to develop our dairy trade with Japan? What do you think are
the implications, and are there things that we could be doing
to be helpful, especially in light of this new framework?
Mr. Vander Woude. Implications are just--I mean, it is all
market access. For everybody around the world, we are all
fighting for the same markets. Japan is one that makes a lot of
sense for us, so obviously we want more access to that market.
They can afford our products, they want our products, we would
like to sell them our products. We are really good at making
these things sustainably and efficiently. We need to get access
to those--we have done everything we can at home. We need some
help from our legislators, and trade ambassadors, and that sort
of stuff. We have worked with--and we have been actively
engaged in trade negotiations throughout the years, so we would
like to continue to be there.
Mr. Harder. Terrific. Well, thank you. Mr. Stenderup, same
question to you. For our almond industry, what do you think are
some of the biggest barriers that our almond industry is facing
when it comes to market access, and how do you think
Congressional programs, like the Market Access Program, or
others, can help or achieve some of the trade objectives that
you have?
Mr. Stenderup. Well, you have heard that--by the way,
Member Harder, you see I am wearing a red and blue tie today.
You and I had that discussion a few----
Mr. Harder. I love it. Absolutely.
Mr. Stenderup. And that is very important today. I tried to
interject a little earlier, almonds are faced with a 55 percent
tariff into China. That is overwhelming. Our number one
competitor, Australia, as a zero percent tariff. They have
somewhat of a free trade agreement, and we are facing that, and
China's a burgeoning market. As far as market access, their
middle class is coming up, and what a great area for us to
continue towards with our friends at USTR, and Congress
themselves, working towards reducing something as ridiculous as
a 55 percent tariff. Thank you.
Mr. Harder. Thank you. I see I am out of time, but thank
you so much for your comments, and I yield back to the Chair.
The Chairman. We thank Representative Harder for his good
line of questioning, and the good job that he does representing
the folks in the San Joaquin Valley. Kent, I am glad you noted
the 55 percent surcharge with regards to almonds, or as we say
amonds, because, given the current prices for almonds, that
would make a big difference. I believe our next Member to be
recognized is Representative Barry Moore from Alabama. Mr.
Moore, are you there?
Mr. Moore. Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you, and Ranking Member
Johnson, thank you for having this hearing today. Following up
on Ms. Spanberger's question, there have been serious concerns
with supply chain stability across multiple industries since
the COVID-19 pandemic began. For any witnesses, what is the
Administration doing that is working, and maybe even not
working? If the Administration was represented here today, what
would you suggest?
Mr. Stenderup. I am sorry, who was the question directed
at?
Mr. Moore. Any of the--anyone.
Mr. Stenderup. Okay.
Mr. Moore. Any of the panelists. I just kind of wanted to
open it----
Mr. Stenderup. I would like to make one succinct comment.
We don't want the foreign markets accustomed to functioning
without U.S. products, whether it is just for a couple months
or a part of a year. Now we are talking 2023 before things may
return to normal? My goodness. They can forget about us
quickly, and these--that--it is just that simple.
Mr. Moore. So, Kent, what do you think--how do we get--how
do we make our presence felt? In other words--I understand what
you are saying. Once they get used to using another supplier,
and they get the logistics worked out, it is tough to go back
and use--and kind of re-establish those logistic chains. What
do you suggest we do in the immediate to help you?
Mr. Stenderup. We are faced with these demurrage charges
and such, and these ships are going back empty. They are
deadheading back because it is quicker and more profitable for
them. Well, aren't we the United States of America? Let us pull
the hammer on these people and fill those things. If we have
available commodities, let us fill them up.
Mr. Moore. Makes sense. Anybody else want to address what
they would mention to the Administration if they were present
today, kind of how we could--what we could do in Congress--the
Administration to help?
Mr. Vander Woude. Yes, I would follow up on Kent's
comments, we can't wait. These are immediate needs. We need
Congress to act, we need the Federal Maritime Commission to
act. We need this Ocean Shipping Reform Act. We need to get
creative. We need to think outside the box, and do things we
haven't done before, whether that is mandating something with
these international carriers. We all understand these are
international carriers coming into our ports. We only have so
much control over them, but let us exert any control we can to
get our products on those ships, heading back to the Middle
East, and heading back to those other countries.
Mr. Moore. Thank you, son. Anybody else want to comment on
that?
Mr. Scott. Well we certainly--excuse me.
Mr. Moore. Go ahead.
Mr. Scott. Yes, currently, we ship about five percent of
the soybeans we produce in the U.S. and export go in
containers, and those containers fit the smaller markets that
don't have the deep ports, so the large ships can't make it in
with their bulk commodities, so it fits quite well that those
containers can go to these smaller ports. And we have plenty of
soybeans to fill those containers, so if we can get it figured
out, that would be a fantastic--just go to along with the rest
of your comments, that would be a fantastic way to fill those
ships.
Mr. Moore. Thank you. And with that, Mr. Chairman, I will
yield back the balance of my time.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, and we thank him
for his line of questioning, and the Chair will now recognize
the gentleman from Illinois, Representative Bobby Rush.
Mr. Rush. I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman. My question is
directed to Mr. Stenderup. Mr. Stenderup, I was delighted to
learn that Blue Diamond Growers is a co-op, with over 6,000
members in California. In your testimony you also mentioned
that 90 percent of California's almond farms are multi-
generational family farms, and I had an opportunity to discuss,
in yesterday's hearing on the renewable economy--I, for one,
believe that co-ops are critical for putting resources directly
into the hands of overlooked populations, and are a critical
way of stopping, and even reversing, the rapid decline in Black
farmers. How many of the Blue Diamond growers are minorities?
Can you discuss how Blue Diamond Growers have been able to help
Black and Brown farmers?
Mr. Stenderup. Thank you, Congressman Rush. I believe, as
far as the minority aspect, and--majority of our membership are
Caucasian. We do have numerous Indian Sikh farmers and Latinos.
Not too many in the Black sector, but we are an open co-op for
all membership, and that just happens to be the type of
person--the family farms that grow for there. I appreciate you
asking the question. Anything else?
Mr. Rush. Yes. Will you please discuss the best practices
Blue Diamond Growers use to help their members succeed, and
specifically their multi-generational family farmers? I am also
interested in whether or not using co-ops more in urban areas
can [inaudible]--your best practices be applied to urban
cooperatives.
Mr. Stenderup. Well, the difference between an urban
cooperative and a rural? Is that your question? We don't
discriminate, as far as that goes.
Mr. Rush. Specifically, you have a model, [inaudible]--and
I am going to think outside the box in terms of your model. The
co-op model, I believe, has some benefits to urban ag and rural
ag, and I want to know do you agree? And urban farming is in
its nascent stage--and should we be more interested in using
the co-op model?
Mr. Stenderup. I am a strong advocate of urban farming and
urban co-op models, yes, whether it is neighborhood or to a
larger extent. I am a strong advocate of that. We spend--we
give our share of money, as far as urban ag education, on an
annual basis too, bringing the farm to the urban areas. And,
yes, a true advocate for that. And the co-op business model
works well for families, and--whether it be urban or rural.
Mr. Rush. Thank you. I want to switch my line of
questioning, I have introduced H.R. 3625, the United States-
Cuba Relations Normalization Act. Ms. Sorenson, do you believe
that U.S. pork producers would benefit from increases in trade
with Cuba? My state is a state that had a robust trade
relationship with Cuba. Cuba contributed much to our trade
negotiations--trade affairs, and I am interested in what is
your opinion on normalizing the trade relationship with Cuba?
Ms. Sorenson. As an industry that exports to over 100
countries, and exporting nearly 25 percent of our production,
broadening our export portfolio through FTAs and more market
access into countries is a top priority for us, and we want
access to as many markets as we can get. Without having read
the language of your bill and your proposal, I would like to
refrain from comment, but if it grows our export market in
countries like Cuba, and in countries where the consumers love
pork, and so many do outside of our shores, then we would be in
support of that.
Mr. Rush. Well, I have heard from a number of Illinois
farmers, and they said that they are being hurt because of the
restriction from trade with Cuba, that they are actually
hurting, and their farmers are hurting, and their bottom line
is suffering because of the restriction on trade with Cuba.
The Chairman. We thank the gentleman from Chicago for your
comments. And I can't speak outside of California, but I know
in various efforts in the past there has been an interest by
California producers trying to participate in the Cuban market,
and clearly it is a question that is well raised, and we thank
you for, always, your participation. The next Member that the
Chair will recognize is Mr. Randy Feenstra, the gentleman from
Iowa.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, Chairman Costa, and Ranking Member
Johnson. Trade is obviously a very key driver in Iowa's
economy. As one of the top agricultural producing states in the
U.S., it is important that Iowa's productive farmers have
access to export markets. According to the data from the USDA,
Iowa agriculture exports totaled more than $11 billion in 2020.
My constituents understand that trade is a lifeblood for U.S.
farmers.
Ms. Sorenson, it is great to have you, as a fellow Iowan,
before our Committee today. As you well know, my district
represents one of the most productive hog productions in all of
the nation. Your testimony speaks to the point that trade
access is important not only for our producers in Iowa, but
across our country. The top export markets in U.S. agriculture,
Canada, Mexico, China, the European Union, Japan, account for
about 60 percent of the total value of our trade exports.
Agreements negotiated by the Trump Administration, such as the
U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement and the U.S.-China Phase One
Agreement sought to update the trade policies in these export
markets. Ms. Sorenson, can you share how these agreements have
benefitted the U.S. pork market, and then also, are there any
outstanding issues that we would like to bring forward to see
from the Biden Administration?
Ms. Sorenson. Yes. Thank you for the question. The
ratification of USMCA, the agreement with Japan, the Phase One
deal with China, despite still having a 25 percent retaliatory
tariff, have all been really helpful, getting the U.S. pork
industry back on its feet after 3 years of trade retaliatory
tariffs, and a COVID pandemic that disrupted the global food
supply chain.
Circling back to our top priorities, we want in to CPTPP.
There is huge opportunity for us to be a part of that, given
the 500 million consumers that are part of those countries, and
the number of countries that want to be a part of that trade
agreement. We want a level playing field, and we also think it
is important to be a part of setting agricultural base
standards across the world. Growing market access through--and
free trade agreements in a large portfolio of countries is what
Iowa and U.S. pork producers need to survive and grow our rural
and U.S. economy.
Mr. Feenstra. Right. Thanks for those comments. When I met
with a representative from Taiwan, I heard that China is
spreading disinformation about the U.S. pork products, such as
ractopamine in the pork. Ms. Sorenson, can you share how these
non-tariff barriers prohibit market access, and any updates on
the U.S. efforts to explain the safety of ractopamine's use?
Ms. Sorenson. Yes. I mean, I ractopamine is a FDA approved
feed additive that producers have been using for decades. It is
a technology, production management tool, and innovation, like
many, that U.S. pork producers utilize on their farms. I think
this circles back to the key point about that we need to be at
the table as part of these agreements--to be engaged in the
conversation, be able to set agriculture science-based
standards for exports and trade agreements across the world.
Things like banning an approved feed ingredient are not good
for the competitiveness of U.S. farmers, in particular pork
producers.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you. And one more question. I am so
passionate about the fear of African Swine Fever in the U.S.,
and especially in the hog market, because I think this would
decimate our export market. Do you see--is there anything that
we can do? Because this would be catastrophic economically to
our nation, and to, obviously, the State of Iowa. Is there
anything that you see from the export side, or anything that we
should do from policy side to address or be stronger when it
comes to African Swine Fever?
Ms. Sorenson. Absolutely. A third of our hogs are tied to
exports, and if we had ASF in the U.S., our exports would stop
on day one. It would be absolutely devastating. We have to have
Congress, working with the Administration, to support and fully
fund the NAHLNs Lab. Our APHIS veterinary staff needs strength,
needs funding. Our CBP agents, and our K9 teams, protecting our
borders, and things like investing dollars for more signage at
passenger terminals. Anything we can do to support our ports
and our borders.
Mr. Feenstra. Thank you, thank you, and I yield back.
The Chairman. One moment. Let us go now to Mr. Bacon from
Nebraska.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
Ranking Member. I appreciate the spirit of which both of you
lead this Subcommittee. But, I would like to highlight, and it
may have been highlighted--by the way, I had an ambassador
visit, so I had to turn off for a bit. I had to speak on the
floor, so I hope I am not duplicating comments here, but I may.
But I did want to point out that, when it comes to the
oversight within the Agriculture Committee, I don't know that
we have done any oversight with anybody from the Agriculture
Department. I would like to encourage the Majority to do so.
And almost all of the committees have not done that in
Congress, with the exception of the HASC, the Armed Services
Committee, and the Intelligence Committee, and so I just
respectfully request that our Committee do that. There is--I
mean, there are things that we need to get the Agriculture
Department--the leadership here and ask them about.
Second, I would like to point out too that, up until last
month, the President has not mentioned trade at all. He has
been silent on this. In the last month he has started to, but I
think it should be a higher priority for this Administration.
Nebraska is an export state, and we need President Biden to
open up doors for our protein and grain products there, so I
wanted to point that out as well.
So my first question is really to Ms. Sorenson and Mr.
Scott. How are we doing with the Phase One deal with China? Is
China meeting their agreement? We will start off with Ms.
Sorenson.
Ms. Sorenson. I was going to say, I guess I will take a run
at that. The China Phase One, and having ASF sadly ravage the
pork industry in China, has indeed created a very large demand
for pork around the world, and an opportunity for the U.S. pork
industry. The problem remains that we need a resolution to the
trade retaliatory disputes with China, so we are still faced
with a 25 percent retaliatory tariff, totaling 33 percent
tariff. Eight percent for the most favored nations, an
additional 25 percent placed on U.S. pork producers. We need to
have a level playing field, and be able to take advantage of
the opportunity that we have with China.
As long as those tariffs remain in place, we are at a
significant disadvantage to other nations supplying pork into
the country. And, they are increasingly seeking pork imports,
because at least \1/3\ of its production has been impacted by
African Swine Fever.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. Mr. Scott, what about the soybean
side of this?
Mr. Scott. Yes, it--of course, Jen's comments are
appropriate. Most of our soybean imports into China go to feed
hogs, and when they had African Swine Fever, there was not a
big need for them to import soy. So they put tariffs on, and it
was basically an artificial tariff for us, because they were
not going to import soybeans anyway, and--but when they did
start to--it--when there was a demand for soybean and hog feed
in China, they somehow allowed those tariffs to go away on the
soybean side. And we in the American Soybean Association would
prefer to feed our chickens, and our hogs, and animals here,
and then ship the meat to China, and so removing tariffs on the
pork side would be fantastic for soybeans, and so we are for
those reduced tariffs also.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. And, Ms. Sorenson, you mentioned a
little bit about African Swine Fever, and the impact on the
pork industry if it broke out here. Are we doing enough in the
research area? What more should we be doing to fund research
when it comes to combating this?
Ms. Sorenson. We will never turn down funding and a focus
on agriculture research if it helps us strengthen our borders,
and helps producers prevent and plan for an ASF outbreak, or
any FAD outbreak in the United States. Again, it would be
devastating to farmers in the entire rural economy if we were
faced with a foreign animal disease, including our friends in
corn and soybean that supplied us--supply us feedstuffs.
Again, would be devastating, and prevention, planning,
preparation, and research would tie into being able to help
producers seek the best methods, including depopulation, and
funding our veterinary stockpiles, and funding our
veterinarians over at APHIS--is also critical.
Mr. Bacon. Thank you. I would like to ask you about foot-
and-mouth disease vaccine, but I--it was my initiative, but I
am going to be out of time, and I hope this--becomes
operational this year and that we could see the positive
results of this vaccine bank.
Ms. Sorenson. Yes.
Mr. Bacon. But with that, I yield back.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, his time has
expired, and the Chair will recognize the next Member on the
Subcommittee, but I want to let those Members and staff members
that are participating remotely--that we are about to conclude
the hearing, so, for Members who have maybe missed their
opportunity, this is going to be near your time. I want to
recognize Representative Jim Hagedorn from Minnesota for your 5
minutes.
Mr. Hagedorn. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, I
appreciate it. I thank the witnesses for being here. Under
President Trump, I thought some of the things we did right for
agriculture--we would try to reset some of the basic principles
to help our farmers. Lower taxes, get rid of some regulations
that lowered cost of production, have energy independence,
which kept the price of fuel, and electricity, fertilizer,
everything down, and then trying to reset some of these trade
deals that for a while maybe had gone too far, USMCA is a very
good example. I think one of the trade deals that was very
excellent. And, of course, China Phase One, and trying to do
what we could there to reset that, when they were manipulating
currency, and they were forcing technology transfers, stealing
our intellectual property, and things like that.
I think for the main point of that, it was going the right
direction. COVID hit, and there was a little bit of an issue
there, but we are on the right track. What concerns me about
the Biden Administration, and I think my colleague just
mentioned it. I mean, up until just recently, the word trade
hasn't even been in their vocabulary. They are really not
working on this at all, and I am not sure exactly when they are
going to get to it. Our Republican Members on this Committee
have asked the Trade Rep, Kathleen Tai, to come by and talk to
us about it, give us an update. She says she is not available
until sometime next year. Well, \1/4\ of the Administration
will be over by the time she wants to come up and even talk a
little bit about trade.
So I will open this up to Mr. Scott and Ms. Sorenson. What
do you think the Administration could be doing more right now
to be a little bit more active in the trade area?
Mr. Scott. Excellent question. Of course, talking about MAP
and FMD would be great. I think those things are critical to
our success in other countries, but trade--needing to get the
people in place that can actively work for ag's interest. And
we need those positions so that we have something to bounce off
of, as far as our conversations with the Administration, so
that they can go out and forward the needs of trade.
I mean, critically, soybean industry focuses on trade. We
have to, and that--we are pretty good doing it ourselves. We
work in other countries, but there is also a definite need for
the Administration's help in getting access to certain markets,
and playing fair. And I know Jen has brought up the scientific
data that is used, or the non-scientific data, basically to put
up artificial barriers to us, and those things need to be
addressed constantly, because there is considerably a lot of
time spent in foreign countries coming up with ways to inhibit
our exports from the U.S. So we definitely need an engaged
Administration.
Mr. Hagedorn. Before Ms. Sorenson answers--and a lot of
that takes--it takes a lot of work. They have to get together,
and negotiate, and we have to pound on them and make those
agreements, and I am just not seeing the work. That is the sad
thing. Ms. Sorenson, what is your perspective on trade, and
what the Administration has been up to so far?
Ms. Sorenson. I would start off by saying we are thankful
for the Administration's engagement in Vietnam and the
Philippines. We have had our eyes on these markets for years,
and so increasing market access into those countries will be
very beneficial for U.S. pork producers. Consumers in those
countries love pork.
I go back to the need to join CPTPP. That would be an
immediate opportunity to look at for U.S. agriculture and U.S.
pork. Again, 500 million consumers, part of those agreements,
and we need a level playing field getting into those countries.
Protection against African Swine Fever, and just always growing
our portfolio through free trade agreements, and more market
access to countries across the globe. I think we could do--we
can produce pork sustainably here in the United States. We can
produce a quality product, and a safe product, at a great cost,
and we need to take advantage of that to grow our rural and
U.S. economy.
Mr. Hagedorn. I appreciate that. I mean, our farmers are
the most productive and efficient in the world. I grew up on a
family farm in southern Minnesota. Farming has changed a lot
since then, you do terrific work, but we have to find these
markets, and we have to have these agreements, in order to make
sure that our independent and other farmers are going to remain
in business, and our communities can remain vibrant. With that,
Mr. Chairman, I will yield back. Thank you.
The Chairman. The gentleman yields back, and I think from
the testimony we have received this morning, there seems to be
a consensus that we ought to take another look at rejoining the
Trans-Pacific Partnership. And, for those of us who felt we
shouldn't have left in the first place, I think we ought to do
what we can on a bipartisan basis to urge that to happen under
conditions that would be acceptable to us, obviously.
And, I am just reminded that China--that the President had
an extensive discussion yesterday with President Xi. For this
Administration, like the previous Administration, like the
Administration before us is always a challenge, because China
is an adversary, China is a competitor, and China is also an
immense market opportunity. Every Administration that has had
to deal with China, that likes to be a part of the world trade
effort, but not always follow the rules required, makes it
perplexing for any Administration to do so, but we must, for
all the reasons that I just described. I think the welcome news
today, with this new initiative with Japan, will create more
opportunities.
With that said, our next Member is Representative Jahana
Hayes from Connecticut, and then followed by Delegate Plaskett
from the U.S. Virgin Islands, and, if the Chair does not hear
any other Members that are in queue, we will bring the hearing
to a close. So, Representative Hayes from Connecticut?
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing. I have been hearing from Connecticut producers about
cost increases and operation impediments caused by global
supply chain disruptions. For some, this has become so
burdensome that they are contemplating closing their doors
permanently. That outcome, if widespread, would be disastrous
for my state, because we have many small family farmers. I am
glad we have a chance to explore this further today.
Generally, trade policy is extremely important to
Connecticut agricultural producers. According to the latest
available data from the United States Trade Representatives,
Connecticut exported about $248 million in agricultural goods,
mainly to Asia and Europe, in 2017. Given that my state has a
substantial dairy industry, I am extremely concerned about this
issue.
So, Mr. Vander Woude, I was pleased to support the USMCA in
last Congress, and was particularly glad to see that the deal
opened Canada to U.S. dairy exports. Since its implementation
last year, how has USMCA affected dairy trade with Canada, and
is Canada adhering to the dairy access agreement in the USMCA?
Mr. Vander Woude. Well, as I said before, I don't think--
they have changed their actions a little bit, but they have not
fully acted on the agreements that were put forth in the USMCA,
so we do ask that Ambassador Tai and the Administration call
them to the table, and ask for the hearing on getting
resolution to that problem.
Mrs. Hayes. And I think this kind of ties together what Ms.
Sorenson said, and the Chairman said. What export opportunities
might U.S. producers be missing out on because the United
States withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and to what
extent, if at all, would meat and dairy producers benefit if
the U.S. were to join the CPTPP?
Mr. Vander Woude. So, again, Japan obviously is a key
market for us, but it needs to be a fully accessible market for
dairy. As I said before, Vietnam used to be our largest
customer, and we have been--we virtually haven't shipped--been
able to ship anything to Vietnam because someone else got a
free trade agreement there, and we had tariffs imposed on us,
and that story just gets told over, and over, and over
throughout the Middle East. We have done what we can to access
those markets, but TPP would definitely be very, very big for
the dairy industry.
Mrs. Hayes. And last, Mr. Vander Woude, you mentioned that
exports drive growth and create jobs in the dairy industry. Can
an increase in exports help strengthen the fluid milk supply
chain?
Mr. Vander Woude. Absolutely. I mean a rising tide lifts
all boats, in dairy, we have faced the same labor issues that
any other industry out there has faced. We have had a really
hard time finding enough labor over the last couple years, and
I am sure I am not alone with--as I talked to farmers across
the U.S., they had the same issue, yes. I think we have a
fairly secure dairy market here in the U.S., and our domestic
supply chain is in very good shape. There were small issues
last year, but, for the most part, we have the product. It was
just a matter of getting it into a package, or getting it to a
store. That was the problem. So I think our supply chain here
in America is very good, and any export opportunities will only
enhance that.
Mrs. Hayes. Thank you. And I will conclude my time the way
I always do, just reminding everyone on this Committee, and all
the stakeholders that, when we look at the challenges in the
industry on a large corporate scale, just imagine how those
challenges are amplified and exacerbated for small family
farmers, or people who this is their only source of income, who
don't have the revenue or the capital to continue through
several bad years or bad seasons. So I just will continue to
push on this Committee to make sure that any solutions to these
problems that we develop does not leave any of those small
farmers behind. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
The Chairman. I thank our colleague, the Representative
from Connecticut, for her well-spoken comments as it relates to
America's challenge, in terms of maintaining our agricultural
competitiveness for farmers of all sizes, and I think that is
an important note. And the Chair will now recognize I think our
final Member to be participating today, and that is Delegate
Stacey Plaskett from the U.S. Virgin Islands. Delegate
Plaskett?
Mr. Plaskett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you to the witnesses for being here today, and having this
conversation with us. This is a very important issue to me. I
think that trade--it is interesting, being a Member of the
Agriculture Committee, but also being a Member of the Ways and
Means Committee, trade policy and priority is something that I
think quite often about, and so I wanted to ask some real
questions with regard to that.
Ms. Latashia Redhouse, I have a question for you. In my
home district of the U.S. Virgin Islands, we are particularly
cognizant of climate change, given our vulnerability to the
devastating environmental impacts that it has. Do you have any
recommendations on how to implement sustainable agricultural
policies, while ensuring we provide support to our small
business professionals?
Ms. Redhouse. Yes, definitely. As you mentioned--and I
appreciate the question. As you mentioned, the smaller farmers
and producers--raising (inaudible] capital--has been one thing
that we have been exploring, and really trying to advocate on
behalf of our constituents, and we have been trying to really
push the--share the whole aspect of regenerative agriculture,
and then also inclusion of the traditional ecological knowledge
to help support our land stewardship. That has actually played
very well in our communication with the EU, Japan, the Middle
East, in the way we are telling the story of the producers we
represent.
And so, I think if there is a way that we can continue to
elevate and support the producers on the ground that are really
pushing for more sustainable and regenerative farming
production type of methods, I think that is really important,
and a good conversation we can have.
Mr. Plaskett. Ms. Redhouse, I think that that is really
fascinating. In the Virgin Islands, our small farmers have been
utilizing methods for resiliency, combating drought, combating
hurricanes, et cetera, for some centuries now, and I am sure,
being Tribal lands as well, farmers are doing that.
I think it is important that we, as members of the larger
agricultural community, Department of Agriculture, even
Commerce gives them tools so that they can replicate this on a
larger scale to farmers in other areas who may have similar
issues, similar challenges, to utilize those skillsets as
trading, exporting those skillsets to other farmers in other
areas. I would be happy to work with you on that, and look to
my staff reaching out to you to provide some support on that.
Thank you very much.
As Chair of the House Agriculture Biotechnology,
Horticulture, and Research Subcommittee, I am interested in
ensuring that U.S. agricultural producers have those tools and
innovations needed to farm successfully and sustainably,
however, I understand discriminatory trade practices from our
trade partners can limit exports of U.S. grown goods, which in
turn limit growers' ability to adopt those innovations. Excuse
me. I wanted to know if one of our witnesses would like to talk
about the underlying problems, potentially, with China's
regulatory process, and any recommendations to U.S.
policymakers on how to address that?
Mr. Scott. I can attempt to----
Mr. Plaskett. --answer that?
Mr. Scott. Sure, I can attempt to answer that. So the
American Soybean Association, we talk to the people who are
developing those new technologies in the seed area, and we
discourage them from bringing anything to the market that has
not been okayed in our primary export markets. So the Chinese,
the Europeans, the Mexicans, if they do not okay these new
technologies that we use to further our sustainability on the
farm, we encourage them not to put them on the market, because
that would be a disruptive figure if they made it to market,
and then got into the export channel.
So it is critical that we get some regulatory sanity in
other countries based on science around our new technology. And
that would help us greatly on the farm become more sustainable,
and that is--that is what I am after on my farm. I want to
continue my generational move towards maybe my grandkids, and
their kids, having the ability to farm. And those new
technologies are important to us.
Mr. Plaskett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity, and I yield back.
The Chairman. We thank the representative for her
participation and her questions. And, Mr. Scott, having myself
a third generation family farm from California, these non-trade
tariff barriers that we find, in my view, raising itself
through phytosanitary standards and others oftentimes are more
of an excuse, or an attempt to leverage markets to limit the
kind of fair, level playing field that we ought to be having
with our trading partners is always seemingly an issue with
different countries that we have to stay on top of, and focus,
and try to make sure that we proceed with enforcement efforts
when needed, so I appreciate your comment.
Before I make my final comments, I will recognize my
colleague and friend, the gentleman from South Dakota, for any
closing statement that he wishes to make.
Mr. Johnson. Mr. Chairman, this has been excellent, and I
think we have seen tremendous common ground from the witnesses,
as well as from Members on the Subcommittee on both sides of
the aisle. Just to recap, I think we have heard about the
tremendous importance of market access for all of these
commodities we have been talking about. That is number one.
Number two, we have heard that CPTPP would have a tremendous
positive impact on American ag producers. Number three, we have
heard that a more robust approach toward free trade agreements
from this Administration would be helpful in advancing the
cause of removing tariff barriers, as well as non-tariff
barriers, which are so often--as you and Mr. Scott are talking
about, are not science-based, and are flimsy pretenses toward
protectionism.
The Chairman. Right.
Mr. Johnson. And then, finally, how important it will be to
get Ambassador Tai here. Mr. Chairman, I know you are working
on that, but if we are going to get a more robust push toward
free trade agreements, this has to be something that will be
done with Congress and the Administration working together, and
I think Ambassador Tai's presence will be tremendously helpful.
So thanks for your leadership in these areas, sir, and I yield
back.
The Chairman. I thank the gentleman for his comments, and I
think you did a good job in summarizing it. We are working to
have Ambassador Tai address the House Agriculture Committee,
certainly--or Subcommittee, but probably--I know the Chairman
and the Ranking Member would probably prefer she address the
entire Agriculture Committee, and that is fine. But we need her
engagement with us to determine how we can work together. We
also need the Senate to confirm Elaine Trevino, who has been
nominated almost 2 months ago, to make sure that the USDA has
that person in place to represent American agriculture, in
terms of these trade issues. I have worked with her for many
years in the past, and know her to be a very strong advocate on
behalf of agriculture.
And, as I have said before, this Subcommittee on Livestock
and Foreign Agriculture will continue to focus on all of the
above. This is but one of a continuing series of hearings that
we will have on the issues of trade and the supply chain crisis
that we are facing today. I think we have to really work on a
bipartisan basis to do all of the above, both the short-term
remedies to the problems with our supply chain challenges, that
is impacting American agriculture, as well as other American
industries, and also the longer-term issues that we can deal
with, such as the legislation that our colleague and friend
Congressman Garamendi is carrying that many of us are principal
cosponsors of. And then, finally, obviously, the infrastructure
package that the President signed earlier this week, I think,
in the long-term as well, is going to expand capacity for our
ability to move goods and products to markets where we can
certainly compete, if it is a level playing field.
The situation, as I noted at the outset with Long Beach and
Los Angeles, who would have thought that 40 percent of the
container packages go through that one port? But they also--and
I work with them--are having a higher utilization of traffic in
the last 6 months than they had pre-pandemic, so you have to
keep that in mind too, because there is a built-up demand.
There has been a lot of savings by Americans over this pandemic
period, and that pent-up demand is--we see resulting in part
for a very--expansion of American consumers, which creates more
demand, which also has other relation effects to the inflation
that we are dealing with.
So it is a challenge, a challenge on multiple fronts. This
Subcommittee has a responsibility to play a part, and a
constructive part, helping to deal with the challenges that we
are facing, and we will continue that work. So I want to thank
the witnesses. I think your testimony was on point, and focused
the Committee Members in areas where we can be constructive now
in the near-term, as well as in the longer-term, when we look
at the reauthorization of the farm bill. There were good
comments as it related to the Market Access Program, and some
of the other areas, and then we will continue to work with all
of you.
And I want to thank the Members of the Committee, I want to
thank the witnesses, and we have a lot of work to continue to
do, but this brings this Subcommittee hearing to an
adjournment, and I want to thank everybody. The Committee is
now--oops, one moment. Under the Rules of the Committee, the
record of today's hearing will remain open for 10 calendar
days--I must say this, the magic words--to receive additional
material and supplementary written responses from any witness
to any question by a Member, as it is appropriate. So, without
any objections, so moved. The Subcommittee is now adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:13 p.m., the Subcommittee was adjourned.]
[Material submitted for inclusion in the record follows:]
Submitted Letter by Sarah Gallo, Vice President, Agriculture and
Environment, Biotechnology Innovation Organization
November 17, 2021

Hon. Jim Costa,                      Hon. Dusty Johnson,
Chairman,                            Ranking Minority Member,
Subcommittee on Livestock and        Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture,                 Foreign Agriculture,
House Committee on Agriculture,      House Committee on Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.;                    Washington, D.C.

Dear Chairman Costa, Ranking Member Johnson, and Members of the
Subcommittee:

The Biotechnology Innovation Organization (BIO) is pleased to
submit a statement for the record to the United States House of
Representatives Committee on Agriculture Subcommittee on Livestock and
Foreign Agriculture hearing entitled, Trade Policy and Priorities.
Introduction
BIO \1\ represents over 1,000 members in a biotech ecosystem with a
central mission--to advance public policy that supports a wide range of
companies and academic research centers that are working to apply
biology and technology in the agriculture, energy, health, and
manufacturing sectors to improve the lives of people and the health of
the planet. BIO is committed to speaking up for the millions of
families around the globe who depend upon our success. We will drive a
revolution that aims to cure patients, protect our climate, and nourish
humanity.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.bio.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Trade Policy and Priorities
BIO applauds the Subcommittee for examining trade policy and
priorities to support agricultural producers, promote innovation,
protect the environment and enable agriculture to combat climate
change.
Because of bipartisan support, for over twenty years, the United
States has successfully and safely led the world in the
commercialization of biotechnology to enable more sustainable farming
and industrial practices. These innovations reduce greenhouse gas
emissions throughout agricultural supply chains, delivering
environmentally friendly products and processes to the market and more
nutritious offerings to all tables.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.bio.org/letters-testimony-comments/bio-submits-
comments-usda-highlighting-biotechs-role-tackling-climate.
Editor's note: references annotated with  are retained in
Committee file.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, when major trading partners such as China, the
European Union (EU), or Mexico, delay biotechnology risk assessments
and approvals or intentionally malign technology, the global
marketplace is reluctant to accept new technology due to potential
impacts on global trade. The results are unfortunate, as producers in
the United States and around the world are denied innovative tools to
reduce emissions, sustainably increase production, and deploy climate-
resilient technologies.
China
For more than a decade biotechnology regulatory policy in China has
effectively limited U.S. farmer access to new biotechnology traits, and
by extension worked counter to the interests of American farmers and
American businesses. In response to these practices, the U.S.
Government (USG) has repeatedly intervened with the Chinese Government.
As a result, China has made multiple commitments to implement a
transparent, predictable, and science-based biotechnology risk
assessment system, both informally during multiple bilateral meetings
and formally through the Phase One Economic and Trade Agreement (Phase
One Trade Agreement) signed by both countries in January 2020. To date,
however, there is no evidence that China has followed through on these
commitments, as the system continues to be opaque and protracted,
averaging over 8 years to secure an import approval for a biotech
trait.
Chief among China's Phase One provisions is a commitment from China
to complete regulatory review of biotechnology products within 2 years,
on average, and to limit the scope of the regulatory review to the
product's intended use, i.e., feed or further processing. Of particular
concern is the fact that nearly 2 years following the signing of the
Phase One Agreement, Chinese authorities have yet to articulate how
they intend to implement commitments made to the USG. While there is
anecdotal evidence to suggest that process changes may have been
enacted, there has been no official communication to seed technology
companies or the USG regarding China's path to compliance.
European Union
For the first time in decades, there appear to be opportunities
emerging within Europe to enable innovation. Both the Farm to Fork
strategy and the European Commission's recent study on New Genomic
Techniques \3\ point to the importance of innovation to achieving a
more sustainable food system. However, significant risks remain as
Europe's regulatory processes are fundamentally prejudiced to
agricultural biotechnology. Nevertheless, we believe it is critical for
the United States Government to proactively engage with like-minded
countries and chart a path forward with the EU to enable science-based
regulations for biotechnology tools and expand sustainable agricultural
practices to achieve our shared climate goals. We applaud Secretary
Vilsack's efforts to work with like-minded countries around the UN Food
Systems Summit to launch the Coalition for Sustainable Productivity
Growth.\4\ However, it is critical to also engage the European
Commission to ensure that concrete measures are taken to enable a
timely, predictable, and science-based approval process to enable
innovation to fully address climate and food system challenges.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/
ip_21_1985.
\4\ https://www.usda.gov/oce/sustainability/spg-coalition.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mexico
More recent, but particularly worrisome, is Mexico's rapid
dismantling of regulatory institutions and international commitments
with respect to agricultural biotechnology. Despite recently confirming
its commitment to North American trade through the U.S.-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA), Mexico has become a major barrier to introducing new
agricultural biotechnology products within North America.
At issue is the fact that COFEPRIS, Mexico's food and drug
regulator, has been not maintained a science-based process for over 3
years. During this time, the queue of biotech products has grown to 25,
with nearly all products far exceeding Mexico's 6 month statutory time
limit. The Government of Mexico has offered no explanation for the
delays nor provided any guidance to developers. We question Mexico's
commitments to the USMCA and are highly concerned about the Government
of Mexico's rejection of technology that has been proven to enhance the
sustainability of agriculture.
Compounding matters, the Government of Mexico continues to make a
series of troubling statements regarding imports of corn produced with
biotechnology--explicitly stating that imports will be prohibited by
2024 and future approvals will be denied, and existing approvals will
be revoked. The most recent example being a recent letter from Mexican
President Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador to President Joe Biden \5\ that
tied Mexico's actions on biotechnology to climate change commitments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://www.gob.mx/presidencia/documentos/carta-al-presidente-
de-estados-unidos-joseph-biden?idiom=es.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We appreciate U.S. Trade Representative Ambassador Katherine Tai
and U.S. Department of Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack have actively
engaged with the Mexican Government on these issues, however, we are
increasingly alarmed as the Government of Mexico has yet to acknowledge
U.S. Government intervention and articulate a path to compliance.
These actions are highly concerning and must be addressed at the
highest levels of government.
Conclusion
A proactive trade agenda is needed to harness the latest science,
enable U.S. producers to be competitive in a global market, sustainably
increase production, and combat climate change. U.S. trade policy must
be aimed at addressing existing barriers to biotechnology and
facilitating regulatory approvals for critical technologies.
BIO is committed to working with the Subcommittee to address these
barriers to foster the rapid development and deployment of agricultural
biotechnology to help American agriculture meet the challenges of the
21st Century. We look forward to our continued partnership in this
critical endeavor.
Sincerely,
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Sarah Gallo,
Vice President, Agriculture and Environment,
Biotechnology Innovation Organization.

[all]
