- IMPROVING SECURITY AND EFFICIENCY AT OPM AND THE NATIONAL BACKGROUND INVESTIGATIONS BUREAU

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

IMPROVING SECURITY AND EFFICIENCY AT OPM AND THE NATIONAL BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS BUREAU

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 2, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-12

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-358 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Jason Chaffetz, Utah, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California              Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan                   Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark Meadows, North Carolina         Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Ron DeSantis, Florida                Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Val Butler Demings, Florida
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia
Steve Russell, Oklahoma
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin
Will Hurd, Texas
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan

Jonathan Skladany, Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Julie Dunne, Senior Counsel
Michael Flynn, Counsel
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 2, 2017.................................     1

WITNESSES

Ms. Kathleen McGettigan, Acting Director, U.S. Office of
Personnel Management
Oral Statement...............................................     6
Written Statement............................................     8
Mr. David DeVries, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Office of
Personnel Management
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Mr. Cord Chase, Chief Information Security Officer, U.S. Office
of Personnel Management
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Mr. Charles Phalen, Director, National Background Investigations
Bureau
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Mr. Terry Halvorsen, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department
of Defense
Oral Statement...............................................    14
Written Statement............................................    16

APPENDIX

February 9, 2016, Worldwide Threat Assessment by Mr. James
Clapper, submitted by Mr. Lynch................................    60
Response from the Office of Personnel Management to Questions for
the Record.....................................................    93

IMPROVING SECURITY AND EFFICIENCY AT OPM AND THE NATIONAL BACKGROUND
INVESTIGATIONS BUREAU

----------

Thursday, February 2, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:02 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Jordan, Amash, Massie,
Meadows, DeSantis, Ross, Blum, Hice, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer,
Comer, Mitchell, Cummings, Maloney, Lynch, Connolly, Kelly,
Lawrence, Plaskett, Demings, Krishnamoorthi, and Raskin.
Chairman Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order.
And without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
I appreciate you all being here. We have a very important
hearing. We have a number of members that, I'm sure, will be
here but will be a little bit late. There is the National
Prayer Breakfast, and getting across town at this time of day
is a very difficult task, so----
But, nevertheless, I'm glad to have you here and look
forward to this important hearing.
Two years ago, the Office of Personnel Management suffered
one of the most damaging data breaches in the history of the
Federal Government. This went on for some time, and there are
still additional details that need to be learned.
But the counterintelligence value of the data that was
stolen will last for an untold amount of time, a generation or
so. So it troubles me to hear reports that maybe some of the
things that led to this haven't necessarily been changed at the
Office of Personnel Management.
We have a number of questions that I think we need to
explore. For example, are legacy systems still in use for
backup investigations? Is OPM employing good cybersecurity
practices such as dual factor authentication and network
segmentation? What is the plan to transition all of OPM's
systems off this legacy technology? When will OPM stop using
unsecured and vulnerable legacy technologies such as Cobalt and
start using maybe some modernized solutions that can be put on
the cloud?
How is OPM protecting the inside of the network and not
just building the cyberwalls higher? Will OPM adopt a zero-
trust model as part of their cybersecurity strategy? You can't
steal what you can't access, and a zero-trust model makes life
much harder for the hackers. These are some of the questions
we'll continue to ask and explore.
We said it in the committee's data breach report, and I'll
say it again, chief information officers matter. They really do
matter. That's why we have two of them on the panel today.
Federal agencies, particularly CIOs, must recognize their
positions are on the frontline of defense against these cyber
attacks. And as the government, we're on notice. Leadership at
the Federal agencies must be vigilant about the ever-present
national security threats targeting their IT systems. And
especially in OPM's case where the IT systems are protecting
some of the most vulnerable information held by the Federal
Government.
The National Background Investigation Bureau, also known as
NBIB, N-B-I-B, was partly born from the failures at the Office
of Personnel Management. When OPM last testified before the
committee, in February of 2016, the NBIB had just been
announced. During the hearing, questions were raised about the
accountability and how this new organization would operate
given the split responsibilities with OPM overseeing the NBIB
and the Department of Defense overseeing the IT security of the
NBIB.
Today, we'd like answers to those questions and assurances
that we're moving in the right direction and also, as to when
the new organization will be fully operational with a secure IT
environment.
Was the creation of the NBIB simply a rebranding effort, or
does the NBIB represent real change? At our last hearing, we
talked about how the many security clearance processes failed
to check social media information of the applicants. The day
before our follow-up hearing in May of 2016, the director of
National Intelligence issued a new policy permitting the
collection of publicly available social media information in
certain cases. We'd like to understand how this policy is being
implemented and if it is effective.
Finally, the clearance process seems to be getting worse
while the reform process continues. My understanding is at
least--based on an OPM management memo of October 2016, there's
a backlog--at least then--there was a backlog of 569,000 cases.
That's quite a list. It does beg the question as to why we have
to have so many background checks, but where are we at in terms
of the backlog? And why, despite all the reform activities, is
the clearance process taking longer?
In fiscal year 2015, it took an average of 95 days to
process a secret clearance and 179 days for a top secret
clearance. In fiscal year 2016, it took an average of 166 days
to process a secret clearance and 246 for a top secret
clearance. That's quite a jump in the timeline that it takes in
order to get there.
More than a decade ago, the security clearance data and
processes were transferred from the Department of Defense to
OPM, and now there's talk of transferring this process back to
the Department of Defense. We also have the newly created NBIB
where OPM and DOD have a shared responsibility. And we need to
get this right, make sure that we have stopped just moving the
organizational boxes around.
As we continue our oversight of the transition of
responsibilities from OPM to the NBIB, we need to continue to
ask about the efficiency and making sure, at the end of the
day, that we're protecting and securing the United States of
America.
So there are a tremendous amount of number of people that
are working on IT issues. We will have additional hearings and
discuss that.
I personally do believe--and this is--at some point, I
would like to draw this out from you--attracting and retaining
IT professionals has got to be a challenge for the government.
It's a challenge in the private sector. It's a challenge across
the board.
I was fortunate enough to have a newly minted son-in-law,
who is in the IT field. And the opportunities for him for
employment were unbelievable. I've never seen anything like it,
which is good as his father-in-law. That's a good thing.
But on a serious note, I do think we have to address, on
the whole of government--not just this particular field, but
the whole of government--how do we attract and retain IT
professionals, because we do need so many of them, and there's
so much vulnerability for the country as a whole.
So this is an important hearing, and I appreciate you being
here. And now I'd like to recognize the ranking member, Mr.
Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you for calling this hearing.
And as I listen to you talk about the IT people, Mr.
Chairman, this is very important that we all let Federal
employees know how important they are, and that we do
everything in our power to provide them with the types of
salaries and work security that they need. That's one of the
things that would help to attract them and keep them.
Today's hearing is on the process our Nation uses to
conduct background checks for Federal employees, who are
seeking very important security clearances so they can have
access to our most guarded secrets.
This hearing could not come at a more critical time.
Yesterday, I sent a letter requesting a Pentagon investigation
of the President's national security adviser, Lieutenant
General Michael Flynn, for his potentially serious violation of
the United States Constitution. I was joined by the ranking
members of the committees on Armed Services, Judiciary,
Homeland Security, Foreign Affairs, and Intelligence.
General Flynn has admitted that he received payment to
appear at a gala in December of 2015 hosted by Russia Today,
that country's State-sponsored propaganda outlet.
During that event, General Flynn dined with Russian
President, Vladimir Putin. As our letter explains, the
Department of Defense warns its retired officers that they may
not accept any direct or indirect payment from foreign
governments without congressional approval, because they
continue to hold offices of trust under the emoluments clause
of the United States Constitution.
On January 6, intelligence officials issued their report
detailing Russia's attack on the United States to undermine our
election. This report concluded with high confidence that the
goal was to, quote, ``undermine public faith in the United
States' democratic process,'' end of quote.
This report described as, quote, ``The Kremlin's principle
international propaganda outlet,'' end of quote. It explained--
and I quote--that ``The Kremlin's staff's RT and closely
supervises RT's coverage recruiting people who can convey
Russian's strategic messaging because of their ideological
beliefs,'' end of quote.
It is extremely concerning that General Flynn chose to
accept payment for appearing at an event hosted by the
propaganda arm of the Russian Government at the same time that
the country was engaged in an attack against this Nation in an
effort to undermine our election. Something is wrong with that
picture.
But it is even more concerning that General Flynn, who
President Trump has now chosen to be his national security
adviser, may have violated the Constitution in the process. We
do not know how much General Flynn was paid for this event and
for his dinner with President Putin, whether it was $5,000,
$50,000, or more. We don't know. We do not know whether he
received payments from Russian or other foreign sources or on
separate occasions or whether he sought approval from the
Pentagon or Congress to accept these payments. We don't know.
Related to today's hearing, we do not know what effect this
potentially serious violation of the Constitution should or
will have on General Flynn's security clearance.
Security clearance holders and those applying for security
clearances are required to report their contacts with foreign
officials. We do not know what, if anything, General Flynn
reported about his contacts with officials from Russia or other
countries. We do not know if he reported this one payment or
any other payment he may have received. These are the questions
that need to be answered.
We also have questions about the individuals who may seek
to join the administration and obtain access to classified
information while they are currently under investigation.
For example, there have been reports that President Trump's
former campaign chairman, Paul Manafort, has been advising the
White House recently while at the same time he's, reportedly,
under FBI investigation for his dealings with Russian
interests. We want to know how security clearances are handled
if the existing clearance holders or new applicants are under
criminal investigation. Does the FBI allow these individuals to
continue to have access to classified information, or is there
a process to place a hold on someone's clearance or application
until the investigation resolves the questions?
Finally, President Trump claims that Democrats only became
interested in Russian hacking for political reasons and that,
for example, we have no interest in cyber attacks against OPM.
He stated, and I quote, ``They didn't make a big deal of
that,'' end of quote.
The President is one million percent wrong. I and other
Democrats worked aggressively on this committee's investigation
of the attacks on OPM. We held multiple hearings, including one
that I requested. We conducted extensive interviews and
briefings with key witnesses. We reviewed more than 10,000
pages of documents, and we issued two reports from the majority
and minority staff.
I called for expanding our investigation to other agencies,
including the State Department, the postal service, which were
both attacked.
I called for investigating the cyber attacks on financial
institutions like JPMorgan Chase. Our intelligence agencies had
warned us--I called for investigating the cyber attacks on the
Nation's biggest for-profit hospital chain, Community Health
Systems, which had the largest hacking-related health
information breach ever reported.
And I called for investigating the cyber attacks on retail
companies, including Home Depot, Target, and Kmart. So the
President's claim that we are focusing on Russia's hacking for
political reasons is ludicrous. Our intelligence agencies have
warned us that if we do not act now, our adversaries, including
Russia, are determined to strike again. We need to get answers
to these questions immediately, and I thank all of our
witnesses for being with us today.
And, again, Mr. Chairman, I thank you for this hearing. And
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll hold the record open for 5 legislative days for any
members who would like to submit a written statement.
I now would like to recognize the panel of witnesses. We're
pleased to welcome Ms. Kathleen McGettigan, who is the acting
director of the United States Office of Personnel Management.
Ms. McGettigan is accompanied by David DeVries--DeVries,
sorry--chief information office of the United States Office of
Personnel Management; Mr. Cord Chase, chief information
security officer at the United States Office of Personnel
Management, and Mr. Charles Phalen, director of the National
Background Investigations Bureau, or NBIB. Their expertise on
this issue will be very important to this subject matter, so
they will all--everybody will be sworn in.
We're also honored to have Mr. Terry Halvorsen is the chief
information officer at the United States Department of Defense.
It's my understanding Mr. Halvorsen is retiring at the end of
the month, and we could think of no better gift for you than
having to testify before Congress.
It's such a joy. I know you're looking forward to it
personally. So happy birthday, Merry Christmas, and happy
retirement for coming to testify before Congress. But we thank
you, sir for your----
Mr. Halvorsen. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. --for your service to this country and
at the Department of Defense. And we really do appreciate your
expertise and look forward to hearing your testimony. And we
wish you well.
And, again, thank you for your service and your willingness
to be here today. You probably could have squirmed out of this
one if you really wanted to, but you stepped up to the plate
and took this assignment, so thank you, sir, for being here.
Again, we welcome you all. Pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses are to be sworn before they testify. So if you would
please rise and raise your right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Thank you. You may be seated. Let the record reflect that
the witnesses all answered in the affirmative.
Your entire written statement will be made part of the
record, but we would appreciate it if you could keep your
comments to 5 minutes. And like I said, your whole record--your
whole testimony and any supplements you have will be made part
of the record.
Ms. McGettigan, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF KATHLEEN MCGETTIGAN

Ms. McGettigan. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity for my colleagues and myself to testify on behalf
of the Office of Personnel Management.
As you said, I am joined today by Mr. Charles Phalen, the
director of the National Background Investigations Bureau, Mr.
Dave DeVries, OPM's chief information officer, and Mr. Cord
Chase, OPM's chief information security officer.
While I am presently the acting director of OPM, I do have
over 25 years of service at the agency.
OPM recognizes how critical the topics of today's hearing
are to the Federal Government and to our national security, and
I look forward to our having a productive conversation about
the NBIB transition, the security clearance process, and
information technology security.
As you know, the NBIB was established on October 1st, 2016,
and is the primary provider of background investigations for
the Federal Government.
Charlie has a distinguished career in multiple roles at
senior levels in the Federal Government and private industry.
His career has been focused on national security. His
experience includes serving in capacities at the CIA, including
as director of security and with the FBI as assistant director
leading its security division.
NBIB is designed with an enhanced focus on national
security, customer service, and continuous process improvement.
Its new organizational structure is aimed at leveraging record
automation, transforming business processes, and enhancing
customer engagement and transparency.
In late 2014, OPM's market capacity for contract
investigation services was drastically reduced by the loss of
OPM's largest field contractor. This resulted in an
investigative backlog. This backlog was exacerbated by the
cybersecurity incidents at OPM that were announced in 2015.
Looking forward, it is an NBIB priority to address the
investigative backlog while maintaining a commitment to
quality.
To accomplish this, NBIB is focusing efforts in three
primary areas: First, we are working to increase capacity by
hiring new Federal investigators and increasing the number of
investigative field work contracts.
Second, NBIB is focusing on policy and process changes to
ensure efficient operations.
Third, NBIB has actively worked with customer agencies to
prioritize the cases that are most critical to our national
security.
Information technology also plays a central role in NBIB's
ability to enhance the background investigation process. While
still in development, NBIB's new system, NBIS, will be operated
and maintained by DOD on behalf of NBIB.
On OPM's behalf, this effort is being led by our new chief
information officer, David DeVries. Dave joined us in September
of 2016. He is the DOD's principle deputy CIO, and he has a
strong relationship with his former agency.
As we work to strengthen the infrastructure and security of
NBIB, we are also working on fortifying our entire technology
ecosystem.
As the Federal Government modernizes how it does business,
OPM has focused on bracing new tools and technology to deliver
optimum customer service and enhanced security.
OPM enhanced its cybersecurity efforts from multiple
angles. We have added cybersecurity tools and security updates.
We've implemented staff and agencywide training we've hired
critical personnel and, finally, we continue to collaborate
with our interagency partners.
Touching on efforts I've just outlined, our cybersecurity
tools and security updates include 100 percent multifactor user
authentication to access OPM's network. This is done via the
use of PIV cards and major IT system compliance initiatives.
Furthermore, OPM recognizes that cybersecurity is not just
about technology, but it is also about people.
OPM has added seasoned cybersecurity and IT experts to its
already talented team. OPM has hired a number of new senior IT
managers and leaders and realigned and centralized its
cybersecurity program and resources under the chief information
security officer. In this capacity, Cord is responsible for
taking the steps necessary to secure and control access to
sensitive information. OPM also strengthened its threat
awareness by enrolling in multiple information and intelligence
sharing programs.
In conclusion, the necessary key partnerships and plans
have been developed to build out NBIB and improve the security
and efficiency of OPM's IT systems. These structural and
process improvements will enable us to improve timeliness,
reduce the background investigation. Equally productive is the
CIO's holistic approach which ranges from bringing on qualified
personnel to adopting new tools and procedures that enhance the
security of OPM's networks and data.
Thank you for the invitation to testify before you today,
and we welcome any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. McGettigan follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you for your testimony.
Mr. DeVries, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.
My understanding is maybe yourself, Mr. Chase, and Mr.
Phalen, I don't know if you have opening statements or if you
care to say anything, but I'll recognize each of you. If you
don't have anything, we'll just--Mr. DeVries, do you have----

STATEMENT OF DAVID DEVRIES

Mr. DeVries. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to just take this opportunity to thank you for the
opportunity to come here. As the brief bio was read there, I
did come from 30 years in the Army. I transitioned in in 2009
to become a senior executive within DOD, and where I spent the
last 2-1/2 years as the principle deputy for the DOD CIO.
Broad range here, I was asked to come here to OPM and
accepted that and arrived here in September of 2016. And it's a
pleasure being here today, and I enjoy the opportunity to
answer your questions here. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Chase.

STATEMENT OF CORD CHASE

Mr. Chase. Thank you very much for the opportunity----
Chairman Chaffetz. If you can all bring that--I'm sorry.
You've got to bring the microphones up close, uncomfortably
close to make sure we can all hear you.
Mr. Chase. Again, thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak today. One of the things that I want to make clear is
I ran into the fire to help with the events that occurred in
2015. In the rebuilding process, we've made a lot of
advancements, but it's only to get us to a standard
environment. By no means am I up here saying, we're successful
or we've won anything, that we're doing our best to improve the
environment to secure the information within OPM and NBIB.
With that, there are quite a few items that I'd be happy to
discuss with all of you on those improvements, and that's all I
have at this point.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Phalen.

STATEMENT OF CHARLES PHALEN

Mr. Phalen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm happy to be here
and join with you today in a good conversation on this.
To echo a little bit what Ms. McGettigan mentioned, we are
focused in our--as we begin our--or end our 4th month as an
entity on three key things.
One is recovering and increasing our capacity to do
background investigations, improving our capability to gather
information that is relevant to background investigations and,
finally, working on those innovations that will help us in
partnership with the security executive agent and the
suitability executive agent to look at what an investigation
will look like as we move down into the future.
A key to this is building an organizational structure
beyond what existed on September 29th and adding capabilities
in terms of investments and in terms of innovation, and then
very importantly, working in partnership with DOD as we build
out an information technology systems that will be able to
enhance and inform security investigations across our entire
spectrum of about 100 customers across the Federal Government.
With that, I'm very happy to be here. Thank you for the
opportunity today.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Mr. Halvorsen, you are now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF TERRY HALVORSEN

Mr. Halvorsen. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
and distinguished members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the committee today on the
Department's information technology and cybersecurity support
to the National Background Investigations Bureau.
I am Terry Halvorsen, the Department of Defense chief
information officer. You have my opening statement. I think
most of you are familiar with my responsibilities, so in the
interest of time, I'll cut this a little short.
The department is responsible for the development and
securing the NBIB IT systems. We have brought the full
expertise of the department both in IT and cybersecurity
resources to bear on this problem, and it is our objective to
replace the current background investigations information
system with a more reliable, flexible, and secure system in
support of the NBIB.
Defense information system under the DOD's CIO's oversight
has established the National Background Investigations Systems
Program Management Office to implement this effort. The PMO is
responsible for the design, develop, and operation of the IT
systems capabilities needed to support the investigative
process to include ensuring that the cybersecurity protections
and resiliency of these capabilities. The alignment of the
systems under DOD assures we leverage all national security
systems expertise and capability to protect the background
investigation data. And I assure you, we are doing that.
The Department has made significant headway on this
important mission, since I previously testified before this
committee last February, and we are on track to deliver the
capabilities needed in an iterative fashion using DOD expertise
and best industry practices.
In fiscal year 2016, the Department funded preacquisition
activities to better posture for official standup and funding
in fiscal year 2017. I would like to thank Congress and members
of this committee for supporting the Department's funding
request for NBIB IT infrastructure and cybersecurity
modernization. As you know, the fiscal year 2000 continuing
resolution did include new start authority for the NBIB, and we
thank you for that.
Today, several of the NBIB's prototypes are enabling the
Department to work with industry and other partners to discover
capabilities that we will provide with a more efficient,
effective, and secure background investigation system in the
future.
Throughout this process, we are actively partnering with
industry, integrating commercial feedback into the process to
ensure we are focusing on capabilities and keeping up with the
changing pace of technology.
I am pleased with the current progress on NBIS that the
Department and our partners have made to date. I look forward
to seeing what this organization will accomplish as it makes
progress toward delivering several prototype capabilities by
the end of fiscal year 2017 and an initial operating capability
covering the full investigative process in the fourth quarter
of 2018.
This is an important opportunity for the Federal Government
to strengthen the security of the IT infrastructure that
supports the Federal background investigating process. This
approach utilizes the Department's recognized IT cybersecurity
expertise, best industry practices while maintaining a
streamline centralized governmentwide approach to the
investigative services that the NBIB provides today for more
than 100 different Federal agencies.
Thank you for this committee's continued support, and I
look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Halvorsen follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I will now like to recognize the gentleman from Texas, the
chairman of the subcommittee on Information Technology, Mr.
Hurd.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you and
the ranking member for the continued diligence on this
important issue.
Mr. Phalen, I've got some basic questions for you. Sorry
for the basicness of the questions.
You're in charge, right?
Mr. Phalen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hurd. Do you have a technical background?
Mr. Phalen. I do not have a technical background.
Mr. Hurd. Who is the person directly reporting to you that
is responsible for preventing another attack that we saw, like
the one we saw a number of months ago?
Mr. Phalen. So it is not a direct chain----
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry. Mr. Phalen, if you could move
that microphone. Straighten it up and right--right up next--
there you go. Thank you.
Mr. Phalen. There you go. Okay thank you.
There's no one specifically in my chain of command that is
immediately responsible. We rely on Mr. DeVries and Mr. Chase
as the CIO and CISO to provide the security for the systems
that we are operating today.
Mr. Hurd. Copy.
So Mr. Chase, you are in charge.
Mr. Chase. That is correct, for cybersecurity.
Mr. Hurd. Well, thank you for running into the fire.
Mr. Chase. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. I recognize the difficulty of the task. In your
brief remarks, you talked about the first step was getting OPM
up to a baseline.
Mr. Chase. Correct.
Mr. Hurd. Can you take 90 seconds and explain that
baseline?
Mr. Chase. Sure. That's a good question. So one of the
things, when I came on board, was to set an appropriate
strategy and a pathway forward. So it was the stabilization
phase. So we understood that there were quite a few systems
that were out of compliance. So we knew that we had to take
steps to get those back into compliance.
We also had another layer of engineering tasks, which
included network segmentation, making sure that we had the
appropriate monitoring tools in place, and then the tuning
process to support that.
Throughout fiscal year 2016, we were able to get those
accomplished but, again, to a standard baseline where we feel
comfortable that we can control our environment and we
understand where we were with the IT system boundaries and the
IT system boundary inventories.
Mr. Hurd. So of the IG GAO, they've all done reviews,
there's been a number of outstanding issues. Many of the
outstanding issues for years had been on the IG report and the
GAO high-risk report.
Of those documents, how many of those vulnerabilities, that
have been identified, are still outstanding?
Mr. Chase. So there are still items that are outstanding,
and we prioritized them based on their criticality----
Mr. Hurd. What's the highest priority--highest priority
vulnerability that's still outstanding?
Mr. Chase. So the IT system compliance was the most
significant vulnerability that was identified in the Fiscal
Year 2016 FISMA report, as well as the IT security officer
hiring process, which is something we were able to accomplish
at the end of this year as well.
Mr. Hurd. Good copy.
You talked about segmentation. And we saw after the
breaches in 2014 and 2015, the hackers were able to basically
move, you know, without--with impunity through the network. And
my question is what have you done to make life harder on the
hackers that once they get past your defenses?
And I will say my--you know, I begin with the presumption
of breach, you give an attacker enough time, they have enough
resources, they are going to get in, so what do you do once
they get in, and how have you improved segmentation across the
OPM network.
Mr. Chase. So I consider it a level of effort, so I'm
trying to make it as hard as possible for them to get in.
Understanding that OPM is a customer-oriented agency and has to
communicate. Some of the segmentation that we have done is
identify all of our major systems and high-valued assets within
our environment, as well as, all the privileged and
nonprivileged users.
We segmented those between each other and set the
appropriate firewalls and monitoring tools to ensure that one
can't get to the another and vice versa, and if there are
attempts to get between the other, the other is stopped and
flagged, and there's a follow-up with that event itself.
Mr. Hurd. In my remaining minutes, I want to ask a
question. And I don't mean to be indelicate. Why did we get to
this situation? And I ask that question in order to learn from
this experience so we can take those lessons learned and apply
it across the Federal Government.
Mr. Chase. So I'm going to say I came post breach, and I
know there's quite a few lessons learned. There was a majority
and minority reports issued, there's all the audits that were
issued, and that's what I've been going off of and, again,
trying to apply those to prioritize the next steps to be able
suppress the threat and the risks within OPM.
Mr. Hurd. So why--you've been there now for enough time.
You've seen the problems. You've probably been shocked by some
of the deficiencies within the network. Why do you think that
network got to where it was?
Mr. Chase. I would say based on those reports and
information that was put in front of me, there were systematic
failures within OPM that led to it.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the ranking member of the subcommittee
on IT, Ms. Kelly from Illinois, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And thank you all for your testimony here today. This is
actually the committee's third hearing on the OPM data breach.
The data breach compromised the information of millions of
Federal employees. The committee responded almost immediately
and did an extensive bipartisan investigation into the
incident. In total, committee staff reviewed more than 10,000
pages of documents, interviewed multiple witnesses, and had
numerous briefings from both Federal and nonFederal entities. I
applaud the work we have done on the OPM data breach, but I
must address the elephant in the room.
We are holding a hearing about hacking by a sophisticated
actor, likely a State actor for a hack that occurred more than
a year ago. But this committee has chosen not to take any
action to investigate the recent Russian hacking and propaganda
campaign to impact our election.
Only last month, the NSA, FBI, and CIA concluded with a
high degree of confidence that Russia successfully hacked
groups throughout our Nation in an effort to influence our
election. In the face of this report from our top intelligence
agencies, we have done zero oversight into this issue. There's
not been a single hearing or request.
My wonderful chairman on the IT subcommittee asked Mr.
Chase about lessons learned.
Mr. Halvorsen, I would like to ask you about lessons
learned after the vulnerabilities were exposed in the OPM data
breach.
Mr. Halvorsen. We certainly took the vulnerabilities that
were exposed in the database, and I can assure you that both in
the OPM legacy systems, the work they're doing today and in the
new systems, we are taking those lessened learn and making sure
that the systems we are building new are built from the ground
up with cybersecurity baked in, and that we've assumed from the
beginning that this system could be penetrated.
So there's a condition we have that you might hear in the
Navy termed, it's set conditions ZEBRA, it means close the
watertight doors. We are making sure that the new system will
be segmented enough that we can close the doors. Because
there's two things you want to stop. Certainly, you want to
stop people from getting in, but when they get in, you don't
want your answer to be you've got to shut the system down.
That's a victory.
So we're designing this system so that we can fight--and
that is the correct word--fight through any attempt to breach
this system. And if we get breached, be able to block and
contain and then eradicate any malware system loss that gets in
here.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Did the subsequent investigations help in understanding how
things could be improved?
Mr. Halvorsen. Absolutely.
Ms. Kelly. Anybody else want to answer that?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes, they did.
Ms. Kelly. And any of the other witnesses?
Mr. Chase. I concur.
Mr. DeVries. Concur.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
I believe these OPM investigations went a long way in
assuring the American public that everything possible was being
looked at to prevent this from happening again. But it is clear
that politics have prevented this committee from being willing
or able to do the necessary objective and nonpartisan oversight
on the Russian attack. That's why I, and every one of my
democratic colleagues in the House, have signed on to
legislation to establish an independent bipartisan commission
to investigate foreign interference in the 2016 elections.
Thank you for your response.
And, Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Will the gentleman--gentlewoman yield
first?
Ms. Kelly. Of course.
Chairman Chaffetz. As I've said publicly, and the
gentlewoman should know, given that it involves sources and
methods, the United States Congress is organized such that the
House Intelligence Committee takes the lead on those things. We
can investigate anything at any time, but I do have limits in
that I cannot investigate sources and methods which clearly is
the purview of the House Intelligence Committee.
I would also suggest that we were the first committee to
create a subcommittee specifically on information technology.
We were the first to dive into the OPM data breach, and we have
been pushing from the Department of Education and others to
make sure that we do have the proper defenses in place. And to
suggest that it's only one particular country would be naive at
best. And it could be everything from a guy in a van down by
the river down to a Nation State.
Ms. Kelly. We know it was the Russians in this particular
instance.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I think that should be investigated.
I have said as much publicly, and I've also--I think everybody
should know, every Member of Congress should know that the
House Intelligence Committee is really the only organization
within Congress that is set up to be able to do that.
Mr. Cummings. Would the gentlelady yield, please?
Ms. Kelly. Yes, I will.
Mr. Cummings. Very briefly, Congressman Swalwell and I,
over a month ago--as a matter of fact, in December, filed a
bill which asks that we have a 9/11-type investigation. And the
reason why we did that is because we didn't want it to get
mired in a political battle like the Benghazi Committee did,
Select Committee.
And it would be patterned after the 9/11 commission so that
we would bring America's best experts to the table. It would be
an equal number of Democrats, an equal number of Republicans,
and that they would look at this thing carefully--and with the
chair's indulgence, I need to explain this--and they would come
back with recommendations. They would have subpoena power.
Then we refiled that bill in January when the new session
came in. Every single Democrat in the Congress signed on to
that bill. Not one signal Republican signed on. And one of the
reasons why we did that is because we felt we didn't move to
common ground; we need to move to higher ground, that this was
such a serious attack on our democracy, and our election
process, that it deserved that kind of attention. And so that
bill is still out there. Only Democrats have signed on.
One of the things we were concerned about is the chairman
of the Intelligence Committee, Mr. Nunes, was a part of the
transition team for President Trump. And we just felt that we
needed to take the complete thing out and let an independent
body do it. And I just wanted to explain that to the
gentlelady.
Thank you very much. And thank you for yielding. Nice job,
by the way.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'll now recognize the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. DeSantis, for 5 minutes.
Mr. DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. McGettigan, I know after the OPM breach there's several
months people were, kind of, notified. But I've had people,
constituents, just wonder, I mean, what has been done to
mitigate the potential damage to people whose files were
compromised?
Ms. McGettigan. Thank you for that question.
We have entered into--in December, we entered into a
contract and identity protection contract. We expanded the
coverage that we already had. And we are moving toward having
coverage for 10 years. The current contract covers all those
affected by the two breaches, and it runs out in December of
2018 during----
Mr. DeSantis. What would that mean, just for somebody who
had their stuff compromised?
Ms. McGettigan. I'm sorry. We have identity protection
services and credit monitoring. So people have received--people
who were affected have received information on how to sign up
for the credit monitoring, although they are covered by
insurance whether they sign up or not.
And currently, the ceiling on the insurance we have
expanded to $5 million, and we are moving toward complying with
congressional direction to have the contract go for 10 years of
credit monitoring.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. Good. I mean, I think that we in this
committee--and I applaud the chairman for being on this issue.
And we hear about these other hacks and stuff. This was
catastrophic. I mean, you're talking about these files with the
amount of information that's there, and I had to go through it
in the military, and other people, perhaps, you guys have gone
through it, too, there is a lot, a lot of information there,
and it's a massive vulnerability. So I hope that what's being
done is going to be effective.
Let me ask--this may be Mr. Chase or maybe someone else
want to take this. If OPM suffers another compromise and NBIB
applications and its systems are breached, who makes the final
call as to whether or not the compromised applications are
taken offline or continue to run?
Mr. Halvorsen. If it's in the new systems that are
developed, that is me.
Mr. DeSantis. Do you agree with that?
Mr. DeVries. For the new system, yes. Right now we're
currently operating underneath the existing legacy system.
Mr. DeSantis. What's the answer----
Mr. DeVries. The answer is the CIO gets the report of it
from the CISO, and the director makes the call on it.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. Let me ask you this, because the
majority staff on this committee had a report indicating that
there were certain tools following some of the previous
breaches that were bought, and then they there were delayed in
terms of their deployment for a variety of reasons, but one of
them, that they had to make certain notification to relevant
unions.
So what kind of notifications is the IT security team
required to make before deploying these tools, and what is the
purpose of the notifications?
Mr. Chase. So from post breach coming in, any tool that we
go out on the street to market and do our research on is fully
vetted internally. We have a procurement office inside of OPM
that works with us to make sure that the appropriate language
is put into that, and then we move to the process of deploying
that tool.
Mr. DeSantis. But in terms of the delays, have there been
delays because of notification requirements?
Mr. Chase. I'm not aware of that specific statement.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay. Had there been other barriers or
challenges in trying to timely deploy some of these tools,
bureaucratic roadblocks?
Mr. Chase. Again, post breach, based on the situation--and,
again, I mentioned earlier stabilizing, the procurement office
has been very, very flexible with me and making sure that they
can give us the time----
Mr. DeSantis. But this was so--the implication is there may
have been a problem prebreach?
Mr. Chase. I'm not aware outside of what I'm reading in
those reports.
Mr. DeSantis. Do you think that it was a problem?
Mr. DeVries. I have no firsthand knowledge of that, but
just from the acquisition side and having been in this field
for many years, yes.
Mr. DeSantis. Okay.
Well, I will yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I now recognize the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And I want to thank our witnesses for your great work and
for your willingness to help us. I want to revisit the issue
raised by Ms. Kelly about the unwillingness or the inability of
the committee to really investigate what's going on with the
Russian hacking.
But before I get into that, let's talk a little bit about
the issue that brings you here.
In June and July of 2015, OPM publicly disclosed that its
information technology systems had been experiencing massive
data breaches over some time, compromising the Social Security
numbers, birthdates, home addresses, background investigation
records, and other highly sensitive personal information
belonging to about 22 million individuals.
These cyber breaches were not only devastating in terms of
their impact on the financial security of their victims,
rather, they also posed a grave national security threat as the
extensive security clearance questionnaires, about an 80-page
document, that really drills down on folks and was filled--were
filled out by nearly 20 million Americans who have security
clearance rights and privileges, and the names and the
information of those individuals were included among the data.
I had asked--that was a--that was a terrible--you know,
some people call that a--like a cyber Pearl Harbor, because all
our folks who are actually actively interested in working on
our national security organizations, you know, basically, they
were giving up. And so I asked at a very basic level, I asked,
Ms. Archuleta, who was running the OPM at the time, I said,
have you actually gone back and encrypted the Social Security
numbers of these employees? Were they encrypted? And she said,
no, they were not. So--so all those Social Security numbers of
those 22 million people went out.
And then a year later, we had one of her successors--not
her successor, but one of the people under her, I asked, again,
have we encrypted the Social Security numbers of the people,
the 22 million people? And they said there are still--there are
still vulnerabilities we still haven't been able to do that.
So let me ask, have we encrypted at least the Social
Security numbers of these 22 million people?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, I'll take that for the record. Yes, we
have begun a vigorous program in 2016 to encrypt the databases.
So it's not just encrypting the Social Security number, but it
is the databases that contain those critical information.
Mr. Lynch. Are we done with that yet?
Mr. DeVries. We are not completely done across the whole
OPM environment, but the HVA systems we have gone through, and
I have one remaining system to be done, and that is scheduled
for next month. To complete the----
Mr. Lynch. What percentage of the 22 million have been
encrypted? Can you give me an estimate on that?
Mr. DeVries. Of the NBIB system, which contains those
records there, all but one have been encrypted.
Mr. Lynch. So what's lacking in percentage?
Mr. DeVries. One major database there on the mainframe.
Mr. Lynch. All right. You're not answering my question,
but--look, we need to get that done. Okay?
Let me go on to the Russian thing. Look, we've got--I
understand that the chairman's resistance on sources and
methods, I get that. But we have--and I would like to introduce
these into the record.
First of all, I would like to introduce into the record my
letter from December 15th--14th asking for a hearing on the
Russian hacking.
Secondly, I'd like to enter into the record an FBI
investigation regarding Russian malicious cyber activity. They
did a whole investigation on this. It's called ``grisly
steppe,'' s-t-e-p-p-e. I want to enter into the record a
background to assessing Russian activities and intention into
recent U.S. elections, the analytical process and cyber
incident attribution. That's produced by the offices of the
director of National Intelligence.
I would like to submit for the record, a statement for the
record, worldwide threat assessment by James R. Clapper,
director of the National Intelligence, February 9, 2016.
I ask for unanimous consent.
Chairman Chaffetz. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you. So we have enough here. Just with
this here, we have enough here to do an investigation. And this
is just the stuff that is unclassified that the intelligence
community has put out there. We don't have to talk about----
Chairman Chaffetz. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Lynch. Yes. Sure I'll yield.
Chairman Chaffetz. Two points. Number one, sources and
methods are the sole jurisdiction of the intelligence
community.
Number two, have you really thought this through? Do you
really think it's appropriate for this committee to investigate
the specific hack of the DCCC?
Mr. Lynch. Absolutely.
Chairman Chaffetz. Because if you are going to do an
investigation of the DCCC, we're going to have to dive into a
political party's infrastructure operation's data. I don't
think that's appropriate. If you----
Mr. Lynch. Let me--well----
Chairman Chaffetz. Here's the difference. Here's the
difference----
Mr. Lynch. Reclaiming my time. Actually, you know, you're
using all my time here.
Look, look they hacked--they hacked the American election.
That is worth looking into----
Chairman Chaffetz. There's no evidence of that. And
President Obama said that that wasn't even possible.
Mr. Lynch. This is high confidence. This is our own FBI,
high confidence that they hacked the election, that they
interfered with the election. It may not have been outcome
determinative. I'm not saying that. But based on the FBI, based
on the office of--the director of national security, they're
saying, yeah. And also, the CIA, they're in agreement that the
elections were hacked.
Now, I'm not saying they affected the outcome, but they
tried. It may have been just chaos that they wanted to create,
but they interfered with our elections. And if we're turning a
blind eye to that, that's a shame. That's a shame. That's core
to our democracy.
And look, if we're just going to say, oh, that's somebody's
work, that's not anybody else's work. That's our work. There
are plenty of reports here we can talk about, and we ought to
do it publicly, about the damage done to the confidence in our
electoral system. That's what's important here.
People have to--people have to fear that we have an
integrity--a certain integrity in our own systems and that
other countries are not allowed to interfere with that. That's
a red line. We should not allow that. And it should be a very
serious obligation of this committee to make sure that doesn't
happen again.
And we need all the committees of jurisdiction to work on
this. We're a committee of unlimited jurisdiction. The
gentleman has said that quite frequently. That's the strength
of this committee. And I think this is--look, they hacked our
election. This should be bipartisan. This should not be
Democrat versus Republican.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman's time--the gentleman's
time is well expired.
As I said, I do think there should be--as I said when it
happened, there should be an investigation. There should be a
prosecution. They should go out----
Mr. Lynch. These are the investigation of the committee.
Chairman Chaffetz. Hold on. The gentleman's time has
expired.
The Intelligence Committee is the only one that can look at
sources and methods. That is the rule of the House.
Mr. Lynch. We won't look at sources and methods. We'll just
look at what the agencies themselves have made public.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman's time has expired.
And if you are going to do a proper investigation, as this
committee did, with the breach at the Office of Personnel
Management, you have to look at the two sides of the breach,
those that were trying to do it, which this committee could not
look at in the OPM breach. Again, that is the purview of the
House Intelligence Committee.
But we could look at those that were breached and how inept
their systems were and how bad it was set up and how the
inspector general was warning of these things. That, we did do.
Mr. Lynch. We had nine separate investigations of Hillary
Clinton, nine separate investigations----
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman's--the gentleman is out of
the order. The gentleman's time is expired. I gave you well
more than 5 minutes.
What I think is inappropriate. And I'm trying to answer the
question. It would be wholly inappropriate for the United
States Congress, for us to dive into the DCCC. You might want
to do an investigation yourself of the DCCC. I don't think that
the United States Congress should be diving into their
individual private systems of a political party. I think that's
too broad--if you want me to start issuing subpoenas of the
DCCC, I'm probably not going to do it, but go ahead and suggest
it.
Mr. Lynch. How about some of the FBI----
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Lynch. You asked me a question.
Chairman Chaffetz. No, I did not. I did not.
Mr. Lynch. And I'm trying to respond. You asked me if I
wanted----
Chairman Chaffetz. I did not ask--the gentleman is out of
order.
Mr. Cummings. Would the chairman yield? Would the chairman
yield? I think we need to calm down here a little bit.
Mr. Chairman, you have made some statements, and I just ask
you to give him the courtesy of a minute and a half just to
respond.
Chairman Chaffetz. No, I will not. I will not.
Mr. Cummings. Well, would the gentleman let me finish?
Thank you.
This has been an attack on our democracy, Mr. Chairman. And
Mr. Lynch is one of our greatest members, and the passion that
he has expressed is not limited to him, it's to many Americans.
They feel as if all of our--the things that underpin our
democracy have been attacked over and over again.
And as I said yesterday, we keep saying we're going to wait
till certain things happen with President Trump. They are
happening now.
Chairman Chaffetz. Can I ask that----
Mr. Cummings. And if the gentleman would just give me 30
more seconds.
And all I was saying is I was hoping that in--I mean, as a
courtesy to the gentleman, I just wanted him to be able to
respond.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'd like to ask you a question, if you
don't mind, to my ranking member. Does the ranking member
believe that this committee should do an investigation of the
DCCC?
Mr. Cummings. I think that we can look at certain things. I
know I am very familiar with sources and methods, but I think
what the gentleman is saying is let's just look at the things
that are--that are unclassified. And apparently, he has his
reports in his hand, and we can see where we go from there.
Number two, as I said before, in answering the chairman's
question, we have a bill that would--I think, would resolve
this issue very nicely.
I think the thing that I'm most concerned about, and I'm
sure Mr. Lynch is concerned about is that we cannot just turn a
blind eye to when we have 17 intelligence agencies who
unanimously agree that there has been hacking with regard to
our elections.
And there seems to be--one of the things that I've noticed,
this has been an effort, not by you, Mr. Chairman, but by
others to say, okay. It didn't affect the results. We don't
even have to get there. Forget it. I accept President Trump as
my President. I'm looking forward to meeting with him next
week. But, the idea that Russia could come in and interfere
with our elections, all of us should be going berserk. I mean,
we should be--I mean, just really, really upset. And so all I'm
saying to you is that I think all the gentleman is saying, is
he's got documents that you've already entered into the record
that are unclassified, want to look at those. Now, how far we
can go is another thing.
But, again, Mr. Chairman, you and I know what happened with
the Benghazi Committee. Basically, it became a partisan fight.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'll--hold on. The gentleman's time is
expired here. You're going well--you're going well outside the
scope of this----
Mr. Cummings. No, I'm not.
Chairman Chaffetz. Yes. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. I'm not and I would pray that you not do an
Issa on me.
Chairman Chaffetz. I've given you ample time. I've given
you more time----
Mr. Cummings. Don't do an Issa on me, please. Don't do
that.
Chairman Chaffetz. No. I'm asking you a simple question. I
just want an answer to a simple question. If you don't want to
answer it, it's fine.
Mr. Cummings. I've answered it. I've told you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'm going to ask one more time.
Mr. Cummings. Yes. I've answered you. Okay? Yes. I just
answered you.
Chairman Chaffetz. I just wanted----
Mr. Cummings. I just answered you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. I'm just saying----
Mr. Cummings. You're not listening. What I said was what
the gentleman asked. All he asked--he said, take the
unclassified information. Do not turn a blind eye to an attack
on our electoral system. Let's look--let's go as far as we can.
When you take it to the Intelligence Committee, what you've
done is you've gotten Mr. Nunes, who is on the transition--who
is on the transition committee for President Trump.
And as much as I like him, I want--as the gentleman asks,
he wants an investigation that will have integrity. And I--I
appreciate integrity over and over again. Like I've said to
you, Mr. Chairman, and to our committee members, when you deal
with integrity and transparency, it's like money in the bank.
Mr. Cummings. And so I would just ask you to just work with
us and see what we can come up with. That's all.
Chairman Chaffetz. My last point. My last point. I don't
think it's appropriate. I disagree with the attack on the
integrity of the Intelligence Committee. I disagree with that.
I think they are of integrity. I think Mr. Schiff and Mr. Nunes
are men of integrity and they run that committee appropriately.
And I'm sorry you don't feel that way.
Mr. Cummings. I didn't--now, see, now you done put
something in my mouth. Let me be real clear. No, no, no, no,
no.
Chairman Chaffetz. I get to make my point. I'll let you----
Mr. Cummings. No, you said something that's not accurate.
What I said was--I'm not questioning the integrity of Mr. Nunes
or Mr. Schiff. Mr. Schiff--both of them I have a lot of respect
for. What I'm saying is what the gentleman said, is that we
want a report--when people look at the situation--I'll be very
brief. When people look at the report and they see somebody on
the transition team for Mr. Trump, then it becomes
questionable. All I'm saying to you as to the world, we want--
that's why we filed the bill that we filed. And that's why
we're asking for more like an independent investigation. That's
all.
Chairman Chaffetz. Last point. Last point. Last point. And
we're going to recognize Mr. Meadows. We've gone way past the
time here.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I ask this rhetorically. Do the
Democrats truly want this committee to do an investigation of
the DNC and the DCCC?
Mr. Lynch. Yes, we do.
Chairman Chaffetz. Wow. Okay. We're now going to
recognize----
Mr. Lynch. A lot of these emails, they're already public.
They're already public. They leaked them. We already know what
they are, those damaging ones.
Chairman Chaffetz. Let's recognize the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We're going to
refocus on the focus of this hearing. I wish that we would have
as much passion that is concerned about the well-being of the
22,000 people that got hacked, the potential security breaches
that are there, instead of losing or winning an election. I
wish we'd have as much passion about that. Let's start to focus
on the real aspects of what we need to be doing.
There are other hacks with the IRS. Let's focus on the
hardworking American taxpayers. You know, I'm sick and tired of
hearing the repeated talking points over and over again. There
is no one who will work in a more bipartisan way to get to the
truth than me. But I disapprove of the talking points that
continue to get repeated to undermine the credibility of a duly
elected President.
Mr. Cummings. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Meadows. No, I will not.
Let me go into this particular issue. When we're looking at
this, you mention that you have 100 percent dual authentication
throughout the system. Is that correct?
Ms. McGettigan. Yes, sir. That's my understanding. Yes,
sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. And you're filling some very big
shoes. I happen to be a fan of Ms. Cobert. She actually--we
come from very different sides of the aisle, but she was always
very responsive to this committee and to me personally. And so
I want to make sure that we can clarify, perhaps, your
testimony. Because the 100 percent dual authentication is
really just at the front door. Is it not? Because we have
indications from the IG that there is still a whole lot within
the system, that if they get in the front door, that only 2 of
46 systems inside would require that. Is that your
understanding? You may want to refer--I think the CIO wants to
jump in here.
Ms. McGettigan. I think I will defer to Mr. DeVries.
Mr. DeVries. Thank you, sir.
Ms. McGettigan. Thank you.
Mr. DeVries. Sir, we have multifactual authentication in
there for the users, the standard users who come onto the
network. That is correct, 100 percent to get onto the networks,
they require their----
Mr. Meadows. But once in----
Mr. DeVries. No, once they get in, they are still then
authorized--their access is based upon those attributes and
their roles of what they're assigned to. So they're not given--
--
Mr. Meadows. So how do you respond to the IG that said only
2 of 46 systems would actually, of the major applications,
would require PIV authentication? Is that not accurate?
Mr. DeVries. I'd like to go back and look at that. I'll
defer to my CISO here, but that is--that does not ring true to
how we----
Mr. Meadows. Because this isn't my first rodeo. I've been
here with a number of folks. In fact, I called for the
resignation of the OPM director when there were similar terms
that I'm hearing today that give me concern that we're making
progress. And I guess, how do we define success? At what point
will we have all the major applications? And Mr. Lynch talked
about the encryption.
Mr. DeVries. Correct.
Mr. Meadows. Now, we've been promised encryption over and
over and over again. And yet even today, we're not there with--
so are all the Social Security numbers encrypted today?
Mr. DeVries. No, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. When will they be encrypted?
Mr. DeVries. But I have----
Mr. Meadows. Just timeframe. When will they be encrypted,
all the Social Security numbers? I mean, that's basic. I've got
encryption better than that on my home computer, and here we
are, we have--is it a lack of resources?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, it was somewhat due to that and also
schedule change here on the mainframe. That's the only one that
is--that was delayed. And I've reenergized that one back in
there. That is 2017.
Mr. Meadows. So when is it going to be done?
Mr. DeVries. End of 2017, sir.
Mr. Meadows. And so we will have everything encrypted by
the end of 2017. Fiscal year?
Mr. DeVries. The HVA system, the high value assets, which
includes the Social Security numbers and so forth, will be
encrypted this year. Yes.
Mr. Meadows. All right. In terms of segmentation, how do
you segment a legacy system? Either one of you can answer it.
Mr. Chase. So, again, as a part of our strategy, we looked
at all the systems and all the IT system inventories that we
had out there. We determined which ones----
Mr. Meadows. So are you going from a zero trust?
Mr. Chase. That's the idea, is to use that zero trust
tenet. Absolutely.
Mr. Meadows. So you rushed into the fire----
Mr. Chase. Ran into it, sir.
Mr. Meadows. --and so as you ran into the fire, you decided
from a zero trust aspect that you're going to look at every
single system.
Mr. Chase. Absolutely.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So we can tell all of those
employees or potential employees or those who have had their
personal life history looked at that by the end of 2017, that
you have great assurance that we have the most up-to-date,
sophisticated cybersecurity protection that they will ever see
and it will be segmented in a way that if somebody gets in the
front door, that they won't be able to go through the whole
system. Is that correct?
Mr. Chase. That is correct. And there's also many, many
compensating controls that reside in the network. So we have
our network analysis tool, we have our data loss prevention
tool. We have malware detection tools. And then we actually
have a 24/7 security operation center that is on glass watching
for those events to come through.
Mr. Meadows. I yield back. I thank the chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
I will now recognize the gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs.
Demings, for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to say good morning to all of you and thank you for
being here. Before I get into my question, I feel compelled to
make this comment. I spent 27 years in law enforcement. I
served as the chief of police. So I am very concerned about the
issue that we're discussing today. Security breaches of any
kind, I believe, deserve every bit of attention and every bit
of passion. I've been here a little shy of a month, but what I
did not sign up for is what I believe was the blatant
disrespect that was displayed to each other by my colleagues.
And so I believe if we're going to solve our Nation's problems,
civility has to be at the center of it.
And with my question, Director Phalen, last November, the
New York Times and other media outlets reported that while
meeting with the Prime Minister of Japan, then President-elect
Trump allowed his daughter and son-in-law to sit in during all
or part of the meeting. In reporting about this meeting, the
Times found, and I quote, ``That anyone present for such a
conversation between two heads of state should, at a minimum,
have security clearance. What we do not--we do not know whether
President Trump has stopped this practice of allowing family
members who do not have security clearances from attending
meetings with dignitaries and other foreign officials.''
Director, I ask you, what are the security risks for having
individuals who do not have the appropriate security clearances
present during classified meetings or briefings? Thank you very
much.
Mr. Phalen. Thank you, Representative. Thank you for the
question. The determination as to whether an individual has a
security clearance is left to the head of the agency with whom
they are employed or otherwise contracted with. And, of course,
the situation between a President-elect and the President is a
different situation. The President has the ability to grant a
clearance or grant access to classified information to anyone
who they please. It is at their discretion.
And the--I am not aware of any of the details around the
meeting that occurred with the leadership of Japan. I just
don't know any of the details about that, whether anything of
classified nature was discussed or not. But it would--in the
current situation, it would be the President's discretion to
allow individuals even without clearances to know or have
access to classified information.
Mrs. Demings. So each department would make that
determination. Is that what you said? There are no basic
general guidelines for persons to have security clearances in
certain situations or positions?
Mr. Phalen. There are general guidelines and there are--
specifically, there are investigative standards which we follow
when conducting an investigation. The agency who ultimately
grants the clearance follows an adjudication set of guidelines,
what are the key factors that one would look at when making a
determination whether this individual is eligible or should be
eligible to receive classified information. And then as a
separate act, the agency then--if the answer's affirmative,
they are eligible, the agency would make a determination as to
whether to actually brief them into a national security program
or not, give them that clearance.
Mrs. Demings. Okay. Thank you very much.
Chairman Chaffetz. Does the gentlewoman----
Mr. Connolly. Would----
Chairman Chaffetz. Does the gentlewoman yield back?
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield?
Mrs. Demings. I yield. I'm sorry. Thank you. I yield.
Chairman Chaffetz. She's yielding. To Mr. Connolly or----
Mr. Connolly. To Mr. Cummings.
Ms. Demings. To Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. I just wanted to let Mr. Meadows know, when I
asked you to yield, the only thing I was going to say is before
you got here, and I will share this with you, in my opening
statement, I talked about all the efforts that we have made in
this committee with regard to the other breaches. I listed them
one by one, all the many things that we've done. And I said it
in a way that--because President Trump has said that we
suddenly got excited about the Russian hacking. But I laid it
out. And again, I will share my opening--it was a courtesy to
you, because I didn't want anybody to think that this is
something new to us.
We've spent, in a bipartisan way, hours upon hours upon
hours upon hours trying to deal with these. And I give the
credit--give a lot of credit to the chairman. And that's all I
was tying to tell you.
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentleman yield?
Mr. Cummings. And I didn't want the public to be left with
the impression that we haven't been working on these acts.
Every single time.
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentlemen yield?
Mr. Cummings. Of course. I only have----
Chairman Chaffetz. It's the gentlewoman's time.
Mr. Meadows. Will the gentlewoman yield for just a comment?
A nice comment.
Mrs. Demings. Yes. Yes. Certainly. Please, Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Connolly. We'll be the judge of that.
Mr. Meadows. The gentleman from Maryland is a good friend,
and a trusted one. And in the passion of my not yielding back
to him, I don't want anything to be inferred about our
relationship and our willingness to work in a bipartisan way.
And I apologize for my passion in not yielding. But I also want
to stress that our friendship and our willingness to get to the
bottom line of it is unyielding and unchanging. And I thank the
gentlewoman.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentlewoman yields back.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Halvorsen, you are the chief information officer for
the entire Department of Defense?
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct.
Mr. Jordan. And in your testimony, your written testimony,
you said that, ``DOD CIO is responsible for all matters
relating to the Department of Defense information enterprise,
including cybersecurity for the Department. In this capacity,
DOD CIO is responsible for oversight of the Department's
efforts to design, build, operate, secure, defend a new IT
system to support the background investigative processes for
the NBIB.'' Is that all accurate?
Mr. Halvorsen. It is.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Are you familiar, then, with the December
6 Washington Post story, front page, Pentagon Hid Study
Revealing $125 Billion in Waste? Are you familiar with that
article?
Mr. Halvorsen. I am familiar with that article.
Mr. Jordan. Do you--well, let me ask you--let me go back
and ask you this: Do you have the resources you need to do
everything I just read in your testimony, help NBIB which has
100 Federal agencies that's got to make decisions about--
regarding individuals who work there and everything at the
Department, do you have the resources you need to do your job?
Mr. Halvorsen. We have the resources to make sure that we
develop and design an NBIB new system that is secure and can
attack and defend the data.
Mr. Jordan. And so you think you got adequate resources to
do everything you're tasked to do.
Mr. Halvorsen. I think I have adequate resources to
everything I'm tasked to do specific to this NBIB issue.
Mr. Jordan. But not overall? Is that what you're saying?
Mr. Halvorsen. Well, I don't think anybody here would say
they have all of the resources----
Mr. Jordan. You always want more. I get that. But you are
familiar with the story that was on the front page of the
Washington Post last month, or 2 months ago?
Mr. Halvorsen. I am.
Mr. Jordan. And the findings of the McKinsey & Company
study, $125 billion in waste at the Pentagon, do you agree with
that--those findings? Or, I mean, they talked about as many
full-time employees in back office personnel and in purchasing
bureaucracy, as many employees there as we actually have--
almost as many people there as we have in troops in the field
or troops in total. Do you agree with what you know about that
study?
Mr. Halvorsen. We were--do I personally agree with that
study? I do not. Is that the reason I'm here to testify? No. So
if you want more data on that, I will take any questions you
have for the record.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Were you--were you interviewed or talked
to in the course of the study by McKinsey & Company? Did they
talk to you?
Mr. Halvorsen. I have talked to McKinsey & Company, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Multiple times? I mean, I'm just kind of
curious.
Mr. Halvorsen. For the study, I believe once. But I'll get
that confirmed. But I have talked to McKinsey in the course of
my business.
Mr. Jordan. The article reports here on the front page here
above the fold, the report issued in January 2015 identified a,
quote, ``clear path for the Defense Department to save $125
billion over 5 years.'' I think this is important too. What the
study said, what the article reports that the study said was
that this savings in bureaucracy waste and other areas is money
that could go into weapon systems and our troops. Frankly,
where I think most Americans would want their tax dollars and
resources to go.
The article continues, ``The plan would not have required
layoffs of civil servants or reductions in military personnel.
Instead it would have streamlined the bureaucracy through
attrition and early retirements, curtailed high priced
contractors,'' and the last clause says, ``and made better use
of information technology.''
Do you have any idea what they're referring to there, make
better use of information technology?
Mr. Halvorsen. Yeah, I do. I mean, if you're asking me do
we think we could do better with information technology, I
think I testified in numerous hearings that do I believe we
should continue to adopt best commercial practices? Should we
bring more commercial systems on into DOD and other government?
I said we should. I believe there are ways to reduce some money
in our IT business. Do I think that number is correct,
personally? I do not.
Mr. Jordan. So a little bit ago you said you didn't agree
with the study. Now you sound like you do agree with a lot of
parts of the study.
Mr. Halvorsen. No.
Mr. Jordan. Is it both or----
Mr. Halvorsen. No. I said I agree that there are
efficiencies to be found in the IT systems. By doing what we
are doing, I think we will achieve some. I do not think the
numbers in the study, my personal opinion, they're not correct.
I will take any more questions you have----
Mr. Jordan. So you think the $125 billion number is a
little high. Would you hazard a guess at what kind of savings
taxpayers could see if part of what McKinsey found in their
study was implemented and how we could better get money to
weapon systems and to troops?
Mr. Halvorsen. No, I will not hazard a guess.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I just think this is an
important area where we need to--I know it's not the sole focus
of and not the primary focus, I should say, of this hearing
today, but this is an area we need to study. If we can get more
money into upgraded weapon systems and to our troops, and if we
got this potential of waste, even the chief information officer
says there's some waste there. Maybe not to the degree that the
article reports, but certainly any we can find and savings we
can find I think makes sense.
With that I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. Point well taken.
I now recognize the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Raskin,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
I wanted to start actually by responding, Mr. Chairman, to
the question that you posed about whether or not the Democratic
National Committee would be a proper object for inquiry and
investigation by this committee. And my first reaction to it, I
think, was sympathetic to you, which is no, not really, because
it's not part of the government. It's a private entity for most
purposes. When you think about the Democratic National
Convention, where it's going to be located, who's going to
speak at it, that's a private matter. It's a private
association.
On the other hand, it struck me that the Supreme Court has
said that political parties are public instrumentalities
capable of State action for certain purposes. So when you go
back and look at Smith v. Allwright, Terry v. Adams, the white
primary line of cases, the Supreme Court said a political party
could not exclude from participation people based on race. So
the Equal Protection Clause applied directly to political
parties, that they were not private entities for those
purposes. They were public instrumentalities.
And in lots of other cases, the Supreme Court has treated
political parties as public instrumentalities and kind of
public carriers for the purposes of effective action in
democracy. And I think if you look at it from a global
perspective, that is the role that political parties play. The
DNC, the RNC, they are organizing political activity for tens
or hundreds of millions of people. And so if they are cyber
vulnerable, I think it makes the whole country cyber
vulnerable, and then it casts a cloud over democratic
government itself.
So that's why, in the end, I think it is a complicated
question you raise, but I would side with the ranking member
and with the other members who were speaking on this side of
it.
Let me pose a question. As a new member of this committee
who was--I was not here for the original OPM breach, and so all
of this is a bit new to me. But I want to ask the question. We
know from the national intelligence community about the fact
that they believed with high confidence that there was an
organized campaign by Russia to subvert the 2016 election and
to compromise the 2016 election. I've also heard that there's
certain other countries where certain kinds of hacking are
common or concentrated, like Nigeria, apparently, is a place
where there's a lot of cyber hacking and phishing attacks going
on.
Do you have a list of the most common enemies or culprits
of our cybersecurity that you use? And I know, Ms. McGettigan,
if that's something you can answer.
Ms. McGettigan. I'll defer to Mr. DeVries to answer that.
Mr. DeVries. Member, if I could----
Mr. Raskin. Please.
Mr. DeVries. If I could, I would like to defer to Mr. Chase
here for the expertise on it. We do have the network
monitoring, but we are part of the greater ecosystem of that
from DHS.
Mr. Raskin. All right. Let's cut to the chase.
Mr. Chase. Thank you. No pun intended.
So one of the things that I just want to make clear is
we're a customer service oriented agency. And so we rely on our
partners from Department of Homeland Security, FBI, and other
components within DOD. The potential attribution or the knowing
of a bad actor is not our job. My job is to focus the staff at
OPM to protect the data that resides in there.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. So I guess--right. You're a customer
service agency and you want to serve the various government
agencies that interact with you. The problem, of course, is now
we've got these outside entities that are trying to invade and
undermine and so on. Do we know who those entities are? Is
there like an FBI most wanted list of the cyber saboteurs all
over the world or in this country? I mean, the national
intelligence community tells us it's Russia, but then we hear
from other people, no, it's a fat guy on a couch someplace. I
don't know why it's always a fat guy. Why couldn't it be a
skinny guy on a couch. But anyway, it might be a guy on a couch
or it might be Russia, but it might be Nigeria. Where it is
coming from? And does that list exist? And is there any attempt
to really get to the bottom of it?
Mr. Chase. And, again, I'll try to answer more directly. So
DHS and FBI provide those reports in unclassified and
classified formats.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Do you believe as experts in the field
that there is going to be a technological answer to this so we
can actually create a secure cyber environment? Or, you know,
is this a Sisyphean task? We go up two steps and we fall back
three steps. I mean, are we really--is it an uphill fight, I
guess is what I'm asking. Mr. Halvorsen.
Mr. Halvorsen. Right now it is an uphill fight. I do
believe technology will get us some of the solutions. But I
think this is much like any area in technology. We will make
strides forward. The people who want to use technology for bad
will make strides forward. And it will be a continuing analysis
and engagement that is not going to end anytime soon.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield
back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize Mr. Comer who's new to our committee.
We're pleased to have him here. The gentleman from Kentucky.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Sorry. The microphone button there. Talk
button. There we go.
Mr. Comer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My question is for Mr. DeVries. Sir, I would like to follow
up with you on the IT infrastructure project that OPM abandoned
last year. The committee's understanding is that you are no
longer leasing two new data centers for OPM's new IT
environment, but rather, are repurposing the hardware and
equipment meant for the IT environment that the contractor
Imperatis built. My question is, is this accurate?
Mr. DeVries. Yes, sir it is.
Mr. Comer. Okay. How much did OPM pay the contractor for
the new IT infrastructure project before terminating the
contract May 2016?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, I would have to get back to you with the
exact amount that was consumed there. I do not have that number
with me today here.
Mr. Comer. Why was the contract terminated?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, as I completed my assessments coming on
board as the CIO, that effort was to build a new infrastructure
to move the legacy stuff into. They went out on the contract.
That contractor went out of business. They did not show up to
work in May, and we terminated the contract after that. We then
repositioned the equipment back in because we had purchased
that, as we had purchased the design and engineering diagrams.
We have what we paid for. Now just turning it back on.
Mr. Comer. It's my understanding that the first two phases
of that were completed, and after approximately $45 million of
investment, OPM abandoned the project. But you say that we have
what we paid for or did we lose what we paid for?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, we have evolved that, and I'm now
building on that capability that we purchased then. Yes, sir.
Mr. Comer. So is OPM still operating the legacy IT
environment? Is that correct?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, I will say no. We have evolved a lot over
the past year, and that was part of my assessment coming
onboard was to take a look at what the network was, where are
our high value assets, where are our centers of gravity, if you
will, and what's the protection there. Mr. Chase has talked
about some of the defense and depth that we've put in place. So
it is not the same legacy infrastructure that it was in 2015.
Not by a long shot.
Mr. Comer. So are we--can we be assured that this
environment is more secure today than prior to the data
breaches?
Mr. DeVries. Absolutely. Mr. Chase and I would not be here
if it was not.
Mr. Comer. Okay. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the gentlewoman from the Virgin
Islands, Ms. Plaskett, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you all
for being here this morning to testify.
I wanted to--I appreciated your testimony this morning on
all of the topics. And it seems to be very wide ranging, of the
discussion that we're having this morning. But we are all here
because protecting our Nation's security from insider threats
and external threats is of paramount importance, of course, to
you all and us as Members of Congress. So I wanted to discuss
the security clearance process and how individuals are granted
access to sensitive information.
Director Phalen, for you specifically, how would NBIB
handle the clearance process for someone under active FBI
investigation? What happens with that application?
Mr. Phalen. When an agency puts an individual in for a
clearance, it starts with a determination by that agency that
this individual needs a clearance for whatever work they're
going to be doing. The individual's information is sent to NBIB
or to some other----
Ms. Plaskett. And what if you find out that the person is
under active FBI investigation? What happens at that point?
Mr. Phalen. If we in the process of conducting the
investigation determine an individual's under active
investigation, we would notify the requester of what we
understand to be the investigation, and we would continue the--
our part of the investigation, unless we were told to stop
based on some decision by the requester.
Ms. Plaskett. Now, in knowing that you're going to continue
the investigation of someone who is under an active FBI
investigation, would that be one of the factors in
disqualifying an individual from a security clearance?
Mr. Phalen. Not necessarily. And it would not be our
determination. It would be the determination of the requesting
agency, who is either the requesting agent themselves, if they
have independent adjudication authority, or the--in the DOD
world, the consolidated adjudication facility. These are the
individuals that make the ultimate determination as to whether
an individual is eligible for access to----
Ms. Plaskett. Got you. So you're processing the
application, you're giving them the information, and then the
agency head then makes the determination whether or not the
person has the security clearance?
Mr. Phalen. Ultimately, yes.
Ms. Plaskett. So for the ultimate decisionmaker for
granting a security clearance for a senior White House staffer,
who would that person be?
Mr. Phalen. The chief of the White House Security Office is
the adjudication authority.
Ms. Plaskett. And so the chief of the security office for
the White House is the determiner for an individual in the
senior White House level having a security clearance.
Mr. Phalen. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. And who places that person in that office?
The chief officer. Is that an independent? Is that appointed by
the President? Is that a career person? Who is that individual?
Mr. Phalen. I actually don't know right now. I can find
that answer----
Ms. Plaskett. I would really love to know that answer.
Because is it possible for the ultimate decisionmaker to make a
decision to grant an individual a national security clearance
if the person is under an FBI investigation? You're saying yes,
that's possible.
Mr. Phalen. It is possible.
Ms. Plaskett. And the reason I'm asking that is because of
course--you know, of course there's a reason I'm asking. Right?
There would--according to multiple reports, several members of
the Trump campaign and incoming Trump administration may
currently be under FBI investigation for their connections with
the Russians; the very country implicated in the hacking that
everyone seems to be interested in here today.
So President Trump's National Security Adviser, Michael
Flynn, is reportedly being investigated by the FBI for phone
calls with a Russian diplomat. And the New York Times reported
that the FBI's investigating communication and financial
transactions between Russia and the former campaign manager,
Paul Manafort.
So my question is, if these individuals become now senior
White House staffers who need security clearance as having sit
on this National Security Council, along with Steve Bannon, if
those individuals are under FBI investigation, they may still
get a national security clearance?
Mr. Phalen. That is certainly possibly. And I would
distinguish between someone who is under investigation and
someone who has been charged or convicted with a crime.
Ms. Plaskett. Of course. As a lawyer, I know you're
innocent until proven guilty. But an active FBI investigation
would raise some eyebrows. Would it not? Because the FBI would
not begin an investigation on my, you know, freshman student
who has cheated on a test or something. They usually start FBI
investigations for pretty serious things.
Mr. Phalen. It would be a noteworthy item on an
adjudication, yes.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Mr. Chairman, I think we need the
answer to some of the questions that we've been asking here.
And so do you know, Director Phalen, which or any of the
senior White House staffers who have access to senior material
are under criminal investigation by the FBI?
Mr. Phalen. I do not know that, no.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. If the gentlewoman yields back, Ms.
McGettigan, she is the acting director of OPM, if you could get
back to Ms. Plaskett about who specifically is in charge, I
think the gentlewoman asked a reasonable question here, who are
the people that make those determinations, and get back to--
will you make that commitment----
Ms. McGettigan. Yes, we will.
Chairman Chaffetz. --that you'll get back to her?
Ms. McGettigan. We will get back to you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As well if you would find out how do we find out----
Chairman Chaffetz. Ask her.
Ms. Plaskett. It would be great to know in that process,
one, who the decisionmaker is, and is there a list of
individuals who are under FBI investigation. If the chairman
and the ranking member would receive that, that would be very
helpful in making that determination, what are the factors.
Ms. McGettigan. Okay.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Ms. McGettigan. We will follow up. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. And I would open up to any member, if
they have questions for OPM, Ms. McGettigan is the acting
director.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman, I just--I assume at some point
Ms. McGettigan's going to actually answer a question as opposed
to always getting back to us.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. She wasn't ever even asked a
question in that series, so I think that's a little
inappropriate. But let me--and she did make a commitment to get
back to the committee. I think that's reasonable.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, I heard.
Chairman Chaffetz. So I'll now recognize myself for 5
minutes.
And I guess this question will go to Mr. Chase. Tell me
about the authority to operate. There have been some questions
about this in the past. The inspector general found that the
authorities to operate were a material weakness in fiscal year
2016. The IG reported that 18 major systems still did not have
current authorities to operate in place. What is the current
state of those ATOs?
Mr. Chase. So all the ATOs----
Chairman Chaffetz. If you can move that microphone a little
closer. I apologize, sir.
Mr. Chase. So all the ATOs are currently compliant.
Chairman Chaffetz. Can you put some meat on the bones?
Define that for us.
Mr. Chase. So in fiscal year 2016, again, our strategy was
to identify and understand all the systems. It was identified
that quite a few of them were out of compliance. So we took on
two major initiatives at OPM. One was a sprint in February of
2016 to look at all the systems, to include the HVAs, to ensure
the best pathway forward to get them compliant. The next phase
of that was marketing within OPM and the agency heads and the
acting director at the time to ensure that everybody in the
agency knew the importance to get everybody into compliance.
Chairman Chaffetz. Would the ATO--you said all of them.
Would that include the PIPs?
Mr. Chase. That is correct, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. It would. Okay.
Mr. Chase. That was not reflected in the fiscal year 2016
FISMA report, and has been recently.
Chairman Chaffetz. Everything within the NBIB, do those all
have current valid ATOs?
Mr. Chase. Yes, sir.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Let me switch over here, if we
could, to Ms. McGettigan and--or maybe, Mr. Phalen, you might
be the right person--actually, let me ask you, Mr. Phalen. What
is the current state of the ability to look at the social
media? We've been talking in this committee over the last
couple of years, actually, with OPM about during background
check investigations looking at social media. What are you
doing or not doing in that process?
Mr. Phalen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Two points to make on
that. Number one, in April of 2016, the security executive
agent sent out a directive that would allow us--allow an
investigation to use social media publicly available on
electronic information in order to inform an investigation. We
at NBIB or its predecessor, the Federal Investigative Service,
have been using on a targeted basis social media inquiries to
help resolve issues when they come up during an investigation.
We are in the middle of a short pilot to understand how we can
incorporate it into a formal--into a more consistent use during
an investigation.
In other words, how do we collect the information, get it
disambiguated, and make sure it is accurate and of any value,
and then provide it to an investigator who is in the field
conducting an investigation to help enhance that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Can you define ``short pilot?'' Because
I think we've been talking about this for a couple years. And
this doesn't seem to be very short.
Mr. Phalen. So a number of pilots have been conducted by a
number of agencies to look at the value of social media. And
most concluded--most have reached the similar conclusion, there
can be valuable information in collecting social media.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Can you just hold on here. This is
what drives people crazy about government. You had to conduct a
study to find out if looking at social media would be valuable?
And the conclusion is it might be yes? Come on. Every single
time there's a terrorist attack, what's the very first thing
the investigative body does? They go look at their social
media. And more often than not, they say, oh, my goodness. If
somebody had just looked at this.
Why in the world do we need--we're still doing a pilot? Let
me answer the question for you. Yes. Looking at publicly
available social media should be part of the background check.
It's a joke to think that you're not looking at social media.
And the idea that we even have to think about this, by its very
definition, it is social. It is open. It's there. Facebook. You
can go--come on. Instagram. Twitter. Every single time we go
and do an interview for somebody, we go check their social
media. Why do you have to do another pilot?
Mr. Phalen. The pilot was not to determine whether or not
there's any value in social media. The pilot that we are
currently running is how do we incorporate it into a standard
background investigative process. And the largest pole in this
tent here is not can we collect the information. It is not is
there going to be valuable information in there. It becomes how
does it get incorporated in a manner that is cost effective to
our customer base. And--because the collection is the easy
part. The analysis of it becomes harder. And the more data
that's out there, the more difficult the analysis becomes.
I believe that this is a relevant data source. We believe
it is a relevant data source. We're going to continue to
exploit it. This pilot was a very short one to determine how we
can build it into an--our current investigative process. And as
we move down the road, how it will become more of a mainstay
for this investigative process.
Chairman Chaffetz. Have you considered implementing a
policy to require the disclosure of online user names or social
media identities as part of the clearance process?
Mr. Phalen. We have not at this point.
Chairman Chaffetz. Why not?
Mr. Phalen. That would be a decision to be made by the
security executive agent to ask for that information.
Chairman Chaffetz. Here's my personal take on this, and
then we'll go to Mr. Connolly. The United States of America,
the people of the United States of America, are about to
entrust somebody with a security clearance that allows that
individual to look at and understand information that the rest
of the public doesn't get to look at. Right? That is the very
nature of a security clearance. We're doing this, we're giving
this person special privileges because we trust them.
I would think it would be reasonable that in return for
that--you don't have to apply or try to get a job with a
security clearance. There's nobody that forces you to do that.
It's optional. But you would think in return for that they
would say: Yes. Here's my Instagram account. And I would go so
far to say: Here's my password if you want to go look at my
private Instagram. That is a reasonable thing to look at when
you're trying to go back and do a background check.
Some of these background checks are so thorough. You're
looking at bank records. You're looking at education. You're
interviewing neighbors. You're talking and trying to figure out
as much as you can about this information. A very costly,
expensive, laborious process. And yet we're not even--we're so
bashful we won't even say: We're going to be looking at your
Instagram. Is that okay, you know? And if it's not, then maybe
we shouldn't be giving them a security clearance. That's my
take on it.
It's very frustrating this takes so long. Because every
time we have a problem, what's the very first thing the FBI and
other law enforcement want to do? They want to dive into their
social media. That's the best way for them to figure out what
has been going, what is the attitude, who are they
communicating with. And if we're going to give a security
clearance, it seems reasonable.
I'm past my time. I'll now recognize the gentleman from
Virginia, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. I also would say to the
chair, I caution him, I don't think it's appropriate for him to
characterize an intervention or a question by a member of this
committee. I don't do that to him. And I expect him not to do
it to me. And if we're going to get into that, two can play the
game.
Ms. McGettigan, a question maybe you can answer. OPM, is it
going to migrate to the required XML format, the transaction
submissions and background checks instead of using legacy
systems? I thought I heard Mr. DeVries say we're pretty much
done with the legacy systems. Have we fully migrated to the
required XML system?
Ms. McGettigan. I will have to defer that to Mr. DeVries.
Mr. Connolly. You don't know the answer?
Ms. McGettigan. I do not.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. DeVries.
Mr. DeVries. No, sir, we have not.
Mr. Connolly. Why not?
Mr. DeVries. So the whole legacy system is comprised of
eight different systems which ask questions and interact and
portray in conducting the investigation through them. A lot of
the language on, especially I think it was a member here
brought up the word PIPs, which is the main database system
that maintains it there, that is on--written in language that
is no longer supported. And I'm trying to move it out of there.
It is not just merely a case of just taking something and
putting it out to XML. We have employed XML in terms of the
interface going into the customer. We have put that into all
their front-facing applications there. And in that time, we've
also put other protections in there, like masking of the Social
Security number and other techniques. So yes, to the customer
facing one, as we have on other OPM systems, we have put the
XML piece into it.
Mr. Connolly. Ms. McGettigan, what is OPM and NBIB doing to
ensure that if data is exfiltrated from the NBIB, NBIS systems,
that the data will be protected and its location and attempted
use not--will not only be prevented but visible to the NBIS for
action? What are you doing to protect that in the exfiltration
process?
Ms. McGettigan. Again, sir, I'll----
Mr. Connolly. Can't hear you.
Ms. McGettigan. I apologize. Again, sir, I will have to
defer to Mr. DeVries or Mr. Halvorsen.
Mr. Connolly. So again you can't answer the question.
Mr. DeVries.
Ms. McGettigan. I cannot.
Mr. Connolly. Does the acting director of OPM get involved
in these cyber issues at all?
Ms. McGettigan. I do get involved somewhat, but not in the
details.
Mr. Connolly. Have you had any experience with the breach
or responding to the breach in your period of time under Beth
Cobert or Ms. Archuleta before that?
Ms. McGettigan. I--when the breach occurred, I was in
another area of the organization. I was in Human Resource
Solutions. I was not the chief management officer at that time,
so I was not intimately involved. I was involved from another
area of the--I had no responsibility for that.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. DeVries, what are we doing about that
exfiltration, protecting that data so it's not breached?
Mr. DeVries. Yes, sir. Sir, on a macro prospective, let's
start with the worthy employee or the individual who's going to
be investigated. He enters his records or his information into
the e-QIP through the SF--Standard Form 86. That information is
stored securely. It's on an encrypted database. That is what
gets queued up to go to the investigators once they are awarded
that work, if you will, from the NBIB. With my coming on board
in September, we changed that process.
In the past, when the companies would get their task orders
to do these investigations, and we just talked about the
contract that was awarded out to the four new companies, two of
those were existing ones and there are two new ones in there,
the investigators no longer can download that information to
their company information stores. It stays as part of the
government, and we've incorporated a new security thing there
where when they pull the records in, it is on a different
encrypted system under their hard drive, and they authenticate
themselves with a verification card that is issued by OPM and
NBIB to them.
Mr. Connolly. I only have 30-something seconds, so let me
ask another question. What are we doing to boost the capacity
to decrease the enormous backlog on security background checks?
Mr. Phalen.
Mr. Phalen. Yes, sir. We have done two things of large
proportion. Number one, as was referenced earlier, we have
started a new contract period and doubled the number of
companies that are available to provide the contract
investigations. And that, we believe, will have a significant
impact on our ability to work off the backlog. At the same
time, in fiscal 2016, we hired 400 new Federal investigators
into the service. And we plan on, in 2017, adding another 200.
And we are already seeing the fruits of that addition to work
off the capacity.
Mr. Connolly. I think this is on top of many topics we're
talking about. This is really important. I get complaints all
the time, especially from private sector companies with
enormous numbers of jobs at the ready they cannot fill because
of this backlog. And so the more we can do to streamline,
expedite, while making sure it's still accurate, I think is
really critical moving forward.
Thank you.
Mr. Phalen. Yes, sir. I agree.
Mr. Connolly. I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know you're new on the job, Ms. McGettigan, and if
there's anyone on the panel who can answer this, I'd appreciate
it. Does OPM allow employees to access personal email accounts,
Facebook, do any other personal business using the Federal
server?
Ms. McGettigan. Employees are allowed to do limited access
for personal and business. Access their bank accounts, what
have you. So there's limited access for personal business.
Limited use.
Mr. Palmer. Are you aware that it was reported that the
Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency just a couple of
years ago, I think it preceded maybe by a year or so the breach
of the data systems at OPM, they had numerous cases where the
breaches were coming--or the attacks were coming through the
use of personal email utilizing the Federal server? Are you
aware of that?
Ms. McGettigan. No, sir, I was not.
Mr. Palmer. Well, it's an area that concerns me where--and
employees, and not only employees, but high ranking officials,
and I don't know that you could answer this, if there are any
OPM directors or other high-ranking officials using personal
email accounts--or accessing personal accounts using the
Federal server or using personal accounts to do business. We
know that's been a problem in other agencies, most notably the
State Department.
One of the things that concerns me is that it doesn't
appear to me that we've made the maximum effort to protect
ourselves from cyber intrusion. And for the record, I'd like to
point out that James Clapper made the point, the Director of
National Intelligence, that it was the Chinese, not the
Russians, that we believe hacked OPM. But I think this may have
been asked earlier.
OPM is still not fully compliant with the requirements for
the use of personally identifiable verification cards, the PIV
cards. Where are we on that?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, I'll take that. Sir, we are 100 percent
compliant for the PIV cards for the users to access the
network.
Mr. Palmer. So is it a chip-based card?
Mr. DeVries. Yes, sir, it is.
Mr. Palmer. And multifactor verification?
Mr. DeVries. Multifactor verification.
Mr. Palmer. So we've got that across the board?
Mr. DeVries. It needs the card and then you need the
personal identification that you put your PIN in for. Correct,
sir.
Mr. Palmer. Let me ask you this: In regard to hiring people
who handle your data systems, and particularly to protect
against cyber attacks, how long does it take to process an
applicant? For instance, I've got a--there's a gentleman in--at
the University of Alabama, Birmingham, one of the top people in
the country on this, Gary Warner, and he's turning out some of
the best experts in cybersecurity. And the day they graduate--
it's almost the day they graduate, they can get a job with
Visa, MasterCard. But it seems to take months to even get in
the system for the Federal Government. Is that an issue at OPM?
Ms. McGettigan. Well, yes, sir, it is an issue in terms of
the background investigations. We are very much backlogged. We
are committed to reducing that backlog. And we have--to that
end, we have just--we have just awarded contracts to increase
our capacity, the field contracts to increase our capacity. And
we are on a path to reduce that--to reduce that backlog. But it
will take time, and employees of OPM or prospective employees
of OPM are also waiting for background investigations.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I know that--and I wasn't here for the
opening of this hearing--that there seems to be a tendency to
try to make this--politicize this. And if that's where some
members want to go with it, that's fine. But I think the
seriousness of the breach at OPM requires that we do our jobs
to make sure that our data systems are secure.
And one of the things that I might suggest and encourage
you to consider is doing the background checks on these top
students while they're still in school so that when they
graduate, we're not going to lose them to the private sector. I
think that we put ourselves at great exposure by not having
quicker access to the best people that are available to protect
our data systems.
Is that something that OPM might consider? Could we
expedite the process? Because it's unreasonable to think that
someone could get a really good job somewhere else and then
have to wait months to get an interview.
Ms. McGettigan. Yes, sir. We do have some programs. We have
a program, Presidential Management Fellow Program, where we
have people apply--recent graduates apply. And they are vetted
and then they become finalists. We do not do--to my knowledge,
background investigations are always done at the--once the
person receives a conditional offer of employment. So it's the
offer of employment that triggers the background investigation.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I thank you for coming today.
And I just want to make this last point, Mr. Chairman, that
I think the point that needs to be made is that the purpose of
this hearing is to make sure that our data systems are secure.
And I think this committee will do whatever we need to do to
make that possible.
I yield back.
Chairman Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Wisconsin, Mr.
Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Thank you.
Mr. DeVries, we'll ask you a question again. You know, the
GAO recently found----
Chairman Chaffetz. Mr. Grothman, my apologies. My
apologies. We need to go to the Democratic first. Mrs.
Lawrence. I failed to recognize her. The gentlewoman is
recognized for 5 minutes.
Mrs. Lawrence. I know you would never purposely not
recognize me, Mr. Chairman.
Yesterday, Ranking Member Cummings sent a letter to the
Defense Secretary about potentially serious violation of the
Constitution by Lieutenant Governor Michael Flynn, the
President's national security adviser. General Flynn had
admitted that he was paid to attend an event sponsored by the
Russian-backed television network known as RT. And he dined
with the Russian President Putin. RT has been described by the
NSA, CIA, and FBI, and I quote: ``The Kremlin's principal
international propaganda outlet. It receives funding, staffing,
and direction from the Russian Government.''
Director Phalen, your staff provided the Standard Form 86
for security clearance holders. One question on the form, and I
quote: ``Have you or any member of your immediate family in the
past 7 years had any contact with a foreign government, its
establishment, or its representatives, whether inside or
outside of the U.S.?''
My question to you, why are these individuals asked this
question?
Mr. Phalen. Thank you, Representative, for that question.
The reason these questions are asked is to ensure that the
individual who is making an adjudicative decision understands
what relationships an individual may have with a foreign
government or foreign representative. And the nature of that
question is to get to the heart of what that relationship may
be. It could be benign, it could be not benign. But this would
be the judgment of the adjudication organization. Our goal
would be, based on the response to that question, to gather as
much information as we can get to----
Mrs. Lawrence. The form also asks the question, and I
quote: ``Have you in the past 7 years provided advice or
support to any individual associated with a foreign business or
foreign organization?''
So my question to you is, do you know if General Flynn has
a clearance?
Mr. Phalen. I have not checked the record. I believe he
does have a clearance, but I don't know that authoritatively.
And if I could add, that the investigation of General Flynn,
given his role in the White House, would generally be conducted
by the FBI and not by NBIB.
Mrs. Lawrence. So you don't know if he has a clearance,
correct?
Mr. Phalen. I don't know authoritatively, but I believe he
does.
Mrs. Lawrence. Do you know if he ever reported to the
appropriate authorities?
Mr. Phalen. I do not know that.
Mrs. Lawrence. Do you know if General Flynn ever reported
how much he paid--how much he was paid for his trip?
Mr. Phalen. I do not know that.
Mrs. Lawrence. So you're stating within the government that
would be the FBI that would answer that question?
Mr. Phalen. The--his reporting chain, if his clearance was
still through the Department of Defense, would have been back
through a Department of Defense security office, and they would
be the organization that would have that on the record. It
would be up to the FBI, if they were doing the investigation,
to go back and reach out to the Department of Defense and ask
if that had been reported.
Mrs. Lawrence. Do you know if that reach-out has happened?
Mr. Phalen. I do not know.
Mrs. Lawrence. Mr. Chairman, we need to get answers to
these basic questions. And I am requesting that the committee
send a letter requesting a copy of General Flynn's security
clearance application, as well as any and all updates he may
have submitted.
Will the chair agree to that?
Chairman Chaffetz. Send me the request.
Mrs. Lawrence. I appreciate it.
Mrs. Lawrence. We have a responsibility, and we have been
talking about this. And, Mr. Chairman, you have been a staunch
leader in this, and this is an area I feel that we need
questions answered. Thank you so much.
Chairman Chaffetz. I now recognize the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman.
Mr. Grothman. Okay, Mr. DeVries. GAO found that personnel
management had not yet completed and submitted a data center
optimization plan. And, originally, that was supposed to be
done in September of last year. Do you know when that plan will
be completed, or has it been completed?
Mr. DeVries. Thank you, sir. I appreciate that question
because that's one that's near and dear to my heart.
I came onboard as the CIO in September. We did not publish
that one, because it was not complete. I completed the
assessment on it, and we're finalizing that. And that should be
done back up to OMB by the end of this quarter here.
Mr. Grothman. By the end of?
Mr. DeVries. This quarter.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So the next couple months. Okay. Do you
know what the savings goal you have for a plan like that is?
Mr. DeVries. Sir, I do not have the savings goal in terms
of the final numbers yet. That's part of the assessment that's
still ongoing right now.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. How many data centers do you own now?
Mr. DeVries. Today, sir, I own seven. We closed down two,
and we're about ready to move out of our third one here in the
next 2 months.
Mr. Grothman. Oh, that's good. What do we have left? What
are the ones that are left?
Mr. DeVries. And then I have five left. And I'm going down
to two.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Good.
Let me give you another question. During the data discovery
breach and mitigation process, your relationship with the
inspector general was strained. There was a lack of
communication, time--there wasn't timely reporting, I think the
IG wasn't informed really what you would consider on a timely
basis. I understand things have improved since that time. How
would you characterize your relationship with the inspector
general today?
Mr. DeVries. On behalf of the CIO office, I'll say it's
very good. I say that because we meet monthly with his staff
and my staff to go through what their concerns are, what their
findings are, what our status is of reporting back to those
findings. It's a very good relationship. They hold nothing
back.
And I'd like to defer now the final question to my chief
information security officer, because he deals with them much
more frequently.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Mr. Chase. Is that okay, Representative?
Mr. Grothman. Sure. Yeah.
Mr. Chase. So one of the things when I came onboard was to
establish a good relationship with the inspector general. We
meet on a weekly basis to talk about all the progress. And so--
and I know I mentioned it earlier, but I'll say it again, is
everything from the compliance efforts that we did to the
engineering rollouts, so there's a lot of things going on that
I wanted to make sure that the inspector general is abreast of.
And so with that, they've given us guidance on what's
appropriate to align to their FISMA report metrics and
reporting. And it's been helpful not only for me but my staff
behind me to see why that relationship is one that pays
dividends in the long run.
Mr. Grothman. Good. And if there was a breach today, how
quickly would the inspector general know?
Mr. Chase. As quickly as everybody else.
Mr. Grothman. Okay.
Mr. DeVries. Sir, I make that first phone call to the
director, the second one is to the OIG, so it's realtime----
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Thank you.
I yield the remainder of my time.
Chairman Chaffetz. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Director Phalen, according to the website, the National
Background Investigations Bureau, NBIB, is now responsible for
conducting, and I quote: ``Approximately 95 percent of the
total background investigations governmentwide.''
Is that right?
Mr. Phalen. Yes, sir, that is.
Mr. Cummings. Out of the total number of background
investigations that NBIB is responsible for conducting, does
that include political appointees in the Trump administration?
Mr. Phalen. Generally not.
Mr. Cummings. Not?
Mr. Phalen. Generally not.
Mr. Cummings. Okay.
Mr. Phalen. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And why not?
Mr. Phalen. By tradition, that work has been given to the
FBI to conduct those investigations by the White House.
Mr. Cummings. And so a--now, guideline A of the
adjudicative guideline states that individuals seeking a
security clearance must have unquestioned allegiance to the
United States, and lays out a series of examples of
disqualifying factors that investigators and adjudicators will
use to determine eligibility.
Based on some of the questions on that SF86, I think many
people often think of association with groups seeking to
overthrow the U.S. Government by violent means, like violent
anarchists or terrorist groups. When we think of this
guideline, is that fair?
Mr. Phalen. Yes, that would be a major piece of that
category. Yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. But the disqualifying factors in the
guideline may include much more than that. Do they not? They
include whether a person associates with or shares the
viewpoint of those who advocate using illegal or
unconstitutional means to prevent government personnel from
performing their official duties or others from exercising
their constitutional rights. Is that correct?
Mr. Phalen. Those are--those are questions to be considered
in an adjudication, yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. And it could--and it could conclude--include
persons who associate or share the viewpoint of those who use
illegal or unconstitutional means to, quote, ``gain attribution
for perceived wrongs caused by Federal, State, or local
government,'' end of quote. Is that correct?
Mr. Phalen. Those would be adjudicative questions, yes,
sir.
Mr. Cummings. If your investigations uncovered negative or
derogatory information in any of those areas, I imagine that
you could raise concern with regard to them. Is that correct?
Mr. Phalen. They would be noted in the investigation, and
they would be forwarded to an adjudicative--adjudication
authority to make a determination as to whether that individual
should be cleared.
Mr. Cummings. So I want to walk you through a few short
examples. If someone said that they were a Boy Scout or Girl
Scout, would that raise a concern under guideline A? Of course
not. Is that right?
Mr. Phalen. No, sir.
Mr. Cummings. What if someone described themselves as a
Leninist, which refers to the Russian revolutionary who was not
a fan of our democratic government, should that raise concerns
for your investigators?
Mr. Phalen. It would, and the investigator should pursue
that avenue of discussion with the subject as to what that
means.
Mr. Cummings. What if someone said that his goal was to,
quote, ``destroy the State,'' unquote, what response would that
elicit?
Mr. Phalen. That would elicit a very strong line of
questioning with that individual and with others to determine
what he means by that, so that we can give a full picture to
the adjudicator.
Mr. Cummings. What if somebody said, quote, ``I want to
bring everything crashing down and destroy all of today's
establishment,'' end of quote, should that raise a concern?
Mr. Phalen. That would be noteworthy in an adjudication,
yes, sir.
Mr. Cummings. Chairman, each of these phrases were
reportedly used by Steve Bannon to describe his views and his
goals, according to Ronald Radosh of The Daily Beast. Mr.
Bannon has since reportedly denied saying those things, but I
imagine an investigator would still have concerns about them. I
imagine that they would also want to see numerous reports about
racism rampant on the news website Mr. Bannon used to run.
Mr. Chairman, this is--this is a very serious problem. The
President has picked Mr. Bannon to be his chief strategist and
senior counselor. Not only that, the President just reorganized
the National Security Council and gave Mr. Bannon a permanent
seat at the table, while removing the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff and director of National Intelligence. This is
at least--I mean, it causes us to--we should wonder about this
and question it.
Do you--if--you may have answered this earlier. If somebody
is under criminal investigation--and I know that we now have a
liaison. Tell me how that works, a criminal liaison to try to
work with--what happens when you find out somebody is under
criminal investigation?
Mr. Phalen. Depending what the criminal--criminal
investigation is and the immediate seriousness of the nature,
we may immediately contact the requesting agency that is asking
for the clearance to give them sort of a heads-up that this is
out there. And they may or may not determine at that point they
want to terminate the request for a clearance. Otherwise, we'll
continue the investigation.
The fact that--going further down the road, an adjudicator
would be faced with this question, this is an individual under
criminal investigation, it would be up to them to understand
what that investigation is about and to make a judgment whether
or not that investigation or what is surrounding it would be
disqualifying for access to classified information, whether--
essentially, whether it shows an inability to be trusted to
hold onto classified information.
Mr. Cummings. So, in other words, the person could still
get a--get a clearance?
Mr. Phalen. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. And I would assume that if that person were
then later on convicted of an offense, then that probably his
clearance would be withdrawn. Is that right?
Mr. Phalen. If----
Mr. Cummings. And who would do that?
Mr. Phalen. The organization that issued the clearance
would be the organization to rescind the clearance. And--based
on what they see. And they would make--and if it had already
been issued, an individual is convicted, it would be up to that
organization to determine whether or not that conviction has
any impact on their ability to be trusted.
Mr. Cummings. My last question. The--I just gave some
quotes that are attributed to Mr. Bannon. Would--I mean, if
they--if you were to raise--if those questions were raised,
would anyone go and then--and then the--say, Mr. Bannon, or
whoever may have said those kind of things, denied them, would,
then, you--would--would somebody go back to look to see if
those statements were made in other--in the periodicals,
whatever? And how might that affect the security clearance of
that person? Do you understand my question?
Mr. Phalen. I believe I do. We--if--if we--first, if we
were faced with an individual who had made statements that
appeared to be counter to the United States, that would be an
issue we would pursue with the subject themselves, to start
with. And to use your example, if that individual said, no, I
never really said that, I don't really feel that way, we would
use, to the best of our ability, whatever sources we can find
to get to--to do issues resolution, to determine whether--what
the truth is, to the extent that we can, so that we can give as
full a picture as we can to the official that has to make that
ultimate decision.
Mr. Cummings. And if you discovered that, unequivocally,
that the person had not been honest with you, what might--
effect that have?
Mr. Phalen. That would, again, be passed on to the
adjudication authority, and they would have to determine
whether that makes a difference or not.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, thank you for your indulgence.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
I'll now recognize the gentlewoman from New York, Mrs.
Maloney.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, very much.
Chairman Chaffetz. Your microphone. Microphone.
Mrs. Maloney. You know, I'm really concerned about
cybersecurity. And if Congress is serious about helping
agencies improve their cybersecurity, it must call on the
President to rescind, in my opinion, his across-the-board
hiring freeze. How in the world can you move forward if you
can't even hire the people that can do the job? Such--this
freeze that he's put in place, in my opinion, undermines the
Federal Government's ability to recruit, develop, and maintain
a pipeline of cybersecurity talent that's needed to strengthen
Federal cybersecurity. And if there was a field that didn't
change every 24 hours, it's cybersecurity. You have to get the
youngest, brightest, latest people that are involved in it.
So I am concerned about this freeze that he put in place, I
think it was roughly 2 weeks ago. And he's taken other steps
that will make it more difficult for Federal agencies to
improve the area of cybersecurity. So I--and then he issued
this memoranda ordering across-the-board hiring freeze in the
Federal Government. And I want to quote from it. And I quote:
``As part of this freeze, no vacant positions existing at noon
on January 22, 2017, may be filled, and no new positions may be
created.''
So it seems to me that when it comes to improving
cybersecurity, a hiring freeze is one of the most
counterproductive policies that you could ever put in place.
And after the 2015 cybersecurity at OPM, Federal CIO Tony
Scott and then OMB Director Shaun Donovan put in place a
cybersecurity strategy and implementation plan for the entire
government. And I quote: ``The vast majority of Federal
agencies site a lack of cyber and IT talent as a major resource
constraint that impacts their ability to protect information
and assets.''
And so I'd just like to ask Mr. DeVries, as the CI--CIO of
OPM, can you highlight some of the challenges that OPM has
faced when it comes to recruiting and hiring cybersecurity
specialists? And, obviously, you can't do anything if you can't
hire anybody. So could you give us some insights there?
Mr. DeVries. Thank you very much for that question. That is
a--that is pertained to OPM. It's pertained to the Federal
workspace and the Federal cybersecurity and IT professionals.
That is a concern to all of us of how do I keep the pipeline
coming in there.
I will tell you, from my experience just coming onboard in
OPM in September, we have, for example, five hiring actions out
there, and we had about a 60 percent--we did not get to them
fast enough before they went someplace else. We have completed
that. We have filled those things. But, again, that's our
challenge across the Federal spaces, how do I recruit and
retain these folks.
I will tell you, it comes from the passion of the heart.
They come onboard. If I give them meaningful experiences,
training they will stay. I think we're also working across the
Federal space of how do I help improve the rotation, if you
will, from Federal service back to industry and then back in
again. We need to make--we have made strides on it. We need to
continue to work on that together.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, I--I've got to say that cybersecurity
is really tied to the security of the Nation. And I think--I
don't see how you can do your job if you can't hire people.
So I would respectfully like to request that the chairman
think about maybe asking for a waiver for the cybersecurity
area in hiring. Number one, as Mr. DeVries pointed out, it's
hard to hire them, because they're in great demand all over the
country right now, that is a prime focus of the country. And so
we need to work in this for the good of the country.
And I--we're all individuals. I'm going to write the
President my own letter and request that he waive it for the
area of cybersecurity.
But can you just go over some of the agencies, how does
this hinder your ability and capability to improve when it
comes to securing IT systems when you're not able to hire
people? How does this affect you?
Ms. McGettigan. Congresswoman, it terms of the hiring
freeze, this is a 90-day freeze, and there are many exemptions
to that freeze, primarily in terms of national security, public
health, and public safety.
Mrs. Maloney. But isn't this national security,
cybersecurity?
Ms. McGettigan. Well, agency heads are able to make that
determination and to exempt those positions that are deemed to
be national security.
Mrs. Maloney. So that's taken care of?
Ms. McGettigan. If they are not--if they have a position, a
cybersecurity position, that they would not feel was national
security, they can come to OPM and we will review their request
for an exemption from that.
Mrs. Maloney. Have any people asked for exemptions?
Ms. McGettigan. At this point, no. I'm not aware
specifically that anyone has come into OPM. I haven't seen any
requests.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. My time has expired. Thank you.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you.
Just a few wrap-up questions.
Mr. DeVries, could you please provide the committee all the
NCAPs or other pen test reports conducted in the last year? Is
that something you can provide the committee?
Mr. DeVries. Yes, sir, we can.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Thank you. We appreciate it if
you'd do that.
And then, Mr. Phalen, one of the--one of the sad realities
of what happened when Director Archuleta was in place is this
hack had legacy systems online that dated back to 1985. And my
understanding is, even if you applied for a job and didn't get
a job with the Federal Government, and you did it after 1985,
you might have been in that system.
What are you doing to take sort of the nonactive records so
they're not online and, thus, accessible to some hacking? Have
you made any adjustments there?
Mr. Phalen. To be honest, sir, I don't know. I know we have
done a tremendous amount, you've heard it earlier today, in
securing the systems. And I'm very comfortable that we have
both the barriers on the front end and the ability to, my
words, fight sort of an active shooter online on the network,
should it appear. I don't believe we've taken a tremendous
amount of this and put it offline, because it is--it needs to
be accessible for any future work that we do.
Chairman Chaffetz. To a degree. I mean, you know, if
somebody retired in 1991 and then all of a sudden we have a
hack in 2014, it does kind of beg the question why is that
system--Mr. Halvorsen looks like he has something.
Mr. Halvorsen. Yes. The new system will have tiered storage
on it both in terms of what's live, what goes back, and it will
take into consideration some of the things you said. If you are
offline for a while, that will go into a different storage
system, and it will be much harder to access.
Chairman Chaffetz. It just--it seems like one of the
lessons we should have learned for the nonactive employees--
again, there may be a period of time. You all are more experts
on it than we are, but after a certain amount of time, maybe it
should be, you know, more sitting in some mountain somewhere as
opposed to online.
Two last questions. Who's in charge? When there's conflict,
disagreement, when there is an attack, who ultimately is in
charge?
Mr. Chase. So through my program, we actually have a
process that we implemented based on the lessons learned from
the 2015 breach, and there is a communication path that routes
up into the director's office through the CIO with the severity
and any data or details related to that incident.
Chairman Chaffetz. So who--who is in charge?
Mr. Chase. So----
Chairman Chaffetz. Who ultimately makes the hard decision
if there's a disagreement, a question? You've got the DOD.
You've got OPM. Something's not--who is the ultimate
decisionmaker?
Mr. DeVries. So I'd like to take that on. If it's on the
current system that OPM and I, as the CIO, am responsible for,
I do that.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay.
Mr. DeVries. On the new system, within the NBIS, as we
transition to it, DOD will.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. So that would be Mr. Halvorsen or
whoever his replacement is?
Mr. DeVries. Correct.
Mr. Halvorsen. That is correct.
Chairman Chaffetz. Okay. Last question. Mr. Halvorsen, you
have the freedom of retirement there running around the corner
here. So given that, your years of service, your perspective,
your expertise, summarize for us, what should the Congress
understand? What are your greatest frustrations and concerns
and your best suggestions that you can offer us?
Mr. Halvorsen. Well, first, I'll thank Congress. As you
know, working through many of the members here, we did get the
cyber accepted service law, which I do think was the first
thing that we needed to get done to recruit and move past some
of the things that were blocking our ability.
I do think we are going to have to reevaluate the pay scale
for cybersecurity personnel and some other key positions. We do
rely on patriotism. We can recruit people a lot for that, but
the pay disparities are getting out of hand. I mean, I will
tell you, I have lost six or seven people this year, very good,
basically, because they could not anymore turn down the offers.
And I can't counsel them against that after a certain point.
Chairman Chaffetz. I'm totally convinced that you're right.
And I hope that this Congress--I plan on helping to champion
some legislation to give more realistic assessment to provide
that flexibility, because I do think you're right.
Mr. Halvorsen. And I think the other more most important
thing that we do, and I have said this before, I will keep
saying it, I do think the secret weapon of our country is, to
keep our security, keep our edge in warfighting is better use
of our industry and commercial mobility and agility.
You have seen--we talk about this in DOD. We are embarking
to bring as much commercial into these activities. We are doing
it with this system as the build of the new. We need to
continue that, and we need to continue that against--across the
foreign government--I mean, across the Federal Government
space. That also means we will have to work and raise the bar
for industry on security.
While I'll be the first to say that DOD included, we have
to get better in our security practices. And I am heartened by
what I see in my discussions with the commercial community.
They are starting to take that to heed, and we are seeing a
rise in their ability to protect data. We need to encourage
that and open up our dialogue with the commercial sector on how
best to do that and share more information.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you, again, Mr. Halvorsen. We
thank you for your service, and we wish you nothing but the
best of luck in whatever your future endeavors take you. And
thank you again for your service.
Let me recognize Mr. Cummings, and we'll close the meeting.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you. Thank you. I want to thank all of
our witnesses for being here today. You certainly have been
extremely helpful. And I want to--you know, I just hope that
the--I want to express my appreciation to all the people that
work with you, because I know that you all have teams of people
who give their blood, their sweat, their tears, because they
want America to remain the greatest country in the world.
Mr. Halvorsen, again, I want to join in with the chairman
and thank you for your service.
I have a brother who is a former Air Force officer, who is
not a cyber expert, so he talks to me all the time about the
demand for these folks who are good. I also have sat on the
Naval Academy Board of Visitors for the last 12 years. And one
thing that we've done in the Naval Academy it's now mandatory
that every student have--I know you probably already know
this--have extensive cyber lessons as part of our curriculum,
and so we see the significance of it.
I want to ask you this: One of the things that we wrestle
with is Federal employees feel that they are under attack
constantly. We've seen recently where all kinds of measures
have been put forth that really make them feel pretty insecure.
And I'm just wondering, how do you--I mean, first of all, talk
about, briefly, the people that you've worked with and what
they bring to the table. Because a lot of people, I think, get
the impression sometimes that the people who work for the
Federal Government are not giving a lot and not giving their
best and not feeding their souls, as I often say.
I just want--you know, you're on your way out. You've had
an opportunity to work with a lot of people. And I'm sure one
of the saddest parts is probably a bittersweet thing, you
created a family. I always tell my children that whenever you
get a job, you also create a family of people who are looking
out for you and who care about you and who you--sometimes
you're with more than you're with your own family.
So could you just talk about some of the, just generally,
the people that you've worked with, sir? Because I know that
you could not have done what you've been able to accomplish
without a support system. If you might, just very briefly.
Mr. Halvorsen. Well, you know, I will tell you, having both
been in the military and in Federal service, highest respect
for the Federal workforce. They do exceptional work. They put
in a lot of hours. They do their best on everything they can
do. But I'm also going to comment, I see that also in the
commercial workspace when I bring the people in. I do think
this is a leadership issue. And if you make your--any of your
employees, whether they're Federal, military, or commercial,
feel a part of the team and you listen to that team, they will
give you everything they've got to get--to get the work done.
And that--I have 37 years, that's what I have seen in the
Federal Government and in that workspace.
Mr. Cummings. And I think when you show people that you
truly care about them--not just about them, but their families
and their welfare--I tell the people that come to work with us
on the OGR, if they are not better when they leave me, then
I've failed. In other words, if they are--their skill level is
not higher, if they're not more proficient, if they're not more
effective and efficient, then I've done something wrong.
Because I want to invest in them. Because I want to be a part
of their destiny. I want to touch their futures. Even when I'm
dancing with the angels, I want to know that they've gone on to
do great things, because our Nation really needs the very, very
best.
And so I can tell you that working with the chairman, we
saw that. We--in working with the--then I'll be finished. I
give the chairman a lot of credit, because when we looked at
the Secret Service, he and I made a concerted effort to say to
the Secret Service we wanted the elite of the elite. We wanted
the very, very best, and we wanted to create that culture.
And I think we're moving toward this, Mr. Chairman. I don't
know that we've gotten there yet, but we're trying to get
there. But--and we've done that in a number of agencies in a
bipartisan way.
And, again, I just--you know, the only reason I raise the
question, Mr. Halvorsen, is because I just want the public to
be reminded that, you know, there's a vast array of Federal
employees that keep our country the great country that it is.
And, again, I want to thank all of you and everybody who
back you all up for doing what you do. And, now, we still have
a lot of work to do, as you've all made very, very clear, but I
believe that, you know, we can--we can get it done.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Chaffetz. Thank you. And thank you all. And please
let them know, the men and women who work within your
departments and groups, how much we do appreciate it. It's a
tough job, but it's a very important job, and we do appreciate
it.
Thank you. The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:28 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
