- REVIEWING THE FAFSA DATA BREACH

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

REVIEWING THE FAFSA DATA BREACH

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 3, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-46

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
28-504 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2018

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Jason Chaffetz, Utah, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California              Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan                   Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark Meadows, North Carolina         Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Ron DeSantis, Florida                Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Val Butler Demings, Florida
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia                Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas                     John P. Sarbanes, Maryland
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan

Jonathan Skladany, Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Katie Bailey, Government Operations Subcommittee Staff Director
Troy Stock, Information Technology Subcommittee Staff Director
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 3, 2017......................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. James W. Runcie, Chief Operating Officer, Office of Federal
Student Aid, U.S. Department of Education
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     7
Mr. Jason K. Gray, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Department of
Education
Oral Statement...............................................    13
Written Statement............................................    15
Ms. Silvana Gina Garza, Chief Information Officer, Internal
Revenue Service
Oral Statement...............................................    21
The Hon. Kenneth C. Corbin, Commissioner, Wage and Investment
Division, Internal Revenue Service
Oral Statement...............................................    22
Joint Written Statement Mr. Corbin and Ms. Garza.............    24
Mr. Timothy P. Camus, Deputy Inspector General for
Investigations, Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    29
Written Statement............................................    31

APPENDIX

National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators
Statement submitted by Mr. Russell.............................    76
National College Access Network Statement submitted by Mr.
Russell........................................................    82
American Council on Education Statement submitted by Mr. Russell.    85
Electronic Privacy Information Center Statement submitted by Mr.
Russell........................................................    87
Ms. Melissa Macko Constituent Email submitted by Mr. Duncan......    90
Response from Mr. Sessa, Acting Chief lnformation Officer, Office
of Federal Student Aid, U.S. Department of Education, to
Questions for the Record.......................................    92
Response from Mr. Gray, Chief Information Officer, U.S.
Department of Education, to Questions for the Record...........   102
Response from Mr. Corbin, Commissioner, Wage and Investment
Division, Internal Revenue Service, to Questions for the Record   104
Response from Ms. Garza, Chief lnformation Officer, Internal
Revenue Service, to Questions for the Record...................   107

REVIEWING THE FAFSA DATA BREACH

----------

Wednesday, May 3, 2017

House of Representatives
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:30 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Steve Russell
presiding.
Present: Representatives Russell, Duncan, Issa, Jordan,
Amash, Gosar, Foxx, Meadows, Ross, Walker, Blum, Hice,
Grothman, Hurd, Palmer, Mitchell, Cummings, Maloney, Norton,
Clay, Connolly, Kelly, Watson Coleman, Plaskett,
Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Welch, DeSaulnier, and Sarbanes.
Also Present: Representative Scott.
Mr. Russell. Good morning. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order. Without objection, the
chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time.
The chair notes the presence of our colleague, Congressman
Bobby Scott from Virginia, and we appreciate his interest in
this topic and welcome your participation today, sir. I ask
unanimous consent that Congressman Scott be allowed to fully
participate in today's hearing. And without objection, it will
be so ordered.
I would also like to ask unanimous consent to enter into
the record statements from the following organizations: The
National Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators,
the National College Access Network, the American Council on
Education, and EPIC.
Mr. Russell. Today, we are here to talk about a data breach
involving a Department of Education website and an IRS web-
based application. Every day, literally, adversaries and
criminals conduct an unknown number of sophisticated and
devastating cyber attacks against our nation. To get the
government ahead of the curve will require even more effort on
the part of agency heads and chief information officers as we
begin the task of modernizing old, outdated, and insecure
Federal technologies and network architectures, but we cannot
calibrate our defenses and buy the right security platforms
unless we understand the threat. We must be honest and
transparent about what risks that we face and what damage is
being done. Ignoring the problem or underestimating the threat
places our nation and its citizens in danger.
Once again, we find ourselves on the Oversight Committee
investigating a data breach. Hackers were trying to file
fraudulent tax returns and steal refunds. To accomplish this
crime, they turned to the Department of Education's FAFSA or
Free Application for Federal Student Aid, .gov network and the
data retrieval tool which was designed to try to aid in
financial applications.
To get the one piece of information that they desired that
they couldn't buy in the marketplace, they came to the tool:
specifically, taxpayers' adjusted gross income data. You need
that AGI to authenticate your identity for the IRS and file
your tax returns, so all hackers needed to do was go to the
dark web, buy a cache of American taxpayer personally
identifiable information, use that to get into the FAFSA.gov
and the data retrieval tool, and then they had everything that
they needed to steal taxpaying citizens' refunds.
This is exactly the kind of hacking scheme that the Federal
agencies must be aware of when they make their services
available online. If sensitive data can be accessed through an
online application, it must be secured with strong
authentication measures and appropriately encrypted.
We need to call these events what they are: data breaches
and major incidents. Facing the truth is important not only
because the incidents ultimately affect tens of thousands if
not hundreds of thousands of American taxpayers and probably
millions of students applying for student aid, but it also--
because without understanding the threats we face, we can't
protect ourselves.
It took the Internal Revenue Service almost three months to
determine that this was a major data breach incident that
required congressional notification FISMA requirements. And the
Department is still not calling this a major incident, and I
would like to find out--and I am sure my colleagues-- why. This
is not about wordsmithing. What we call these incidents helps
us bring the full weight of the Federal Government to bear on
the cyber response, getting help to those that have been
impacted and making sure the vulnerabilities are defended.
Cybersecurity is a team sport. A leak at one end of the
pipe or the other still creates a leak. Agencies must safeguard
their data and make sure it goes where they intend. If we have
other organizations, tools, or technologies hooked up to our
networks or websites, then we are responsible. It only takes
one vulnerability and then everyone who is connected to that
vulnerability is at risk.
What is so troubling about this incident is that it was
detected through suspicious activity accidentally. The hackers
inadvertently targeted an IRS employee. Criminals do make dumb
mistakes. But so do agencies. I would like to think our
detection and defense abilities are more advanced than mistakes
of criminals relying on the dumb mistakes that they make.
We aren't going to win this fight unless we understand the
threats that we face, the damage that hackers and enemies are
doing to us, and what we as a Congress can do to empower agency
heads and CIOs to protect our networks. The first step in
fighting back is wearing our mistakes like a badge. We should
follow it with some grit and determination to not let it happen
to the areas of government that have been entrusted to our
charge.
Mr. Russell. And with that, I would like to yield to the
ranking member, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
No matter who may define it, this is a major incident, IRS
or Education. I am just letting you know it is a major
incident. You can put any kind of definition you want on it but
I am telling you it is.
I welcome this hearing today. This hearing is about the
data retrieval tool, and that is a valid topic that several
other committees are also addressing. And I, too, Mr. Chairman
want to thank Representative Scott for joining us today. He is
one who has addressed these issues for many, many years, and I
thank him.
Now, what nobody seems to be addressing is the unethical,
abusive, and predatory actions of student loan companies. Last
September, the inspector general issued a report finding that
multiple student loan companies, which were supposed to be,
supposed to be helping students were actually accessing and
changing student logon information as part of predatory schemes
to access their accounts, change their regular mail and email
addresses, and even intercept correspondence. That is a major,
major event.
Specifically, the IG reported that the process for logging
onto the Federal Student Aid website was, quote, ``being
misused by commercial third parties to take over borrowers'
accounts,'' end of quote. In one case the IG warned that a
student loan company, and I quote, ``changed the mailing
address, the phone number, and email address for borrowers so
that it would be difficult for the borrowers to be contacted by
loan servicers,'' end of quote.
In another case, the IG found that a company charged
borrowers monthly fees to, quote, ``put their loans into
forbearance with the stated promise of eventually enrolling
them in the Public Service Loan Forgiveness or some other debt
reduction program even though the borrowers in some cases were
not qualified for these programs,'' end of quote. This is
major.
The IG also found that these companies were able to, quote,
``intercept all of the borrowers' emails, correspondence,
including password resets via email, important email notices,
and direct communication from FAFSA or the loan servicer,'' end
of quote.
Less than two weeks ago, on April 20, our committee staff
conducted a transcribed interview with the special agent in
charge of this investigation at the inspector general's office.
This is what he told us. He warned that these companies, and I
quote, ``were controlling thousands of accounts or creating
thousands of accounts and controlling them,'' end of quote. In
other words, the very companies that were supposed to be
helping students were actually abusing their trust.
These practices are reprehensible, but the IG reported that
it could not prosecute these student loan companies because of
technicalities. Apparently, these companies forced students to
sign powers of attorney to get loans so the companies
presumably could try to argue that they were authorized to
engage in these abusive activities. Something is awfully wrong
with that picture. It is outrageous that these companies
effectively got away with behavior they must have known was
wrong--no, not must have known, they knew was wrong.
I am eager to hear from today's witnesses about
improvements necessary to hold these student loan companies
accountable for engaging in these deceptive and abusive
practices.
In addition, as we will hear today, criminals were able to
compromise the data retrieval tool, which is used it to link
student tax information to financial aid and student loan
accounts online. These criminals then use this information to
file fraudulent tax returns. It is unacceptable that students
have to deal with the abusive practices of predatory loan
companies, as well as the increased threats of identity theft.
It is critical that we crackdown on these criminal elements
and improve the security of the systems. Congress also needs to
support these efforts. Severe budget cuts in recent years have
made it more difficult to make critical improvements in
information technology. President Trump's budget proposal and
staff reduction directives would exacerbate these challenges.
Finally, if we really, really want to protect students from
the abuses we are addressing here today, Congress obviously
cannot abolish the Department of Education, as some of my
colleagues have proposed. We must support and increase our
nation's investments in our students. As I often say, our
children are the living messages we send to a future we will
never see. The question is how will we send them? The question
is how will we protect them? And this is that moment. This is
our watch.
And with that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Russell. Thank you.
I will hold the record open for five legislative days for
any members who would like to submit a written statement.
We will now recognize our panel of witnesses. I am pleased
to welcome Mr. James Runcie, the chief operating officer,
Office of the Federal Student Aid, Department of Education; Mr.
Jason Gray, chief information officer from the Department of
Education; Ms. Silvana Gina Garza, chief information officer of
the Internal Revenue Service; the Honorable Kenneth C. Corbin,
Commissioner, Wage and Investment Division of the Internal
Revenue Service; and Mr. Timothy Camus, the deputy inspector
general for investigations, Treasury Inspector General for Tax
Administration.
We welcome all of you and thank you for being here this
morning.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. Would you please rise and raise your right
hand?
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Russell. Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would appreciate
it if you would please limit your oral testimony to five
minutes each. Your entire written statement will be made a part
of the record.
And with that, I am pleased to recognize Mr. Runcie for
five minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JAMES W. RUNCIE

Mr. Runcie. Thank you, Chairman Russell, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee, for the opportunity to
join you today. I will discuss the events that led to the data
retrieval tool, or DRT, being disabled, the plan to securely
restored the tool, and the actions we've taken to assist
students, parents, borrowers, and schools.
As the largest source of Federal student aid for
postsecondary education in the U.S., FSA delivered more than
$125 billion in aid to over 13 million students attending more
than 6,000 schools last year. FSA is committed to safeguarding
taxpayer interests as we provide access to Federal student aid
for students and their families.
During my tenure at FSA, we have securely managed the
growth of the direct loan portion of the student loan portfolio
from 9.2 million recipients and $155 billion to 32 million
recipients and approximately $1 trillion. One of the critical
resources that has assisted the Department in this growth is
the DRT. It first became available in 2010 through the joint
efforts of the IRS and FSA and provides FSA's customers an
effective way to transfer required IRS tax information.
Each year, about half of the 20 million FAFSA filers use
the DRT and another 4.5 million borrowers use the tool for the
income-driven or IDR plans. In total, over 55 million FAFSA and
IDR applications have successfully utilized the DRT since
inception. Using the DRT has saved millions of hours of
applicants' time, reduced improper payments by billions of
dollars, and lowered the verification hurdle for schools and
their dedicated staff of financial aid professionals.
Following a broader IRS security review last year, the
agency contacted FSA about a potential DRT vulnerability. The
joint goal of the IRS and FSA was to minimize the potential
vulnerability without causing a major disruption to our
customers. We agreed to keep the DRT operational while
increasing the monitoring of the tool for suspicious activity.
The IRS and FSA have evaluated many solutions that could be
integrated with both applications and would increase the
protection of taxpayer information. Many solutions did not meet
the required security and privacy threshold or resulted in too
many applicants being unable to access Federal Student Aid.
In February, we agreed to develop and implement an
encryption solution. This solution would be employed for the
2018-19 award year beginning October 1, 2017. The IRS and FSA
also agree that we would continue to monitor the applications
for the current award years and still allow for DRT use.
On March 3, the IRS alerted FSA of suspicious activity
related to the DRT and suspended its use. The suspicious
activity involved bad actors who illegally obtained personal
information elsewhere and began filling out FAFSAs in order to
access taxpayer information from the IRS through the DRT. This
information could then be used to file fraudulent tax returns.
I want to reiterate that we have no evidence that any
personal information from the Department systems were accessed.
However, with evidence that criminals were starting to exploit
the potential vulnerability of the DRT using the tool was no
longer an option. The solution to bring back the DRT allows tax
information to be electronically transferred, but it will
encrypt the information and hide it from applicants' view.
For the DRT--for the IDR application, we are targeting the
end of May to have the DRT functionality available to
applicants. For the FAFSA we are scheduled to meet the October
1st timing for the '18-'19 award year launch. Due to benefit
and risk considerations, the current award year of '17-'18 will
not have the DRT available for the remainder of the award year.
Consequently, we are reminding students, parents, and
borrowers that they can still apply for aid and repayment plans
without the DRT. Our ongoing efforts involve utilizing all of
our communications resources, digital properties and vendors,
and also leveraging the financial aid community. The Department
also issued a communication to schools extending flexibilities
regarding verification procedures.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide you with this
information, and I welcome any questions you may have here
today. Thank you.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Runcie follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Russell. Thank you.
And the chair now recognizes Mr. Gray for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JASON K. GRAY

Mr. Gray. Thank you, Chairman Russell and Ranking Member
Cummings and members of the committee. I am Jason Gray, CIO for
the U.S. Department of Education, a position I have had the
privilege of holding since June of 2016. I appreciate the
opportunity to speak with you today on the cybersecurity
incident that led to the shutdown of the IRS data retrieval
tool.
As the CIO, I embrace and support the Department's mission
of promoting student achievement and preparation for global
competitiveness, fostering educational excellence, and ensuring
equal access by ensuring that we apply information technology
effectively, efficiently, and securely. I take this
responsibility seriously and understand that this includes the
entire Department, including Federal Student Aid and all
principal and support offices.
When we became aware that the IRS had confirmed that tax
data accessed through the FAFSA link to the DRT may have been
used to fraudulently file tax returns, we immediately activated
our incident response processes. This involved coordination of
Security Operations Center resources to gather forensic data
and to gain a better understanding of the incident. We held
daily meetings to facilitate communication between the
technical staff of my office, Federal Student Aid, and the IRS.
Additionally, we reported the incident to the office--to our
Office of the Inspector General and to the United States
Computer Emergency Readiness Team at Homeland Security.
While the Department systems were involved, this was in
essence a scheme directed at retrieving tax data from the IRS.
There is no evidence that the malicious actors were able to
access any personal information from the Department systems. I
am confident that the personal information the Department has
on borrowers, students, and parents remains appropriately
protected.
I will describe several actions we have taken to further
strengthen and enhance our cybersecurity program to protect
sensitive data, including PII, that is managed by the
Department.
Incident response is a priority for the Department. In
2015, we created an incident response planning workgroup to
address cybersecurity incidents and data breach response
processes. In 2016, the Department conducted two incident
response tabletop exercises that helped us refine our incident
response process through the development of lessons learned and
identification of actions the Department needed to enhance our
overall incident response process.
The Department has implemented a number of technical
controls and solutions to detect policy violations,
unauthorized changes, and unauthorized access to the
Department's primary network. These include a data loss
prevention solution, which restricts users from sending emails
that contain sensitive PII such as Social Security numbers
outside of the Department.
In 2016, the Department also implemented network access
control, which prevents connection by any unauthorized device
to the network. A third solution, web application firewalls,
has been implemented, and we are transitioning web portals and
web applications to be protected by those firewalls.
The Department has partnered with DHS on the implementation
of automated solutions for continuous diagnostics and
mitigation, which will enable us to continuously monitor our
network for intrusions and malicious activity. The Department
also actively leverages multiple DHS-provided shared security
services.
I thank you for the opportunity to discuss the
cybersecurity incident that affected the DRT. The Department of
Education and the IRS continue working together to continuously
enhance the security and privacy protections around this
important capability. I am confident that the technical
solution currently being worked will achieve this goal. I would
be pleased to answer any questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Gray follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Russell. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Ms. Garza for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF SILVANA GINA GARZA

Ms. Garza. Chairman Russell, Ranking Member Cummings, and
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss the cybersecurity incident
associated with the Federal Student Aid data retrieval tool, or
DRT. I have been a public servant for over 32 years, and I am
information technology executive for the last 17. Recently, I
became the chief information officer, having served as the
deputy CIO for the four years prior.
During this time, I have seen a dramatic change in the
number and types of attacks fraudsters and criminal enterprises
use to try to get the data we are committed to protecting. As
the tactics have changed, the IRS's attitude and approach
towards cybersecurity and refund fraud have also changed. We
understand that the enemy is ever-changing and that we must
stay diligent in continually assessing our risk posture and
improving our defenses. We know that we are--we all share the
responsibility to ensure that cybersecurity is embedded in
every part of our operation.
Stepping into the role of CIO eight months ago, I
established two priorities: cybersecurity and delivering a
successful filing season. Having been an executive in the
Business Operating Division, I appreciate the delicate balance
between meeting taxpayer needs with quick and convenient access
to online programs and securing our systems.
We did not take lightly the decision to disable the DRT
tool. We knew that doing so have the potential to disrupt
millions of students applying for Federal financial aid. Even
so, I believe we made a sound decision, one which would protect
the data of approximately 175 million Americans. This is our
highest priority.
I appreciate your decision to conduct a public hearing on
the subject, as I believe it is critical that we continue to
raise awareness of the widespread cyber and identity theft
threats we are facing across the globe today. Every day,
thousands of individuals fall victim to identity theft.
Government and private sector companies are all being bombarded
with cyber attacks. We in the IRS have a front row seat. Every
day, the IRS receives and defends on average a million attempts
to penetrate our systems. Identity theft continues to be a
major threat to our tax administration efforts.
When we first became concerned with the level of
authentication protecting the data retrieval tool, we assessed
the risk to determine if we should shut down the application.
Our practice has been to shut down the application of concern
until we have mitigated the risk. In prior situations, no other
agency was involved. This situation was different. The
Department of Education was highly dependent on the data
retrieval tool for the success of its program and to serve its
customers. We would not make a decision to shut down the
application without engaging the Department of Education in the
decision process.
We discussed the need to raise the level of authentication
with the Department of Education. Additionally, we discussed
the fact that this could be done at either the Department of
Education website or at the point the applicant invokes the DRT
tool. The Department of Education needed to have a user-
friendly solution in place. This made it undesirable to
implement a solution that would cause about 75 percent of
applicants to be unable to complete the process. We continued
to collaborate with the Department of Ed to find an alternative
solution to protect the data.
At that time, there was no evidence of data loss or fraud
so we agreed to not shutdown the application while we worked on
an acceptable solution. We were always clear that the moment we
had evidence of data loss or fraud, we would turn off the data
retrieval tool. On March 3, having confirmed an incident of
fraud, we turned off the application. Details of the incident
and activities leading up to the decision to shut down the
application are in the written testimony.
In conclusion, protecting data is our highest priority.
This threat is persistent and ever-changing, and the IRS
remains diligent and ever watchful. The portion of the funds
Congress provided last year to support cybersecurity has helped
us implement tools and processes that have enhanced our
capabilities, but there will always be more work to be done.
Chairman Russell, Ranking Member Cummings, members of the
committee, this concludes my oral testimony. I will be happy to
answer your questions.
Mr. Russell. Thank you. The chair now recognizes Mr. Corbin
for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF KENNETH C. CORBIN

Mr. Corbin. Chairman Russell, Ranking Member Cummings, and
members of this committee, I am the new commissioner of the
IRS's Wage and Investment Division, having started this
position at the beginning of the year. My responsibilities
include overseeing the processing of tax returns, issuance of
refunds, preventing and detecting refund fraud, providing the
best possible taxpayer service. Thank you for this opportunity
to testify.
My colleague, Ms. Garza, has described the work the IRS is
doing in collaboration with the Department of Education to
secure the DRT. I will put that in a broader context of how we
are working to save at all of our programs where we share
taxpayer information. I will also update the committee on our
efforts to help taxpayers who may have been affected by the
incident earlier this year involving the DRT.
An important focus of the IRS's efforts to protect taxpayer
data is the ongoing battle against stolen identity refund
fraud. We have made steady progress of the last few years
against this threat, but as many colleagues noted, this threat
is constantly evolving. To address this challenge, the IRS has
worked to increase our ability to monitor, detect, analyze
suspicious activity within our systems. Congress helped us by
approving $290 million in additional funding in 2016, which
included $95 million to improve cybersecurity. We have used a
portion of that funding for monitoring equipment and other
capabilities that are more sophisticated than we previously
had. This is helping us detect unusual activity in our various
online tools and applications more quickly.
Despite all this progress we've made, we realize we cannot
relax the fight against identity theft. We are finding that, as
the IRS enhances return processing filters, catches more
fraudulent returns at the time of filing, criminals attempt to
become more sophisticated at mimicking taxpayers' identities so
they can evade those filters and successfully obtain fraudulent
refunds. Therefore, the IRS is working not just to react better
and faster but also to stay ahead of the criminals.
In that regard, we've also undertaken a broad effort to
review authentication practices for programs where we share
taxpayer information and strengthen those practices where
necessary. Student aid is an area where we have been concerned
about the ability of bad actors to fraudulently obtain taxpayer
information. That led us beginning last fall to more closely
monitor activity on the DRT and work with the Department of
Education to make the DRT more secure. In investigating the
incident earlier this year involving the DRT, we found that the
data obtained through unauthorized use of the tool was in some
cases used to attempt to file false returns.
Our strengthened fraud filters have stopped a significant
number of questionable tax returns by filers who access the
DRT. We are working to determine whether any of those returns
are in fact fraudulent. Our analysis of the suspicious activity
involving the DRT found approximately 100,000 individuals may
have had their taxpayer information compromised.
While we have indications that a large number of these
taxpayers are--in all likelihood did not have any information
compromised, in an abundance of caution, we have mailed letters
to all of these taxpayers. We wanted to tell them about the
possibility of unauthorized activity related to their personal
information so they can take steps to secure their data. We
also offered them free credit monitoring. Along with notifying
these taxpayers, the IRS is marking their accounts to provide
additional protection against the possibility that an identity
thief could file a false return using their information.
We also recognize that many families trying to apply for
student aid have been inconvenienced by the decision to shut
off the DRT while we work to improve security for the tool. In
the interim, families can still complete the application for
student financial aid by manually providing the requested
financial information from copies of their return. Although we
realize this is not as convenient as using the DRT, we have a
responsibility to ensure the DRT and all of our online tools
are fully protected from identity thieves.
Chairman Russell, Ranking Member Cummings, and members of
this committee, that concludes my statement. I will be happy to
take your questions.
[Prepared joint statement of Mr. Corbin and Ms. Garza
follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Russell. Thank you.
The chair now recognizes Mr. Camus for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF TIMOTHY P. CAMUS

Mr. Camus. Thank you. Chairman Russell, Ranking Member
Cummings, and members of the committee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify on the topic of the recent free
application for Federal Student Aid data retrieval tool breach.
On average, each year the IRS issues approximately $400
billion in refunds, processes 242 million tax returns, and
collects over $3 trillion in revenue. In addition to the
significant amount of money that flows through the IRS each
year, the taxpayers' IRS information is extremely valuable to
identity thieves. As a result, the IRS has become a persistent
target of cyber criminals located all over the world.
Over the past several years, TIGTA has conducted numerous
investigations of a variety of cyber attacks on the IRS. For
example, in May 2015 criminals launched a coordinated attack on
the IRS e-authentication portal that was estimated to impact
110,000 taxpayers. Further investigation revealed that more
than 700,000 taxpayers were impacted by abuses of the system by
multiple bad actors over an extended period of time.
In January 2016, the IRS e-file PIN application was
exploited. The IRS estimates the exploitation resulted in the
issuance of over 100,000 e-file PINs that were used it to file
fraudulent tax returns seeking more than $100 million in
fraudulent refunds.
On January 25, 2017, the IRS noticed unusual activity on
the FAFSA data retrieval tool. The IRS reported this
observation to the Department of Education. The Department of
Education advised the IRS that they believed the activity was
legitimate activity.
Then, on February 27, 2017, it was determined that the
FAFSA data retrieval tool was in fact being used in order to
steal taxpayers' adjusted gross income, or AGI, information.
Taxpayer AGI information is extremely valuable to identity
thieves as it is needed by criminals in order to authenticate
themselves for the purpose of filing fraudulent tax returns and
stealing refunds.
Due to this activity, in early March 2017, the IRS made the
decision to take the data retrieval tool offline. It is
estimated at this time that as many as 100,000 taxpayers may
have had their AGI information stolen through this
exploitation.
Through the benefit of hindsight, all of these cyber-
related incidents that I've discussed reveal that although the
IRS conducts electronic risk assessments of its tax information
sharing sites, it has had difficulty in identifying proper
levels of risk associated with the various applications. That
is because the struggle with determining the risk, then
necessary authentication requirements, all the while balancing
the ease of use for taxpayers, continues to be the challenge.
As we learn from our investigations how cyber criminals are
defeating the various authentication and security requirements,
we share what we learn with the IRS in order to help them shore
up their applications. One thing is crystal clear. There is a
determined criminal element paying close attention to
electronic tax administration, and I believe these criminals
will continue to present challenges to the future of efficient
and secure electronic tax administration.
In summary, we at TIGTA take seriously our mandate to
protect American taxpayers and the integrity of the IRS. As
such, we plan to provide continuing investigative and audit
coverage in the area of cybersecurity, and we look forward to
continued discussions on ways we can fight these types of cyber
crimes in the future.
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, and members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to share our views,
and I look forward to answering questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Camus follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Russell. Thank you.
The chair will now recognize himself or five minutes.
Ms. Garza, you know, as I look at this situation--and you
certainly have a lot of experience both in the CIO arena, as
well as in public service, and we do appreciate that. A lot of
times public servants are taken for granted. But with your
broad experience, that is not taken lightly. But still, as we
examine this issue, we are trying to get to who is responsible
for making the operational and security decisions for the data
retrieval tool?
Ms. Garza. Sir, as I said in my opening testimony, we are
all responsible for ensuring that cybersecurity is our top
priority. As a group, we look at every risk assessment, we
evaluate the situation, and we make the decisions as to what
level of risk we're willing to take with the application that
we are talking about.
Over the last year since Get Transcript, we've become much
more conservative, but we evaluate the situation, we discuss
it, and we determine what actions we need to take.
Mr. Russell. Now, in your testimony you had mentioned that
this was unique because, unlike attempts or attacks on the IRS
and the different departments within the IRS, this involved a
different department. So you had one end of the pipe and the
other end of the pipe. So when you learned in September 2016
that it was possible to, with, quote, ``little stolen personal
information,'' for a hacker to pose as a student and access the
DRT tool and the data stored on that tool, why did you not move
to immediately secure the tool through encrypting or otherwise
masking the sensitive information accessible through the DRT?
Ms. Garza. So there was a couple of actions that we took at
that time. We--first of all, there was no data loss at the
time. We had no evidence of fraud at the time. We immediately
----
Mr. Russell. Well, there was no evidence of fraud but that
doesn't mean that there wasn't. I mean, you had a clear
indication that something was awry, yes or no?
Ms. Garza. We looked at the analytics and we looked at all
of the data that we had available to us at the time, and we did
not see anything suspicious. We contacted the Department of
Education. Our--both cyber organizations started to work to
look at the data, and the data did not reveal that there was
any kind of penetration going on at that time.
Mr. Russell. Well, didn't--and I guess--you know, and here
is the information I am speaking at specifically. You know, the
isolated case, did it not result in an indictment that is still
processing in the courts from September 13?
Ms. Garza. It was a single case, and they did not get the
data.
Mr. Russell. Well, I guess then let me follow on this vein
because what I hear each of the panelists saying is that no
data breach, no problem, and I hear Mr. Camus say 100,000,
investigation ongoing, and fraudulent returns filed, and I will
come back to some of that. But, Mr. Gray, to what extent do you
think that the Department is responsible for securing the data
accessible on FAFSA.gov and other web-based applications?
Mr. Gray. One hundred percent we're responsible for
securing our data.
Mr. Russell. Okay. But yet we see what the Department of Ed
saying, hey, give us the tool, we have the IRS saying here is
your tool and you have got data coming out the spigot on one
end, you think it is secure on the other, there is a leak, and
yet it took you how many months from September to February to
even recognize and say, no, we thought it was legitimate in
September but now we think we might have a problem. That is a
big period of breach. So would you say that you have a
responsibility for--you do have that responsibility, but that
wasn't perceived as such in September?
Mr. Gray. It was perceived that there was a potential
vulnerability in September, October, and the two departments
worked together to create a solution that would prevent that
vulnerability from being exploited. It did--when it became an
exploited vulnerability, which was in March, is when we took
the appropriate action to bring it offline.
Mr. Russell. And yet it wasn't shut down when you had
indication in the start of a new financial aid season. And I
guess what I would like to do is--you know, Mr. Runcie, you
said that there was no evidence that info was accessed, but
were fraudulent returns filed with regard to this data?
Mr. Runcie. Mr. Chairman, I can't tell you if fraudulent
returns were filed or not. What I can tell you-- because we're
not privy to that information. What we did was we analyzed the
Social Security numbers, IP addresses. We did a pretty
exhaustive examination looking at indicators of risk, and we
returned that information to the IRS so that they could
complete some of their analysis.
In September, as I mentioned earlier in my oral comments,
we at that point probably had filed 50 million applications
using the DRT. So we filed a substantial amount of applications
using the DRT going back seven years to 2010.
It is an evolving landscape and it's quite possible, as
we've said, that the criminals and the fraudulent activity, you
know, they're innovative and so things change. But over that
period of time there wasn't any documented material criminal
activity on the DRT. When that was found and confirmed, it was
shut down. So there's a history there that--one we relied on
even though we continued to monitor it, and we balanced that
against the risk of shutting off the tool and all the
implications around shutting off the tool.
Mr. Russell. Well, there is always a risk of protecting
taxpayers, and I want to be respectful of the time here. But
before I turn it over to the ranking member, you know, what it
appears is that we are not identifying that we had a breach and
it has made us more vulnerable. And with that, we will come
back to some of that at a later time.
I would like to recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Runcie, this past September, the inspector general
issued a scathing report warning that student loan companies
were using the Federal aid website to take advantage of
students. The IG explained the tactics these companies were
using to commit possible fraud. First, the loan companies would
obtain the logon credentials students used to access their
accounts. Then, the loan companies would change or create new
credentials to let them take control of the student accounts.
These loan companies took advantage of the students for
commercial gain in many different ways. Now, Mr. Runcie, are
you aware of that report?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, I am.
Mr. Cummings. And in one case the IG reported that a loan
consolidation company, and I quote, ``changed the mailing
address, phone number, and email address for borrowers so that
it would be difficult for borrowers to be contacted by their
own loan servicers.'' Another company charged students $60
monthly service fee to, and I quote, ``put their loans into
forbearance with the stated promise of eventually enrolling
them in the Public Service Loan Forgiveness or some other debt
reduction program even though the borrowers in some cases were
not qualified for these programs.''
Now, Mr. Runcie, when you read this report, were you
troubled by these companies that did this to these students?
Mr. Runcie. Ranking Member Cummings, yes. I think we were
all troubled. And we continue to work with the IG. We have a
potential solution or mitigating action that we're going to
take later this month. So we understand what the issue is. But
as you mentioned earlier, there is the technicality of someone
who potentially signs up for these services. So whether it's
through power of attorney or some other agreement, there is
sort of that technical issue that we have to deal with.
Mr. Cummings. So the IG reported that it could not
prosecute these loan companies based on technicalities. For
example, many of these companies required students to sign
those powers of attorney in order to get the loans. The
companies that used these powers of attorney to improperly
access the student accounts. Now, Mr. Runcie, it should not be
necessary for students to sign powers of attorney to get
student loans. Do you agree with that?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, I absolutely agree. And I think one of the
approaches that we've taken is to go heavy on user education. I
mean, ultimately, all these services that are being provided
can be done free. But again, through aggressive marketing
tactics and so forth, it's quite possible that there are number
of people who are not aware that they can get these services
done free. So we've been real focused on user education, and in
addition, you know, we're going to make sure that there's
information out there that the IG can leverage in terms of
going after some of the bad actors that are out there, and
that's what I referenced a little bit earlier without actually
being specific.
Mr. Cummings. I got you. Now, what other actions have been
taken so that going forward these student loan companies will
be held accountable for these abusive activities? I just think
there is something about this that just tears at my heart
because I see so many--a sit on the board of a college, and I
see young people having to drop out of school because they
don't have money and they are struggling. They just want to go
out there and be all that God meant for them to be. And not
only do they have to fight people who are supposed to be
helping them, but then they lose the opportunity. And they
don't lose it maybe for a week or a day. They lose it for a
lifetime. That is why I am so concerned about this.
Now, what assistance can Congress provide to help hold
student loan companies more accountable? What can we do? Do you
need some help?
Mr. Runcie. Yes. I mean, you know--while I have some
thoughts ----
Mr. Cummings. Give us your thoughts because we have a duty.
Once we find out that there are things that we can do, we need
to explore to try to figure out whether they are practical to
be done ----
Mr. Runcie. Yes, well ----
Mr. Cummings.--but we have got to know what they are.
Mr. Runcie. Yes. I mean, so there is that technicality. I
don't know if there is a way to sort of limit the ability to
transfer the authority of giving away your password and your
information so that others can provide those services. If there
is some, you know, legislative process to address that, then,
you know, I would be an advocate of it.
I think the other thing, though, is you've got a balance
that potentially with there may be a population--and I know
it's--it would be a segment, a small segment of the people that
are being contacted who may actually need some guidance for
some--whether it's loan consolidation or providing some other,
you know, value within the Federal Student Aid system. There
may be some small amount, and we would have to sort of think
about the impact on those that might need some level of
assistance.
But again, I think the bigger problem is what you
indicated. There is the potential for people to be put in a
situation where they're harmed for a very long period of time
because they're not educated about some of the options out
there to do it by themselves.
Mr. Cummings. So would you think legislation regarding
the--doing away with the power of attorney requirement would be
appropriate?
Mr. Runcie. I think it would be something that we should
consider. You know, again, I--we'd have to do some analysis,
you know, and it could be surveys or whatever. There are--like
I said, there's potentially a group of some of the most needy
who may need some assistance, and I can't calibrate that right
now. But I think, as you said, the bigger problem is that
there's a lot of them that aren't aware that they don't need to
pay for these services and are being exploited.
Mr. Cummings. Mr. Chairman, I would hope that we would
pursue this even further. I think it would be legislative
malpractice for us not to protect these students. It is
ridiculous that we--we have got a do all that we can. I am sure
that you will work with us and everybody up there on our panel
work with us try to make sure that happens.
The other thing that we have got to do, Mr. Chairman, we
can't have just a hearing with these folks. We have got to
bring in these people that are messing over our young people
and playing games with their lives. And so I look forward to
working with you and Chairman Chaffetz as we move forward.
Mr. Russell. And I thank the ranking member and agree that,
you know, it extends even beyond the students. It extends
really to all Americans. This is very private data and even to
their parents and others and look forward to working that
effort.
The chair would like to recognize now the gentleman from
North Carolina, Mr. Walker, for five minutes.
Mr. Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Camus, I want to ask you to describe the following
three incidences, but I would just like for you to confirm them
if you would, please, specifically the ones starting in
September 2016. Was that incident involving the data retrieval
tool, was that criminal in nature?
Mr. Camus. Yes, it was.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Did the incident result in an indictment?
Mr. Camus. Yes, it did.
Mr. Walker. Okay. There was also one that was identified in
November 2016 and the third one was on January 25, 2016, by
which a high number of taxpayer identification numbers were
identified as being processed on the FAFSA that raised red
flag. Did this result in a notification of a major incident to
Congress?
Mr. Camus. No, it did not.
Mr. Walker. Okay. Ms. Garza, given the three separate
incidents as described by TIGTA that predated the major
incident that resulted in the DR tool not being taken offline
on March 3, the question is why was the data retrieval tool not
taken offline earlier?
Ms. Garza. So ----
Mr. Walker. Microphone, please. And if you would, just
could you pull that microphone a little closer and speak into
it there? Thank you.
Ms. Garza. Thank you, sir. Congressman, in regard to the
September incident, we took immediate action by analyzing the
data that we have, and we found that there was no evidence of a
breach. The data was not lost. And we started working with the
Department of Education to strengthen the authentication
process for the data retrieval tool.
I am not aware of the incident in November and so I will
have to go back and look at what the findings were for that.
Mr. Walker. Yes. I don't understand the fact as far as
saying, well it wasn't breached, it wasn't breached. I was just
listening thinking of my family back home. If I have got a
security system, yet we have still people trying to break into
that, at some point I am going to be concerned, say, well, oh,
nothing was taken, nobody was hurt, nothing was damaged. It
doesn't make sense to me that there is not more action being
taken here. Shouldn't the IRS be concerned about criminal
misuse of the tool being sufficiently perked? Is that not
something that is important?
Ms. Garza. Protecting the taxpayer data is our top
priority. We had to--we're trying to balance the protection of
the taxpayer data with the use of the tool, and that is why we
reached out to the Department of Education to have discussions
about what we could take. We saw this is action that we needed
to take immediately, and we did take that--those actions to
come up with--to try to come up with a solution that would
mitigate the risk.
Mr. Walker. Now, the keyword is trying to come up with a
solution. I am not sure we have arrived at that. And according
to Mr. Runcie's written testimony, after the October 2016
discovery that the DRT could potentially be vulnerable, the IRS
increased monitoring of the tool for any suspicious activity.
Could you describe what that increased monitoring looked like?
Ms. Garza. That is correct. We--actually, we engaged with
our TIGTA friends and asked them, as well as the new cyber
analytics team that we have in place, to start looking for
suspicious activity. And actually it was because of that
increased monitoring that we had done that we identified that
there was suspicious activity occurring in January.
Mr. Walker. Yes. There was an incident also in February of
this year, I believe. Was that discovered by accident?
Ms. Garza. We have mechanisms in place, multilayer defense
mechanisms. One of the mechanisms is a notification to the
address of record to the individual whose data has been
identified. That actually led us to identify that we had an
issue. As we investigated that issue, we were able to find that
in fact there was a fraud that had taken place and we
immediately shut down the application.
Mr. Walker. So for the record you are saying that no, that
it wasn't discovered by accident?
Ms. Garza. There was a notice that was generated to the
taxpayer that had that taxpayer come in and notify us that
there was something amiss.
Mr. Walker. To me this is not only a question of taking
responsibility for the IRS and Department's web-accessible
services and data but of understanding the cybersecurity risks
these online services and applications face. And I certainly
agree with the Ranking Member Cummings. These are young
people's lives at stake, and to--as they are coming out and
getting started, to be able to put them on a path where they
are having to unravel this, I hope there is more of a sense of
urgency to deal with this issue than what presently seems to be
at the time.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Russell. The gentleman yields back.
And the chair would now like to recognize the gentlelady
from New Jersey, Mrs. Watson Coleman, for five minutes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and
good morning to all of you.
Mr. Runcie, in September the inspector general reported
that student loan companies misused the Department's system to
take advantage of students. As reprehensible as this finding
is, this is not the first time student loan companies have
acted against the best interests of the students they are
supposed to be serving. In 2015, the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau and the Department conducted a public inquiry
finding a vast universe of complaints regarding loan servicers.
And even more concerning, this current administration has
withdrawn a series of policy memos that have been issued from
the previous administration that were put in place to
strengthen protections for student loan borrowers. Mr. Runcie,
what impact would this action have on student loan borrowers?
And do you think that this could aggravate the issue of
predatory lending practices?
Mr. Runcie. Well, in terms of our focus, you know, our
focus from a servicing perspective is to make sure that we have
the highest quality outcomes for all the students and
borrowers. And, you know, we've done a--we've put in place a
series of actions over the years, and right now, we're going
through a re-competition among the servicers that you
referenced. Because we're in a procurement process, I can't
really talk about specifics, but I will just reiterate that we
are focused on having the highest quality product that we can
from a servicing perspective and generating the best outcomes
for students and borrowers.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Are you aware of the rollback of
certain oversight and accountabilities that had been instigated
or initiated in this administration that are overturning some
of those accountabilities that were designed to protect
students and vulnerabilities?
Mr. Runcie. I personally am not aware of any rollbacks.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Is there anyone on this panel that has
any knowledge of any recent actions on the part of either this
administration through the White House or the Department of
Education that will negatively impact the accountability of who
is and who is not a good person or entity to work in this
space? Is that a no? There is no one?
Ms. Garza. No.
Mr. Gray. No.
Mr. Corbin. No.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Interesting. Okay. This January, the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau filed a lawsuit against
one of the Nation's largest servicers of Federal and private
student loan Navient. According to the lawsuit, Navient cost
borrowers billions of dollars by withholding information about
income-based repayment programs that could have lowered
borrowers' monthly payments. Instead, they reportedly pushed
borrowers into forbearance, suspending their payments but not
the accrual of the compounding interest. Mr. Runcie, are you
familiar with these allegations in CFPB's lawsuit?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, I'm familiar with those allegations.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Navient services the student loans of
more than 12 million borrowers and roughly 6 million of whom
are serviced to contractors with the Department of Ed. Is that
so?
Mr. Runcie. I believe that's right.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. And Navient sought to dismiss CFPB's
complaint as part of its defense. It alleged, and I quote,
``the servicer acts in the lender's interest and there is no
expectation that the servicer will act in the interest of the
consumer.'' Is that right?
Mr. Runcie. I'm sorry. I didn't hear the last part.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. The servicers--the servicer ----
Mr. Runcie. Yes.
Mrs. Watson Coleman.--acts in the lender's interest and
there is no expectation that the servicer will act in the
interest of the consumer.
Mr. Runcie. Yes, I understand that statement. In the case
of, you know, private lenders, a servicer would be acting on
the behalf of private lenders. That's right.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Does it concern you that companies
like Navient publicly claim they have no responsibility to act
in the best interest of the students they are supposed to be
serving?
Mr. Runcie. We are currently in a procurement process and I
can't make a comment on that, of which Navient is also in the
procurement process so I can't make a comment on that. We're
making decisions about our servicers.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. All right then. I would expect that
what you were going to do is to look at information such as
this and not--we are not going to ask you again about someone
like Navient even though you can't express whatever is
happening with regard to the company right now.
Mr. Runcie. You know, what I can say is, I mean, we look at
past performance, we look at responsibility metrics. There are
criteria that we have to look at in terms of the process but --
--
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Well, I don't know by number the
executive order or the rollback that just took place as it
relates to looking back at a company's business and reputation,
but I think that is something you need to look at to see
whether or not it does negatively impact your ability to ensure
that the best is taking care of the best.
Mr. Runcie. Absolutely.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. And with that, I yield
back.
Ms. Foxx. [Presiding] The gentlewoman yields back.
The gentleman from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, is recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Jordan. I thank the chair.
Mr. Corbin, when did the IRS notify TIGTA that you guys had
a problem?
Mr. Corbin. Sir, the notification to TIGTA for the incident
on February 27 happened that same day.
Mr. Jordan. So you guys talked to Mr. Camus and his guys on
February 27 of this year?
Mr. Corbin. I did not personally talk to Mr. Camus ----
Mr. Jordan. Someone at the IRS?
Mr. Corbin.--but someone at the IRS did, yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Got it. And how many taxpayers are potentially
harmed by the hacking and the breach that took place?
Mr. Corbin. Approximately 100,000, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Hundred thousand people. And then the law
requires you to notify Congress when something like this
happens, doesn't it?
Mr. Corbin. I'm not familiar with that, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I will read it to you. This is a letter
from your boss, Mr. Koskinen. The Federal Information Security
Modernization Act and criteria provided in the Office of
Management and Budget guidance says this, that not later than
seven days after the date of an incident you should notify
Congress, right?
Mr. Corbin. Correct. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. So you are supposed to do it and you are
supposed to do it within seven days. Is that accurate?
Mr. Corbin. That sounds accurate, yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Okay. It doesn't just sound accurate. That is
the law.
Mr. Corbin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. So when did you tell Congress?
Mr. Corbin. Sir, I believe we notified Congress within that
seven-day timeframe from what I know.
Mr. Jordan. Really. Is that true, Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. Mr. Jordan, I'm not sure when they made
notification to Congress.
Mr. Jordan. Because we don't have it until April 6, which
is a lot longer than seven days. You learn on February 27, you
tell Congress on April 6.
Mr. Corbin?
Mr. Corbin. I'd have to go back and check that,
Congressman.
Mr. Jordan. Well, that is important, right?
Mr. Corbin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Mr. Koskinen testified on April 6 and that is
when he told us.
Mr. Corbin. Well, I ----
Mr. Jordan. He testified in front of the Senate.
Mr. Corbin. Yes, Congressman. I'd have to go back and take
that back and confirm that for you, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Well, I don't know that--well, we would
appreciate that, but this is when Congress first learned was on
April 6 that there had been an incident. And here is what the
statute says. It says, ``not later than seven days after the
date on which there is a reasonable basis to conclude that a
major incident has occurred.'' Would you describe this as
major, Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. The fact that it impacted potentially 100,000
people, I would say so.
Mr. Jordan. Same here. So we are wondering why you waited
so long.
Mr. Corbin. I don't have an answer to that, Congressman.
I'll go back and find out for you.
Mr. Jordan. Well, we would like to get that because,
frankly--well, let me turn to Mr. Camus.
Mr. Camus, is this the first time the IRS has waited to
tell Congress some important information?
Mr. Camus. Mr. Jordan, I'm not aware. I can't answer your
question.
Mr. Jordan. Well, maybe I will refresh your memory. There
was a little incident that happened over the last several years
where the Internal Revenue Service systematically and for a
sustained period of time targeted taxpayers based on their
political beliefs. Are you familiar with that situation, Mr.
Camus?
Mr. Camus. I am familiar with that.
Mr. Jordan. You did an investigation into that, didn't you?
Mr. Camus. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. A couple of investigations ----
Mr. Camus. A couple.
Mr. Jordan.--didn't you?
Mr. Camus. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. And was the IRS always forthcoming in a
timely fashion with important information in that investigation
you did, Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. We found that there were some mistakes that were
made and some materials that should have been turned over,
that's correct.
Mr. Jordan. Well, that is a nice way of saying it. I
appreciate that. You have got maybe a career in politics after
you are done at TIGTA, Mr. Camus, with that answer.
Let me just refresh your memory. The IRS knew there was a
gap in Lois Lerner's emails in February 2014. They did nothing
to stop the destruction of backup tapes, actually 421 backups.
You remember this, Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. Yes, sir, I do.
Mr. Jordan. Because it was your investigation that
discovered they destroyed 421 backup tapes, right?
Mr. Camus. That is correct, sir.
Mr. Jordan. Potentially 24,000 emails, right?
Mr. Camus. Yes, sir.
Mr. Jordan. And that all happened in March 2014, a month
after they knew there was a gap in her emails. And Mr. Koskinen
testified in April of 2014, but what you know what he told
Congress? June 13, 2014, is that right, Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. That's correct.
Mr. Jordan. So here we have again the Internal Revenue
Service, an agency that has a little bit of influence and
impact on American people's lives, with a major breach that the
law says you are supposed to tell Congress within one week,
within seven days. And what did they do? They wait 38 days. And
you know what--to add insult to injury, think about what
Congressman Walker just talked about, all the suspicious
activity that took place before February 27.
In fact, when Mr. Koskinen testified and said, oh, we are
putting you on notice, Congress, that there has been a major
breach, 100,000 taxpayers potentially impacted, look at what he
said in that testimony. He said this: April 6, 2017, Mr.
Koskinen testified in front of the Senate Finance and said,
quote, ``We have started working with Education in October
telling them we were very concerned,''--very concerned--``that
the system could be utilized by criminals.''
So Mr. Koskinen was on notice that there was problems,
potential problems, potential big problems. He even used the
term ``very concerned'' clear back in October of last year. We
have the major breach take place on the 27th when the IRS tells
you, hey, guys, we have got to look into this; this is real. We
have had all these things happen, suspicious activities ahead
of time, and they don't comply with the law and tell Congress
within a week. They wait 38 days to tell us. It is not supposed
to be how it works, is it, Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. It doesn't sound so, sir.
Mr. Jordan. No. And the IRS--once again, the IRS is
treating taxpayers the way they are not supposed to, and it is
why this committee has been so focused on trying to clean up
the mess over there and frankly I have been so focused on
saying Mr. Koskinen has to go.
With that, I yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Jordan.
Ms. Plaskett, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. I want to thank the lovely chairwoman this
morning for the opportunity to speak.
Thank you all for being here. Of course, everyone on both
sides of the aisle are very concerned about this issue. Most of
us have children and have our own student loans or have loans
that we are helping with the children that we care very much
about our future, as well as our constituents'.
I did, however, just want to touch on something that I know
one of my colleagues spoke about just a few moments ago, Mr.
Runcie, when they talked about the lawsuit with Navient. It is,
however, understood that this is a lawsuit so the interest of
both parties--you know, they both have allegations raised. But
Navient does have a lower default rate than some of the other
users or loan companies that--and they do have a propensity to
loan to minority and underserved communities, is that correct?
I understood that the default rate of the students who have
loans with Navient is a significantly lower potentially than
some of the other loan companies.
Mr. Runcie. I would have to confirm that. And a lower
default rate is better, right?
Ms. Plaskett. Right.
Mr. Runcie. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. Yes.
Mr. Runcie. But I'd have to confirm that.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay.
Mr. Runcie. And I know the portfolios aren't all the same.
They have different compositions and so sometimes there would
be natural, you know, differences in the default rates for the
various services.
Ms. Plaskett. Sure. Sure. Okay. So one thing that is really
interesting as well, Mr. Runcie, when we are talking about the
inspector general's report, it seems, you know, something that
we are all very focused on. And the IG warned that the systems
were, and I quote, ``being misused by commercial third parties
to take over borrower accounts.'' This is something that
Ranking Member Cummings talked about. These are things that we
are really very keen on because these are of course students
who are navigating a very difficult system. This is sometimes
some of the first instances where they are really delving into
their own finances, making decisions that are going to have an
impact on them for the rest of their lives.
So the commercial third parties are student loan companies
and student loan consolidators. Is that correct when we are
talking about ----
Mr. Runcie. That is right.
Ms. Plaskett.--the third parties that take over borrower's
accounts? And less than two weeks ago this committee conducted
an interview with the special agent in charge of conducting
that investigation for the IG, and he explained to the
committee that the information in these students' accounts is,
quote, ``of commercial interest for loan consolidators.''
Right?
Mr. Runcie. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. And that word commercial interest is very key
to me. He also told us that student loan companies, and I
quote, ``were controlling thousands of accounts or creating
thousands of accounts and controlling them.'' Mr. Runcie, is
this true? Were student loan companies actually using the
information of individuals they are there to serve in a manner
to control for commercial interests those accounts?
Mr. Runcie. Yes. My understanding is that they--it's a fee-
for-service, and so to the extent that they've got 1,000
clients, they're being charged for those services. So it would
be a commercial endeavor.
Ms. Plaskett. And do you have a list of the names of those
companies that were doing that?
Mr. Runcie. We've identified some. I don't know that we
have an exhaustive list of those companies.
Ms. Plaskett. Ms. Chairwoman, may I ask that we obtain a
list of every student loan company that were involved in the
activities?
And, Mr. Runcie, how long would it take you to provide
something like that to the committee?
Mr. Runcie. I don't want to commit because I'm not sure how
readily available ----
Ms. Plaskett. Come on, you can't give me like, you know, an
outside range time or anything like that? A week, two weeks, a
month?
Mr. Runcie. I'd say if you'd give us a month, that would be
appreciated.
Ms. Plaskett. Of course you would for the outside of what I
requested.
Mr. Runcie. Hey, I don't want to negotiate against myself.
Ms. Plaskett. Got you. Got you. Got you. Very good.
Ms. Plaskett. The special agent in charge also told us that
student loan companies were, I quote, ``aggressively pursuing
account holders and taking advantage of this.'' That sounds
outrageous. And could you explain to me not just with the
aggressively pursuing but what did he mean by taking advantage
of them?
Mr. Runcie. I don't want to speculate, but, you know, to
the extent that they're providing services and they have
account information, you know, they can receive correspondence
on their behalf and make decisions on their behalf. And those
decisions might benefit them commercially.
Ms. Plaskett. And are any of these same companies still
doing business with the Department of Education?
Mr. Runcie. Not that I know of.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Ms. Chairwoman, we have a
responsibility to help protect students from the kind of abuse,
and I am so very pleased that we are having this hearing to go
through this. And I believe the entire committee is very keen
on holding a follow-up hearing within the next--with the
student loan companies that are actually engaged in these
activities. And I hope that we can have the IG from the
Department of Education testify about what they have found.
Thank you very much for the information that you have
provided us, and I hope, Ms. Chairwoman, we are able to do
that. I yield back.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Plaskett. First of all, I want to
say thank you for your willingness to accommodate me on the
Floor the other night. It wasn't necessary, but I appreciate
that.
And I believe under the committee rules you have the right
to ask any witness for any information, and I am sure that will
be followed up with the staff. So thank you very much.
Mr. Hurd, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Madam Chairwoman.
I apologize if I review some information that has already
been discussed in this hearing. But raise your hand-- and this
is for all five of you--raise your hand if you are responsible
for FAFSA.gov.
All right. Let the record reflect Mr. Runcie, Mr. Gray, and
Ms. Garza raised their hand.
Raise your hand if you are responsible for the DRT tool or
also known as the FSA-D tool?
All right. Let the record reflect Ms. Garza and Mr. Corbin
raised their hand.
In October 25, 2016 IRS, conducted an e-authentication risk
assessment, and it concluded that the DRT tool was in need of
stronger authentication measures. Is that correct, Ms. Garza?
Ms. Garza. Yes, it is, sir.
Mr. Hurd. And were steps taken to improve the
authentication measures?
Ms. Garza. We started to work with the Department of Ed --
--
Mr. Hurd. You started to work with the Department of Ed.
What steps--what did you actually do since October 25, 2016 to
strengthen the DRT tool?
Ms. Garza. We increase monitoring on that application so
that we could become alerted should something--we see something
suspicious.
Mr. Hurd. Were those efforts successful?
Ms. Garza. In January it was those efforts that identified
that there was a suspicious activity occurring, and at that
time we partnered with the Department of Ed to get our two
cyber teams together to review that suspicious activity. And we
were informed by the Department of Ed that that was not--it was
normal behavior.
Mr. Hurd. What steps are being taken now to strengthen the
authentication of DRT?
Ms. Garza. We have already developed and implemented an
encryption solution on the IRS side. We are working with the
Department of Ed ----
Mr. Hurd. How is encryption going to help with
authentication if you have a user that has stolen credentials?
Ms. Garza. The authentication solution that we had looked
at was not satisfactory to provide the usability of the
application, so we have moved to an encryption. So unless that
----
Mr. Hurd. But that doesn't answer the question. The
question is how does encryption on the backend help with
authentication of an attacker that is using stolen credentials?
Ms. Garza. It does not improve authentication. What it does
do is does not allow the data to be revealed to someone other
than the actual applicant.
Mr. Hurd. But if you have stolen credentials and you are
able to spoof that, you have the credentials, what are you
doing ----
Ms. Garza. So ----
Mr. Hurd.--to prevent that from happening?
Ms. Garza. There are a set of keys that--on the IRS that is
only shared with the Department of Education. So as the
applicant comes in and releases--tells us to release the data
to the Department of Education, they don't have access. They
don't have a key to de-encrypt that data. Only the Department
of Education, once it gets to their side, that they will be
able to de-encrypt the data.
Mr. Hurd. Okay.
Ms. Garza. So that applicant ----
Mr. Hurd. So, Mr. Gray, how--you are responsible for
FAFSA.gov.
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hurd. What are you doing to strengthen authentication
if somebody has stolen credentials to actually authenticate it
to the end-user?
Mr. Gray. We are looking at several proactive measures to
----
Mr. Hurd. We are looking portends that you are doing
something in the future. Do you have a past tense verb that you
can use on what you have done?
Mr. Gray. For the Department, we follow Defense in depth
and we have a whole series of actions that we're taking to
ensure that we protect our systems.
Mr. Hurd. And what are those series of actions?
Mr. Gray. Some of them I referenced in my opening statement
regarding data loss prevention, web access firewalls ----
Mr. Hurd. So how does data loss prevention help with
authentication?
Mr. Gray. It would not. For authentication for FAFSA, the--
this is the balance between--this is an application form where
users are actually inputting their own data to gain access to
apply for a student loan.
Mr. Hurd. Yes, I get that. And ----
Mr. Gray. So ----
Mr. Hurd.--you have got to--it is your responsibility,
right, to confirm that the person that is entering that data is
indeed the person who owns the data. And I recognize this is a
tough job, okay? I recognize that what you have to do is
difficult. But you still haven't explained to me--we have
proven and we have seen with the theft of over 100,000--or the
impact on 100,000 students that the authentication mechanism
within FAFSA.gov and the DRT tool is lacking. And my concern is
that everybody is doing this. And I want to know what are you
doing. And if there is not--if you need additional authorities
to improve authentication on FAFSA.gov, I want to hear that,
too.
Mr. Gray. Thank you. The authorities that I have through
FITARA has been very adequate. In terms of what we're doing,
this is the balance between accessibility of the tool, which at
this point is--it is a web application where students and
prospective borrowers are coming in to apply. The level of
authentication for that is currently set where it is so that we
can cast the net as broadly as we can to potential borrowers.
The identity proofing piece comes in when we are dispersing the
funds.
For the DRT, the challenge--or what we're doing is--we're
looking at doing is masking and encrypting the data so that if
an identity thief logs in through our system, they will not see
that data, which would not allow them to exploit this
vulnerability.
Mr. Hurd. Madam Chairwoman, I apologize for going over my
time.
Ms. Foxx. No problem.
Without objection, I am going to recognize Mr. Duncan for a
unanimous consent request.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you very much, Madam Chair. I
realize you are not going to be able to get to me for question
and so I simply want to make a unanimous consent request to
include in the record at this point an email from one of my
constituents, a Melissa Macko, who is the financial aid
administrator at the Tennessee College of Applied Technology
because she has four good suggestion to help with this problem
in her email. Thank you very much.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Duncan.
Ms. Foxx. Ms. Kelly, you are recognized for five minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Madam Chair.
In recent years, hacking, identity theft, and cyber crimes
have been on the rise. I have been the victim myself. Federal
agencies have to do their part to secure their systems, but
Congress must acknowledge the impact its own actions have had
on the ability of agencies to protect their IT systems. Many
agencies face serious challenges in modernizing outdated legacy
IT systems and implementing stronger cybersecurity measures
under severe budget cuts that have been imposed by Republican-
controlled Congresses.
One of the agencies hit hardest by these cuts is the IRS.
In May 2016, the IRS then-chief information officer Terence
Milholland testified, and I quote, ``the IRS budget system is
the most critical challenge facing IT modernization.''
Mr. Corbin and Ms. Garza, what are the impacts of budget
cuts on the ability of the IRS to modernize and secure IT
systems? Are we putting taxpayers at greater risk?
Mr. Corbin. So, Congresswoman, one of the things that
Congress did do for us last year was appropriate the additional
$290 million. We did take a portion of that funding to help us
get the tools that Ms. Garza had described to help us identify
and monitor our systems more closely.
We also continue to invest in the return review program or
RRP, and so that allows us to create rules and filters so that
as returns come in, we're able to evaluate those returns and
then--for potential fraud or identity theft and then stop those
returns before they are actually paid out.
Ms. Garza. So I want--I think it's on. I want to thank
Congress for the money that we did receive. That was extremely
beneficial. It allowed us to put new technologies in place that
are actually protecting our systems at a much higher level than
we had done in the past. In this incident itself, we were able
to address the situation a lot quicker than we would have an
able to in the past because of the new monitoring capability
and the data analytics capabilities that were implemented using
those resources.
Ms. Kelly. And would you say more is needed or ----
Ms. Garza. We would always be thankful for any additional
resources and continued support in this area.
Ms. Kelly. To make us more secure?
Ms. Garza. Yes.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. It is not just IT systems that have been
affected by these resource lapses. Mr. Milholland testified
last year that increased progress on systems modernization and
cybersecurity measures, and I quote, ``will require significant
sustained additional resources in the IT area. Do you agree
with that assessment?
Ms. Garza. I would agree with Mr. Milholland's assessment
of our needs.
Ms. Kelly. Mr. Corbin?
Mr. Corbin. Yes, ma'am, I would agree as well.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Yet again, Congress has failed to ensure
that agencies have the resources they need to carry out their
missions. For instance, under the IRS Restructuring and Reform
Act of 1998, Congress gave IRS the authority to hire a limited
number of individuals to staff critical technical and
professional positions at salary levels greater than general
schedule rates. This critical pay authority was intended to
help the agency attract highly qualified individuals with
advanced technical expertise who might otherwise be available
for government service at normal Federal salary levels. The IRS
used its authority to fill 168 of these positions from 1998 to
2013.
Does critical pay play a role in making Federal Government
jobs more appealing to highly qualified technical individuals
who may be interested in public service but could be earning a
much higher salary in the private sector?
Ms. Garza. Congresswoman, the critical--streamlined
critical pay authority that we've had was extremely beneficial
to the IRS. Because of that authority, we were able to bring on
board high-level architects, engineers, and cybersecurity
experts. Over the last several years, they have helped us
ensure that we were doing what was needed to secure our
perimeter and make sure that our systems were running much
better.
The important component of this was the streamlined part of
the critical pay. It allowed us to offer a job when we had--
when we found somebody after the announcement was made and we
identified somebody much quicker than the normal process would
have been. A lot of times what we found was without the
streamlined component, when we got back to the individual to
see if they were still interested, the time had elapsed so long
that we were not able--or they were no longer available or
willing to come to work for us. So it is a critical component.
Ms. Kelly. But this pay authority expired in 2013 and has
not been reauthorized, so American taxpayers lose when Congress
ignores its responsibilities. Congress can and should swiftly
pass streamlined critical pay reauthorization and act to
provide adequate resource levels for cybersecurity at all
agencies.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Ms. Kelly.
Mr. Issa, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Issa. Thank you, Madam Chair. And I look forward to the
reauthorization if we can get the reforms that were required as
of our last couple of hearings on the use of those 168 slots.
But let me go on to the actual data breach. Ms. Garza,
under your interpretation of the data breach, this is a data
breach, right? It is a major incident and it is a data breach.
Is that correct?
Ms. Garza. Under the definition of data breach it is
classified as a data breach.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So we have had a data breach. Let me turn
it around for a moment because both you and Mr. Gray said that
you had no--and I think Mr. Runcie all said the same thing. You
had no information that personally identifiable information had
specifically been compromised. That is pretty--paraphrasing all
of you?
Ms. Garza. That's correct.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Well, I will go to IRS first. Ms. Garza,
you were there for the kickoff of the Affordable Care Act
website. And, as you know, in that website if somebody looking
at their information at the top of the screen simply went up
there and changed the State, they might actually look at
somebody's personally identifiable information. That was a
vulnerability that was discovered right in there in the HTTP
line, right? Do you remember that?
Ms. Garza. That was on the CMS site ----
Mr. Issa. Right.
Ms. Garza.--and so I don't have any detail ----
Mr. Issa. Okay. Well ----
Ms. Garza.--specifics on that.
Mr. Issa.--just for historical sake, I actually did it. You
could--and somebody did it themselves. You could simply change
the State and you could end up with somebody else's
identifiable information on your screen.
Now, they would have said that there was no breach, as Mr.
Gray is sort of saying, because there was no proof anyone took
that information and used it. But let me ask it another way. If
you put a team of white knight hackers onto this vulnerability,
could you have harvested information in your estimation?
Ms. Garza. I think the evidence is that after the fact,
yes, we--there were people that were accessing that application
for bad reasons.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So, Mr. Gray, I want to get you on the
record under oath with an accountable statement. If there is
evidence that people did nefariously gain some information,
whether they used it or not, and that a team of white knight
hackers or bad people could have harvested information, don't
you have to admit that this is by definition a data breach, not
just a hypothetical vulnerability but a vulnerability that was
recognized that caused the shutdown of this tool?
Mr. Gray. Thank you for the question and the request for
clarification. I would say that when I am speaking about a data
breach, I am speaking about the Department of Education's
systems, and through our analysis, there was no Department data
that was compromised or viewed through this. This was a case of
unlawfully obtained information that was used to go through our
system to pull information from the DRT.
Mr. Issa. Okay. But in this case we are talking about you
together represent like an automobile, and you are saying that
your right-hand wheel didn't come off but the left-hand wheel
did or could have. Ultimately, the construction of the entire
product was brought to a halt as a result of a failure, right?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay. And both of you--I just want to make sure
because I heard Ms. Garza say it--but both of you admit that
under FITARA, under the reforms, as CIOs, you have budget
authority and the authority necessary to shut down or to make
what changes are needed to control the security and accuracy of
your work. Is that right?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So now my question to you in the short time
remaining is, although this is about education and it is about
the tremendous impact on students who will have a burdensome
time applying, if we are to do the next level of reforms that
this committee would be required to, if we have given each of
you authority and one of you says I have got a breach and the
other says I don't, how do we resolve--within the hierarchy of
the executive office of the President so to speak how do we
resolve making sure that the failure of the whole is in fact
controlled by somebody? In other words, I am looking at the two
of you. You gave slightly different testimony. I think you have
come together on testimony.
But I want to know how in the future we do two things: one,
make sure that somebody above you, sort of a super CIO, can
make sure that this that this--that everyone--somebody is
looking at the entire vehicle and not just a left tire and
right tire; and then secondly, where were those white knights
in this process? Where were the people who scrubbed this--third
parties who scrubbed this data and system trying to find those
vulnerabilities? Because somebody found it and it wasn't either
of your teams. I will take an answer from either of you in the
time that I am allowed.
Mr. Gray. I don't know where those white knights were, sir.
I do know that there were other entities within the government,
USDS specifically, that was assisting with this as well. So I
don't know where they were.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So as Will said earlier, before the fact,
you don't know. After the fact, of course, you could re-create
it.
Ms. Garza, the two questions to you. You are very senior in
this position. You have had a lot of experience. One, how do we
bring together organizations like you that have become
interdependent to make sure there is oversight of the entire
combined authority? And two, how do we make sure there are
white knights proactively in the future to try to find these
things and maybe to concurrently and constantly try to find
them?
Ms. Garza. Congressman, we actually do have processes in
place that--where we do penetration testing where we have
individuals that come in and test our applications to ensure
that they are not subject to white hackers coming in and
getting away with the data.
Mr. Issa. Although, white hackers I am okay with.
Ms. Garza. White hackers, black hats ----
Mr. Issa. Bad guys.
Ms. Garza. So we do have that process in place and we do
use it. I don't recall right now if that process was utilized
on this application. It clearly should have, and perhaps we
would have been able to avoid this.
As far as your other question, as the IRS continues to work
with other agencies to provide data, it becomes more and more
important that we actually address the concern that you have
raised. I don't have an answer for you right now, but it's
something we need to be very thoughtful about because I think
this is going to start happening more often.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Ms. Foxx. The gentleman's time is expired.
In the priority of the chair, I think will be helpful to
this committee and to the Congress as a whole to get some sense
of what kind of priority you put on testing your systems
because it is pretty obvious that something like this should
have been tested and should have been aggressively tested
anytime you are sharing data with another agency. So I hope the
committee will follow up on that.
Mr. Raskin, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. And Madam Chair, thank you very much.
Mr. Runcie, there has been a documented pattern of abuse
with the student loan companies for many years now. Lots of
scams have taken place. In 2012, the IG reported that a student
loan company improperly accessed student borrower accounts to
change the contact information of the borrowers in order to,
quote, ``make it difficult for the borrowers to be contacted by
their loan servicers. Why would they do that? What is the scam?
Can you explain to us how that works for them?
Mr. Runcie. Thank you. So they're commercial entities and
they're fee-for-service entities, so they ----
Mr. Raskin. These are legitimate businesses then? These are
not internet scammers or ----
Mr. Runcie. They're not Internet scammers but the nature of
the interaction between, you know, those entities and the
students and borrowers, I can't characterize that. But they're
businesses that are formed to provide commercial services,
whether it's loan consolidation or something else.
It seems and it appears that in cases where they want to
have a level of control to create a transaction or to continue
through the process, they change email addresses and
potentially mailing addresses and so forth to facilitate the
process that they are taking the students and borrowers
through.
Mr. Raskin. But how do they profit from it? They take over
the student's account?
Mr. Runcie. They--it's a--they may charge it--and I'm just
going to make up a number. Let's say they charge $100 for
consolidation or more. So there's an agreement that they will
consolidate the loans and create a lower payment amount or
whatever the agreement is, and they would be paid for that.
Mr. Raskin. So did this actually take place? I mean, in one
example the IG reported in 2013 that a company charged
borrowers a monthly fee--I think it was $60--in order to put
their loans into forbearance with the promise of enrolling them
in the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program eventually,
which they weren't qualified for. But did that actually happen
with people?
Mr. Runcie. My understanding is that it--there are these
companies that provide these services, and a part of that
process sometimes is they put people into forbearance with the
understanding that they're ultimately going to go into
consolidation. So those are third-party entities involved in a
transaction that doesn't include the Department, you know,
except for the fact that they're using the email addresses and
the resources that we have to facilitate transactions where
they make money. As ----
Mr. Raskin. So just to get you straight there, they are
using your website essentially as the framework to access their
victims. Then, they prey on the people. But as far as you know,
they might still be in this scam relationship with the
students?
Mr. Runcie. Yes. We've looked at IP addresses and we've
looked at some of the activity, and in some cases you will
actually see loan consolidations. Whether it's 10 percent or
100 percent of their clients, we don't know. What we've
stressed is user education to make sure people are aware that
they can get these services done for free by leveraging
resources that the Department provides.
Mr. Raskin. Well, I get complaints on a daily basis pretty
much from my constituents who feel like the whole system is a
scam, but you are talking about a scam on top of a scam in a
way. You are talking about people who are in serious debt from
college and then some of these kind of low-riding companies are
able to access them--charge them more money to offer them
either real or completely illusory services, right?
Mr. Runcie. That's right.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Who is the ombudsman and champion of
America's students and college graduates who is looking out for
the scams in the IRS, the Department of Education, at every
level of government? Is there anybody?
Mr. Runcie. I think we play a role. The Department plays a
role. So, you know, for instance, I mentioned user education.
The IG has noticed that this is an issue, and we're doing some
things with our systems to make sure that we give them an
additional tool or lever that they can use to prosecute, you
know, bad entities. So, you know, we play a role in that and --
--
Mr. Raskin. How many prosecutions have there been since
this was revealed?
Mr. Runcie. I don't have that information.
Mr. Raskin. Have there been any prosecutions?
Mr. Runcie. I--the--we don't prosecute. It would have to be
through the IG or some other ----
Mr. Raskin. And let me just say I know everybody up there
is working hard for the American people and has a tough job,
but the overall institutional sense that I get is one of basic
passivity and reactivity to events rather than getting on top
of it. We have got millions of people who are carrying these
loans. I think there is more student debt in America than there
is credit card debt now. It is more than $1 trillion. And
obviously, there is a lot of money being made there, including
by people who are going out and preying on people who are
already laboring under the burden of these loans who--do we
need to create an ombudsperson, somebody who is just a champion
of the students and the graduates to make sure that they are
not getting ripped off at every step of the process?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, I mean, we have an ombudsman, but it's
not--it's sort of a pervasive all-inclusive person that sort of
challenge--you know, challenges resources across government,
across, you know, IGs, across operations. So, you know, that is
potentially something that can be useful, but ----
Mr. Raskin. Where is that ombudsperson located? Is that --
--
Mr. Runcie. The ombudsman is located within FSA. They deal
with complaints and issues that we can resolve. There are
operational issues, so the customer service issues. They could
be, you know, school-related issues. But in terms of ----
Mr. Raskin. Did that person ever raise any of these issues
with you about the scams being perpetrated on students through
the website?
Mr. Runcie. No. Those scams are done by third-party
entities that are outside of our scope. And so ----
Mr. Raskin. So basically, it was nobody's responsibility to
try to identify that threat? Is that right? I mean, that is not
a gotcha question. I am just trying to figure out ----
Mr. Runcie. No, no ----
Mr. Raskin.--to prevent this from happening again because,
you know, there were cases of this going back four or five
years now.
Mr. Runcie. Yes. The--again, the commercial entities that
are marketing to students to provide services to those students
and the students agree to, you know, obtain those services, and
the questionable nature and value of those services is not
something that we police. What we've been trying to do was
provide user education and let people know that, you know, they
don't need to use these resources. And we've--you know, working
with partner organizations and so forth, but we don't have any
control over those entities.
Mr. Raskin. Thank you very much for your answers, and I
yield back, Madam Chair.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Raskin.
Mr. Hice, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Corbin, do you have any idea how much the IRS loses to
fraudulent tax returns each year?
Mr. Corbin. No, Congressman. I can bring that back for you
or go back and get that information for you.
Mr. Hice. Please do. But would it surprise you that in 2013
alone it was over $5 billion? Does that come as a surprise to
you?
Mr. Corbin. It does not come as a surprise, Congressman.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So it is no surprise that over $5 billion--
let's just say that is the average year, $5 billion a year plus
or minus in fraudulent returns--and now, as you--as has been
clearly established, ballpark 100,000 taxpayers put at risk as
thieves breach the DRT or--do you have any idea how many
fraudulent returns resulted from those 100,000 taxpayers?
Mr. Corbin. So, Congressman, what I know is that of the--
we have received about 111,000 returns filed under those Social
Security numbers. Of those returns, 80 percent of them were
either stopped by our filters prior to their refunds being paid
or they were the actual legitimate taxpayer.
Mr. Hice. Well, that is good information, but that was not
my question. I want to know how many fraudulent tax returns
came from those 100,000.
Mr. Corbin. Yes, sir. We have confirmed about 29,000
returns as identity theft.
Mr. Hice. Okay. And how many of those were fraudulent is my
question. Commissioner Koskinen said it was about 8,000.
Mr. Corbin. Yes, well, there are--so, Congressman, there
are 8,000 returns that were not stopped by our filters that we
have not been able to determine ----
Mr. Hice. That were fraudulent?
Mr. Corbin. That we have not been able to determine if they
were fraudulent or the legitimate taxpayer.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, that was my question. I would
appreciate it if you would answer the question rather than run
around it.
Mr. Corbin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hice. Do you have any idea how much money was lost due
to those 8,000 fraudulent returns?
Mr. Corbin. I believe that is about $32 million, sir.
Mr. Hice. It is about $30 million. Does the IRS reimburse
the fraudulent tax returns from those who were victims?
Mr. Corbin. So when a true taxpayer comes in and files a
return, they do get their full refund that they're entitled to.
Mr. Hice. Okay. And who pays for that?
Mr. Corbin. That comes out of the Treasury, sir.
Mr. Hice. So the taxpayers pay for it?
Mr. Corbin. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hice. So we had $32 million just out of this 100,000
people, 8,000 fraudulent returns. So is that $30 million, does
it include the reimbursement from the victims?
Mr. Corbin. No, sir, it does not.
Mr. Hice. All right. So we are talking 60, $65 million in
this one incident. We are talking if we have $5 billion a year
in fraudulent returns, we are probably talking $10 billion that
it costs the taxpayers every year after the victims are paid
back. Does that ----
Mr. Corbin. So of the 32, Congressman, again, we have not
confirmed whether that is a fraudulent return or the true
taxpayer.
Mr. Hice. Okay. I am just going by what Commissioner
Koskinen said, and I would think that he would be accurate in
that information.
Ms. Garza, I am still scratching my head over your comments
earlier, that as far as you are concerned, you didn't know of
any breach whatsoever, and yet it is pretty well confirmed
there was a breach here and you even came back around and
admitted that a little while ago.
Ms. Garza. It depends on the timing, sir. In September we
----
Mr. Hice. It depends on whether or not anyone broke into
the system. That is what determines a breach. And it just--I
tell you, I just struggle. It appears to me at the end of the
day--you are either in denial of what happened or you are
incompetent or you are just untruthful in what is happening
here. And I go back with what has been shared, too. The abuse
that has been inflicted on American citizens by the IRS is
inexcusable and it is time that there is accountability and
some change that takes place at the IRS. This is just--it is so
bothersome it is indescribable.
Mr. Gray, let me come to you. It is my understanding that
the Department may have the data retrieval tool operation for
the purposes of income-based repayment plans back up in May or
June. Is that correct?
Mr. Gray. That is my understanding, sir.
Mr. Hice. Okay. That being said, if it is going--this has
taken more or less three months to fix it, correct?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Hice. Okay. If it has taken three months, why in the
world was this not addressed last fall?
Mr. Gray. Unfortunately, I can't answer that question
because I am not involved ----
Mr. Hice. Who can answer that question?
Mr. Gray. Mr. Runcie.
Mr. Runcie. It wasn't addressed--I think it's what we'd
said a little bit before, which was we were making a decision
at the time based upon the fact that there wasn't any
criminal--material criminal activity. What the commissioner
said was we would continue to monitor the situation, and once
there was confirmed criminal activity, we would take the system
down. So that was the focus of it, and then March 3 when there
was--when we were contacted, the system was taken down.
Mr. Hice. The commissioner said that identity thieves used
it to put forth false tax returns and made it clear that there
was criminal activity, and that because of such, the system was
going to have to be shut down. It looks like we are talking out
of both sides of our mouth.
Madam Chair, I thank you for indulging me extra time. I
yield back.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much, Mr. Hice.
Mr. Clay, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Clay. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I find it deeply concerning that the Trump
administration has started rolling back the protections that
help ensure that students are not taken advantage of by
predatory loan companies.
Mr. Runcie, Secretary of Education DeVos recently rolled
back a critical protection put in place during the Obama
administration. This protection prohibited loan servicers from
charging up to 16 percent in interest on overdue student loans
if borrowers entered a loan rehabilitation program within 60
days of default. Mr. Runcie, why did she rescind that
protective order?
Mr. Runcie. I'm not aware--there was a policy memo that was
rescinded. Is that what you're referring to, Representative
Clay?
Mr. Clay. Yes.
Mr. Runcie. Yes? So we--again, we're in the process of
going through a competition for servicers, and the focus of
that competition is to make sure that we have the best contract
in place that's focused on high quality outcomes for students
and borrowers. So that's what we're focused on. There hasn't
been anything communicated from the Secretary that would change
our ability to go forward and to make sure that there's a
vehicle in place to make sure that we optimize outcomes for
students and borrowers.
Mr. Clay. Now, doesn't that action place the financial
interest of the loan companies over the interest of our
students?
Mr. Runcie. That's not what we're doing, and that's not
what's been communicated to us.
Mr. Clay. Well, now, does it signal the loan companies that
they can return to the predatory practices they engaged in
before that take advantage of students? I mean, look, you and I
know that people struggle to pay these student loans, so they
came up with a way to give them some kind of relief, and now we
are going to throw that out?
Mr. Runcie. No, I--look, I share your focus on making sure
that we have the best circumstances for borrowers and students
and, you know, if you look at income-driven repayment plans,
which is a tool that was put in place to make it easier for
students to manage their obligations and their debt, that has
risen substantially. Our servicers and the Department is
focused on making sure people get into plans that allow them to
maintain ----
Mr. Clay. Okay.
Mr. Runcie.--and manage their debt.
Mr. Clay. Okay. Let's talk about those plans. Just last
month, the Secretary withdrew another critical consumer
protection afforded to student borrowers. Under the Secretary's
order, contracts for debt collection will no longer be based on
a loan company's history of helping borrowers but can again be
based on a company's ability to collect debt. Can you explain
why this change was made?
Mr. Runcie. Actually, the evaluation--and again, we're in
procurement mode so there are certain things I can't talk
about--but the actual evaluation does include looking at past
performance and responsibility, as well as operational
performance. So it is--the process is more than just looking at
the ability to recover.
Mr. Clay. Yes, but doesn't that go back to allowing these
companies to pray on borrowers, I mean, and make that the
standard operating procedure, that at all costs collect the
debt?
Mr. Runcie. I can't speculate on that, sir.
Mr. Clay. And, look, there have been troubling reports
recently that the Department is reversing previous
determinations that student loan borrowers qualified for a loan
forgiveness program to encourage public service. Borrowers may
have relied for years on these determinations to plan their
educations, their careers, and their lives, and this program
started in 2007. Under this program, borrowers can have the
remainder of their Federal student loans forgiven after making
10 years' worth of payments if they serve full-time in public
service jobs. Is that what is going on?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, I'm aware of the issue, and my
understanding is that there is potentially some litigation
around that. But, you know, the Public Service Loan Forgiveness
is a vehicle that's out there. If you make payments for 10
years on time, you could be forgiven the remainder of that.
That program is in place and we operationalize it.
Mr. Clay. And are you intending on changing it?
Mr. Runcie. I'm not aware that there's any intention to
change it. You know, that's an overall departmental
perspective.
Mr. Clay. It all comes down to let's scam these students,
let's scam these borrowers, and let's take care of the
servicers. And I think you should be ashamed of yourselves.
Mr. Runcie. Well, what I can say is that--and I can say
this personally--is that there is a dedicated staff at the
Department that's been there for quite some time, and our focus
is not to facilitate or aid and abet any situation that
compromises students and borrowers. We're committed to making
sure they have the resources to be successful. We know it's
difficult. It's a huge portfolio. But my intention is the same
as your intention, which is to make sure that we don't have a
structure that compromises any ----
Mr. Clay. God help the borrowers.
Ms. Foxx. The gentleman's time is expired.
The ranking member is recognized for a unanimous consent
request.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I want to
just submit for the record a letter dated May 1, 2017, to the
Honorable Kathleen Tighe just requesting certain documents with
regard to this hearing.
Ms. Foxx. Without objection.
Ms. Foxx. The chair will recognize herself for five
minutes.
I have to say that I agree with my colleague from Georgia
who was here a few minutes ago that this situation of none of
you all or people in your agency has been willing to take
responsibility for what has happened. Either you are in denial
or incompetent. I think the American people watching this are
feeling the same way. I am troubled by my colleagues wanting to
distract from the incompetence of the FSA and the IRS on
display here today.
I want us to go after any bad actors outside the system,
but our number one priority is to protect the American people.
And everybody who works in this country is affected by the IRS.
So, yes, we want to protect students from any unsavory
characters, but all Americans are affected by the IRS if they
file their taxes, and most of them do. Thank goodness we have a
system where most people voluntarily do what they are supposed
to do.
So the problem we have with our government agencies is
there is no accountability for any of you individually, and
that is a shame, a real shame on this country, that you all can
ignore the continued incompetence and not be held responsible.
I do have some questions. The Department has taken some
steps, Mr. Gray, Mr. Runcie, to mitigate the burdens on
students' families and institutions caused by the DRT
suspension, but I am concerned about the potential fraud the
flexibilities you have put in place may cause. How is the
Department protecting against fraudulent income reporting or
ensuring that no new doorways to fraud are opened in this
process? And I would like specifics, please.
Mr. Runcie. Well, in terms of--and thank you, Chairman
Foxx--Chairwoman Foxx. In terms of specifics, you know, as you
know, the verification--the backend verification is something
that we've used along with, you know, the schools. So we do
regression analysis and we come up with a formula that
indicates a level of risk.
And so what we've done in terms of giving flexibility is we
would reduce the lowest-risk element based upon a regression
analysis so that even if we lessen the verification burden, it
would be on a risk-mitigated basis. So we would only eliminate
the lowest-risk applicants potentially.
So the other part is that we're going to do this for a
limited period of time, right, because we're going to get the
tool back up October 1. And so for all the FAFSA cycles going
forward, that won't be an issue. So it's somewhat of a
temporary way to address the--to balance the burden to the
schools against the risk to taxpayers.
Ms. Foxx. Mr. Gray, do you have anything to add to that?
Mr. Gray. I would--yes, ma'am. I would say that there are
also technical controls that we are looking at putting in
place, and I would be happy to give more in-depth details about
those controls specifically, but I would not want to reveal
sensitive information right here.
Ms. Foxx. I understand.
So, Mr. Runcie, you touched on this a minute ago, that you
are trying to get the system back up for the 2018 FAFSA filing
period. Recognizing the balance between security and access,
can you make the commitment to ensure there is no opportunity
for the DRT to be misused again when it is once again
operational? And I want to ask each one of you answer that
question yes or no. Mr. Runcie?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, because the ----
Ms. Foxx. That is all I need to know.
Mr. Runcie. Okay. Yes.
Ms. Foxx. Mr. Gray?
Mr. Gray. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Foxx. Ms. Garza?
Ms. Garza. I'm unsure.
Ms. Foxx. You are not sure?
Mr. Corbin?
Mr. Corbin. I'm also unsure.
Ms. Foxx. Mr. Camus?
Mr. Camus. We will be watching closely.
Ms. Foxx. I think you have given the American people great
confidence today from the IRS when you tell us you cannot
secure the systems.
Mr. Runcie, I want to come back to you. I have been hearing
troubling reports regarding the collection of defaulted student
loans, and we have been hearing a lot about that in here this
morning. Currently, struggling borrowers in default are without
the critical services needed to rehabilitate their loans or
access other benefits designed to lessen the impact of default.
This is the responsibility of the Department. Can I get a
commitment from you and the Department to provide my staff with
critical information needed to assess the current loan default
situation?
Mr. Runcie. Absolutely.
Ms. Foxx. And when?
Mr. Runcie. Two weeks.
Ms. Foxx. And when? Can we get--when will we know what the
critical information is? When will you get that to us?
Mr. Runcie. So we can define what the critical information
is within two weeks, and we could get you the information
within a month because--so we'll have that to you within a
month.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you for telling us that. We will hold you
to it.
Mr. Runcie. Thank you.
Ms. Foxx. Mr. Connolly, you are recognized for five
minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
I just want to say the breach at the Department of
Education is something we have been warning about on this
committee for quite some time. The Department of Education
holds data on 139 million individuals. And I would echo what
our colleague from Ohio, Mr. Jordan, said that the Department
of Education may very well be in breach of law, and we are
going to explore that.
However, what--Mr. Scott? I was just going to yield to Mr.
Scott. Is he--all right. Sorry. Then I will pursue.
Mr. Gray, are you familiar with FISMA?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. Connolly. And what does FISMA require you to do, the
Department of Education?
Mr. Gray. To protect our information assets for the
Department.
Mr. Connolly. Well, that is not all it does. Doesn't it
have a reporting requirement with respect to the legislative
branch?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir, it does.
Mr. Connolly. And what is that reporting requirement?
Mr. Gray. Within seven days of an incident to report ----
Mr. Connolly. And did the Department of Education comply
with that seven-day reporting requirement?
Mr. Gray. Sir, through our analysis of nearly 89,000 Social
Security numbers, we did not identify that Department data was
compromised in this situation. This was a situation where
unlawfully obtained information was used to go through our
system to access information through the DRT, which is why we
did report it to US-CERT, and when it was identified that the
compromise was through the DRT, we--that is when we did not
report this as a major incident because our information--the
information that the Department holds was not compromised.
Mr. Connolly. And is that still your position?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. So from your point of view FISMA has not been
triggered?
Mr. Gray. A major breach of Department information was not
compromised.
Mr. Connolly. Is that the language of the law, that a major
breach has to be compromised? That is to say a major breach has
to lead to the compromise of data?
Mr. Gray. No, sir. The--when the IRS reported this and we
were notified on March 3, it was identified as an--the--an IRS
system. It was not a Department of Education system. We did a
thorough analysis of all of our system through FAFSA and
nothing indicated to my knowledge that any of our information
was compromised.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Camus, is that your view?
Mr. Camus. We have yet to determine the timeliness of the
reporting of the incident, sir.
Mr. Connolly. No, that is not my question. My question is
do you concur with Mr. Gray that there was no breach of data?
Mr. Camus. We ----
Mr. Connolly. Compromise of data?
Mr. Camus. We would view it as once somebody was able to
see somebody else's data, that that in fact has been a breach.
Mr. Connolly. I would, too, and therefore, I would argue
FISMA is triggered. Would you agree?
Mr. Camus. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Well, Mr. Gray, it sure does sound like you
are splitting hairs and you are coming up with a criterion that
was not envisioned in the law itself, nor was it reflected in
the language of the law itself. I mean, we don't have traffic
laws that allow you to decide, well, I didn't hurt anyone. Yes,
I was speeding, but I didn't hurt anyone, so therefore, I
shouldn't get a ticket. I mean, the law is there to make sure
that the legislative branch is informed in a timely fashion
when this kind of activity occurs. And the reason isn't so that
we are keeping score. It is to make sure that we are doing what
we can on our part to protect sensitive data of American
citizens.
And it seems to me that it was incumbent upon the
Department of Education to inform us in a timely fashion. In
fact, I would even argue if I were managing the Department of
Education, you know, the better part of wisdom would dictate
that I inform them even if I didn't believe FISMA was
triggered.
But the fact that months could go by and, as Mr. Camus just
said, a breach is a breach. Once it is breached, you have to
assume that data is compromised, if not today, tomorrow,
because it can be. And I just don't find your explanation very
credible, and I frankly think it is a disservice to, you know,
the people whose data you possess. And it is an end around with
respect to the legislative branch, and I think it is in
violation of the law.
I know we are going to pursue that more, but I don't think
that is something that puts the Department of Education in any
kind of good light.
My time is up. And I am sorry I missed Mr. Scott. I was
going to defer to him. I thought I was being asked to.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mr. Connolly, and thank you for honing
in on the issue of the day and looking for what remedies we
might have under the law.
Mr. Meadows, you are recognized.
Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
We are going to follow up, Mr. Gray, right now, because I
can tell you that Mr. Connolly is spot on. And this is not your
first rodeo. You know, we have had these other issues before
with regards to privacy. And is it your sworn testimony today
that this did not actually require notification of Congress?
Mr. Gray. No, sir. My understanding is that the IRS had
reported the incident and that it was a breach, but the
Department of Education, my understanding when I was notified
on March 3 that the notification had already happened. I have
learned in this hearing that it did not happen.
Mr. Meadows. Well, how can the American people, actually
people who share private information with you who expect it to
be protected have confidence when you are here today and you
don't even know the full story, that you are finding it out in
a hearing when you knew that we were going to be looking at
this?
How can you find a hacker who truly wants to come in and do
harm and you can't even be prepared for sworn testimony today
on questions that I presume that you knew we were going to ask?
Mr. Gray. I understand, sir. The challenge ----
Mr. Meadows. Where is the outrage? Where is the outrage,
Mr. Gray? Are you not outraged?
Mr. Gray. I absolutely am. Our ----
Mr. Meadows. Why didn't you notify Congress?
Mr. Gray. My understanding was this was not a Department of
Education ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, you realize that was not--did you have
your counsel that said you don't have to notify us? Who did you
check with who said you don't need to notify Congress?
Mr. Gray. We went through our incident response process,
who did an assessment ----
Mr. Meadows. So why did you refer something to an outside
agency before you notified your own IG within your Department?
Mr. Gray. Our IG was notified right after we ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, but according to my documents, you
actually notified US-CERT first, according to your testimony.
Why would you do that and wait to get the IG involved?
Mr. Gray. Because when we notify US-CERT, it's to let them
know that we were investigating something that had occurred. At
that time, we weren't sure what had happened.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. So the IG, you go, you notify the IG. It
was important enough to notify the IG but it was not important
enough to notify Congress?
Mr. Gray. Hindsight, sir, yes, it was important enough to
notify Congress.
Mr. Meadows. Well, at what point are we going to get this
right? Because we continue to have breaches. Mr. Connolly and I
have had a number of hearings where we have raised this as a
concern, and yet what happens is is we are always coming in
after the fact to look at this. Do you not see a problem with
that?
Mr. Gray. I do see a problem with that.
Mr. Meadows. Well, when are we going to get it fixed?
Mr. Gray. Sir, we receive on average more than 1.5 million
intrusion attempts every single month at the Department, and
what my team does is we assessed to determine whether or not
something had happened, nothing happened, and logistically--I
mean, I know in this case it's easy to look and say, okay, this
should have been reported. I understand that.
Mr. Meadows. So you're saying it's a matter of logistics on
why you didn't report it? Because that's different than what
you said earlier. Earlier, you said you didn't think you had to
report it.
Mr. Gray. Based on the analysis that my team did, we--our
information, the information that I am--that our ----
Mr. Meadows. So how confident are you that there was only
89,000 people that were affected?
Mr. Gray. Based on the logged analysis that was done at the
Department, very confident.
Mr. Meadows. All right. A 10?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. So if we find out there is more than that, are
you willing to resign?
Mr. Gray. If it's--if I don't know the information, no,
sir. I mean, from what I have ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, you said you are confident at a level of
10, so I guess I would stake my reputation on that if you were
confident at a 10. So if there is more than that-- because the
IRS knows that sometimes we find out that there is actually
more people that were affected than was originally thought. So
if you are confident at a 10, are you willing to stake your
reputation and your job on it?
Mr. Gray. So, sir, the challenge here is that when we ----
Mr. Meadows. Sir, I am representing people back home in
North Carolina, as every member here is, and you know what,
they fail to realize that you can't protect sensitive
information that they give you, and they don't understand that.
I don't understand it. At what point are we going to have the
confidence when people share their information with the
government that it is not subject to being shared with another
party? Isn't that what your job is all about as CIO?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Meadows. All right. The next time, are you going to
inform Congress when there may be a doubt? Will you inform us
within the seven days?
Mr. Gray. Absolutely.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Ms. Garza, last question to you. Why didn't you inform us?
Ms. Garza. Congressman, we briefed the staff shortly after
we brought down ----
Mr. Meadows. You didn't brief our staff. Why didn't you
inform Congress? That is the question of the day. Because
according to your TIGTA, it is 100,000, so it is certainly--
even meet the threshold, but why wouldn't you inform us?
Ms. Garza. So, Congressman, we did inform the Congress that
this was a data breach. The reason why it took as long as it
did is because we were going through analyzing the information.
The initial population was much smaller than 100,000 that we
thought were impacted. We also needed to coordinate with the
Department of Education to determine whether ----
Mr. Meadows. But didn't you find it just based on dumb
luck? It was actually just one of your IRS employees that
actually got a transcript request and they said, hey, something
doesn't smell right here?
Ms. Garza. Congressman, we have multiple layers of ----
Mr. Meadows. That is not the question. Wasn't it dumb luck
that you happened to find this?
Ms. Garza. No.
Mr. Meadows. So it wasn't an IRS employee that happened to
get a transcript? Be careful; you are under sworn testimony
here.
Ms. Garza. The--it was an IRS employee. He received a
notification as part of one of our defense mechanisms that his
account had been accessed.
Mr. Meadows. So it was an IRS employee who happened to have
his stuff that was notified and we said, hold on, we got a
problem here? Do you not see that that is almost laughable?
Ms. Garza. One of our mechanisms to determine whether
something has gone wrong is a notification to the taxpayer. Our
systems automatically send out a notification ----
Mr. Meadows. So you purposely embed IRS employees in all
this so that they might get a personal notification so they can
highlight this? Come on.
I will yield back.
Ms. Foxx. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Sarbanes, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank the panel.
Ten years ago, I was proud to lead the effort here in the
House and we teamed up with Senator Kennedy on the Senate side
to create the Public Service Loan Forgiveness program. And we
have paid close attention to that over the last 10 years,
working with U.S. Department of Education along the way, to
create online resources to help borrowers understand whether
they are going to qualify for this program, which includes
reduced monthly payments, as well as ultimate forgiveness of
their outstanding principal if they commit 10 years to public
service.
That includes the need to be assured that the employment
you have, the particular employer that you are working for,
qualifies under that public service category and that you can
count the time spent with that employer towards your 10 years
and ultimately earn the forgiveness.
Congressman Clay alluded a moment to go to the fact that
there is some troubling position that the U.S. Department of
Education has been taking over the last 18 months with respect
to certain categories of employers. They are now telling
borrowers who relied on an assurance that that employer would
qualify, being told now that it won't, and there is some
litigation around that, Mr. Runcie, as you indicated. And we
need to get to the bottom of that because our borrowers that
have relied on assurances that have come from the Department
and they need to be able to count on that. Otherwise, the rug
is being pulled out from under them.
I know that some of us here have been trying to get a
briefing from the Department over the last few weeks. That has
not yet happened. Could you commit to us today that the
Department would be willing to brief us on this issue and what
is happening with that?
Mr. Runcie. So I--it's not just FSA. I mean, we obviously
operationalize it and we put the resources out there so people
can avail themselves of Public Service Loan Forgiveness. But I
think that briefing would include other entities such as ODC
and policy, some other folks. I can't ----
Mr. Sarbanes. Well, that is fine. Can you help us arrange
to get that briefing done and get it done quickly so we know
what is happening with this and then we can take appropriate
steps in our oversight capacity?
Mr. Runcie. Absolutely. It is an important issue, and I
think we're real focused on it, so I will absolutely commit to
working, you know, with my colleagues to ----
Mr. Sarbanes. Now, let me stay focused on the Public
Service Loan Forgiveness piece and loan-driven repayment,
because when you talk about the universe of borrowers out there
that are impacted by the breach that we are talking about
today, using this data retrieval tool, you have the part of
that universe that are folks that are, you know, involved with
standard repayment, and then you have those who are in a loan-
driven repayment situation based on one program or the other.
That includes Public Service Loan Forgiveness. And they have to
be handled differently because they are impacted differently.
And you have indicated that with respect to the standard
repayment world that you are going to try to get this tool back
in service by the beginning of the next year, so October is the
goal. But with respect to loan-driven repayment, you are trying
to get that back up by May.
So can you tell us how confident you are that--I mean, it
is May now. I mean, how confident are you that that is going to
be available to folks that are benefiting from loan-driven
repayment arrangements? Is that going to happen?
Mr. Runcie. Yes, we are very confident. You know, as the
IRS mentioned, they've completed the encryption part, and we
have a timeline that gets us to a place where it's up and
running by the end of this month. So we know it's only another
few weeks but we can commit to that.
Mr. Sarbanes. I appreciate that. Could you also let me
know--I know one of the remedies or sort of stopgap remedies
when someone is in a situation perhaps not being able to access
a tool that allows them to do things in a timely fashion is
forbearance for, you know, two months, three months, what have
you. That can work okay for the standard repayment folks
because there is really no downside to losing a couple months
in terms of your repayment.
But if time is of the essence in the sense that you are
accruing time towards this 10-year repayment period, then
forbearance isn't necessarily going to be a great solution for
people that are in the loan-driven repayment category. Is that
something that the Department has considered, and is there a
way to provide a remedy there that doesn't complicate the lives
of these folks that are in a particular program like that?
Mr. Runcie. Yes. I'll make sure that we are--I know we're
considering a lot of different issues around it, and I believe
that's one, but we'll certainly make sure that we're focused on
that because I do understand the issue around that.
Mr. Sarbanes. Okay. I yield back.
Mr. Runcie. I wanted to add one thing, and we're pretty
firm on the end of May unless potentially some requirements
change, but I think we're committed to the end of May for the
tool being back up for the income-driven repayment plans.
Ms. Foxx. Well, thank you, Mr. Sarbanes.
Thank you, Mr. Runcie.
Mr. Mitchell, you are recognized.
Mr. Mitchell. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I join your dismay that rather than discuss the data
breach, the impact it has on the ability of students to get
assistance, how we deal with the data breach going forward,
avoided that some wish to talk about issues that we are now
going to investigate as well, which is potential bad actors to
obfuscate with the current issue is, which is the IRS and the
Department of Ed's inability to have this tool work and not
have it breached but rather talk about other issues.
We only have so much time here. We only have so many things
we do simultaneously. Let's talk about the issue we put on the
table. So I am dismayed, and I guess I shouldn't be surprised.
Mr. Connolly, you have--I am sorry, Mr. Gray. You have seen
the Wizard of Oz, right?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mitchell. Did you see the part where they talk with the
scarecrow and they ask him which way the yellow brick road is?
Do you remember that part?
Mr. Gray. Yes, Representative.
Mr. Mitchell. And the scarecrow goes like this? Do you
remember that part?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Mitchell. In my opinion, frankly, sir, that is exactly
what you are doing when you talk about, well, the data breach
happened at the IRS and we didn't think it was us so we didn't
need to worry about notification. You know, when you have got
something as sensitive as personal information for the number
of students that you have, the moment in time that you think
your data has been breached, you have a legal if not moral--
moral if not legal responsibility to notify Congress. That is a
lot of information. And it wasn't done.
And it is not the first time it wasn't done. And I don't
understand that. And I don't know how it is we get across to
the Department that that is your responsibility by law if not
morally. What does it take to get someone to understand that
over there? Can you explain that to me?
Mr. Gray. I have committed that going--that I will do that,
sir.
Mr. Mitchell. I ran a private career school group that had
6,000 students a year, close to 7,000 students a year for six-
and-a-half years as a CEO. Ms. Garza, do you know what-- the
CIO reported to me for a reason. Do you know the deal I had
with the CIO if we got hacked? And we didn't have as many hack
attempts is the Department of Ed, I will just be honest about
it. Do you know what the deal was? Do you want to guess what
the deal was if we got hacked?
Ms. Garza. You held the CIO accountable.
Mr. Mitchell. The CIO's resignation was on my desk. That is
how sensitive that information was. And I am serious. I am
absolutely serious. I will give you his phone number. You can
call him. His resignation was on my desk. His cell phone got
buzzed any time there were certain sets of activities, whatever
hour of the night.
Now, who on your staff gets called in the middle of the
night or gets a buzz if in fact data goes out of whack?
Anybody?
Ms. Garza. The CISO is the first one that gets a call, and
then depending on the type of breach, she will call me.
Mr. Mitchell. Let me change the subject for moment here
because time is limited. I have heard repeatedly budget
concerns, budget concerns. I come from the private sector, and
I am absolutely amazed. The first time a problem comes up,
everyone wants to whip out the taxpayers' checkbook because,
hey, just spend more money. From the world I come from, we
first identify the problem and what it takes to solve it and
not just throw money at it.
So answer a question for me, Ms. Garza. And by the way, I
mean, we all know how many people have had their data hacked,
false tax returns. I had it happen to me. My youngest son is
dealing with it right now this year. How much money do you need
to tell this group, to tell Congress that you can secure this
system? Exactly how much do you need in your budget that you
will put your letter of resignation there if you get hacked?
How much money?
Ms. Garza. I don't know how much money it would take.
Mr. Mitchell. But you ask for more money all the time.
Ms. Garza. We ask for additional resources to continue to
fortify ----
Mr. Mitchell. Every year.
Ms. Garza.--our systems.
Mr. Mitchell. Every year.
Ms. Garza. That's correct.
Mr. Mitchell. I asked you a question. How much money do you
need in your budget for data protection that you will put that
budget request in and simultaneously you will tender your
resignation that if you get hacked, you go home?
Ms. Garza. I don't have that dollar amount in my mind. What
I do know is that criminal enterprises are constantly changing
----
Mr. Mitchell. Oh, I understand that.
Ms. Garza.--and their tactics, and so to make the statement
that we can guarantee a system is secure quite frankly is a
little bit folly. We are doing everything that we can to make
sure that our systems are secure. We have not had a breach of
our internal systems, although we have had data loss. And so to
put--to try to come up with a dollar amount that would
guarantee that something will not occur I think--at that point
I would think that we are probably not going to end up being
secure.
Mr. Mitchell. And my time is expiring and I appreciate the
patience. Anywhere else in the world in the private sector at
least somebody says we really screwed up here. At least someone
says, well, hey, we missed--you know, they take accountability
for it. My technology staff took it personally when someone
tried--you know, when we had people trying to hack it, when we
had--how we secured it. It was the game. It was their life. And
the fact that folks can sit here and say, well, basically,
stuff happens. But when you are talking about people's
information to the Department of Education or IRS, it is not
just stuff happens. This is their life. It is their tax return.
It is their personal information used to get credit elsewhere.
This is not minor stuff, and I don't see the perspective or
concern that, well, we do the best we can. If it is wrong, we
may notify, we may not notify. We may not think it is our
problem because it is the IRS's problem. Again, they went that
way. Somebody needs to be accountable for it, folks. And I will
join Mr. Connolly and others in finding a way we have got to
hold folks accountable because we can't have this kind of data
leaking out, people taking it and using it for adverse
purposes. You should be ashamed.
I yield back. Thank you.
Ms. Foxx. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mrs. Maloney, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mrs. Maloney. Thank you, Lady Chair.
We need to do everything we can to prevent cyber attacks
from occurring, but when they do occur, it is critical that we
take it as seriously as the gentleman said and also that we
learn from them.
In 2015, criminal elements attacked the IRS and its Get
Transcript application, the tool that allows taxpayers to
obtain copies of prior tax returns using a collection of
personal information. An organized crime syndicate accessed
this application using stolen personal information of
individuals and obtained tax data for a staggering 300,000
individuals. Is that correct, Mr. Corbin?
Mr. Corbin. That is correct, Congresswoman.
Mrs. Maloney. And since that incident, the IRS has been
working diligently to increase the security of its systems. In
January 2016, a result of cybersecurity improvements, the IRS
stopped an attempt to acquire the e-filing PIN number of
taxpayers. Mr. Corbin and Mrs. Garza, is that correct? And can
you describe what the improvements were that were able for you
to stop this other attempt?
Mr. Corbin. So for--so, Congresswoman, for Get Transcripts,
we took that application down and did an assessment level of
risk, and we put in place what we call secure access
authentication. It is a higher level of authentication that
requires ID proofing, financial verification, and then an
activation code in order to be able to get access to your
transcript.
We continue to take the dollars that were provided by
Congress, the $290 million, to invest in additional cyber tools
that allowed us in this case to be able to detect when there
was activity occurring on tools that we have that are outside
the IRS network.
For the e-file PIN, Congresswoman, we looked at that and
again identified that that would be a vulnerability. The e-file
PIN application is not back up. We eliminated the e-file PIN
application and now require AGI or the self-select PIN, which
taxpayers have.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. After the 2015 incident, you did a
reassessment of the security of all of your online
applications, including the data retrieval tool. And as you
stated in your testimony, that assessment--and I am quoting
from your testimony--indicated the need for strengthened
procedures and led to collaboration with the Board of Education
to best implement those procedures. Now, is that correct?
Ms. Garza. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Okay. Now, I want to turn to the 2017 data
retrieval tool incident where criminals were able to use
personal information gathered elsewhere to create student aid
accounts on the Department of Education's websites and obtain
individuals' sensitive tax information. So, Mr. Corbin and I
would say Mrs. Garza, is it right to say that, much like in
2015, individuals were seeking the information necessary to
file fraudulent returns?
Ms. Garza. That's correct.
Mrs. Maloney. Yet this time, individuals were much less
successful in obtaining the returns, and according--would you
like to comment on that?
Mr. Corbin. No, Congresswoman. Go ahead.
Mrs. Maloney. According to GAO, identity theft at the IRS
has decreased in recent years because the IRS has improved its
ability to detect fraud before processing returns. This
approval detection ability is illustrated by the fact that
automatic security filters were able to stop almost 65 percent
of potentially fraudulent refunds from being issued in the data
retrieval tool incident. Is that correct?
Mr. Corbin. That is correct.
Mrs. Maloney. So we can't stop all cyber attacks. That is
just the reality of today. But we can learn from them. So I
think you have shown your ability to do that.
So, you know, when you file--why would somebody want to
file a fraudulent return? What was the purpose of it for the
purpose ----
Mr. Corbin. So, Congresswoman, most people file fraudulent
returns with the hopes of obtaining a refund ----
Mrs. Maloney. Whoa, okay.
Mr. Corbin.--from that return.
Mrs. Maloney. And are they successful?
Mr. Corbin. Congresswoman, fraudsters are successful, but
we have gotten so much better over the years. The IRS has a
public-private partnership called the Security Summit where we
work to protect the tax ecosystem, working with State
Departments of Revenue, with software developers so that we can
build better systems to help protect the tax ecosystem.
As you stated in this case with the data retrieval tool, we
have new data elements or information that we are using in our
filters. It did allow us to stop 80 percent of the returns that
were filed in this event that were either potentially
fraudulent or before the refunds were able to be paid.
Mrs. Maloney. Well, thank you. My time is expired, but I
hope we can continue to fund the IT improvements that the IRS
requests so we can continue going forward in being more
effective in stopping fraud and helping taxpayers.
Thank you for your testimony today.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you, Mrs. Maloney.
Mr. Grothman, you are the one we have been looking for, the
last one.
Mr. Grothman. Good.
Ms. Foxx. You are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Mr. Gray, I will give you a few questions.
How long have you been the chief information officer over at
Education?
Mr. Gray. Eleven months, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. And since November of 2015, this
committee has uncovered what we feel are significant
shortcomings in your IT security plans before you were even
there, as well as corruption of the former CIO. As newcomer,
what concerns you the most, and what were your first actions as
CIO to clean this up?
Mr. Gray. There were several--I had five focus areas when
it came to the Department. One was on security, another was
FITARA and organizational health, so there were policy
challenges. There was numerous things that we need to improve.
And I will say in the last 11 months we have made significant
progress at the Department in terms of implementing processes,
implementing policies, changing personnel.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Last year, US-CERT reported 192
incidents in your Department. Can you tell us what information
leaked out in those 192? Give us, say, how many files and what
they covered?
Mr. Gray. I would have to get that information for you,
sir. I do have a list of the information and--but I'd want to
verify.
Mr. Grothman. Give me a broad--you know, there must be some
that stuck in your mind. What are the type of things that get
out there?
Mr. Gray. Typically, Social Security numbers that were
inadvertently sent from one individual to an individual it
wasn't supposed to or it wasn't encrypted.
Mr. Grothman. Anything beyond that? Any information
connected with the Social Security numbers?
Mr. Gray. I would--I'd want to verify, sir, but to my
knowledge I would ----
Mr. Grothman. You can't think of any example?
Mr. Gray. Not at this moment.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Is this--I guess we will call this
OCIO-14 handbook?
Mr. Gray. Yes, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. You know how recently this was updated?
Or I've got one that I believe is right now the current one
that you must give your employees. Do you know how recently it
was--or how recent the most recent update was?
Mr. Gray. There is a draft going--circling right now to--
that is being updated, that has been updated and that is being
routed for concurrence right now.
Mr. Grothman. Yes, but do you know how long--how old this
is?
Mr. Gray. Several years, sir, too many.
Mr. Grothman. A little over six years now. Okay. Do you
think that is satisfactory?
Mr. Gray. No, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Could you give us a hard number as to
when you feel you have got something new available for your new
employees?
Mr. Gray. For OCIO-14?
Mr. Grothman. Correct.
Mr. Gray. The concurrence process within the Department
takes an amount of time, so I can't comment on that, but I will
say that I have a solid draft that is going through concurrence
right now.
Mr. Grothman. Can you give us a guess? A month, four
months, a year?
Mr. Gray. My understanding is the process is about six
months to a year to go through formal concurrence.
Mr. Grothman. And how far are you through the process now?
Mr. Gray. We started last week. We started the actual
concurrence process last week, sir.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. So you began something but it could be
a year before we get something that is more than six years old?
Mr. Gray. I will expedite it because I know it's critical
to the Department.
Mr. Grothman. And critical to us and critical for the
public.
Could you give us--when we talk about the files with the
Social Security number, can you tell us what else is in those
files?
Mr. Gray. I would have to look specifically at them. I-- at
this point--I mean, sometimes they're Excel spreadsheets that
contain Social Security numbers. I would have to look to
verify.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I will try Mr. Runcie. Have there been
breaches of your ----
Mr. Runcie. Not to my knowledge, no. There was I think
about--it might've been four years ago there was a time where
the system was open for a few minutes, and there were 6,000
cases of information that was viewed that shouldn't have been
viewed, but that was the only systemic breach or exfiltration
of--it wasn't even an exfiltration but it was an incident that
occurred at that time.
Mr. Grothman. How long ago was that? How long ago was that?
Mr. Runcie. It was a few years ago. I'm not exactly sure.
Mr. Grothman. So you have had nobody breach anything for
the last four or five years, do you think, three or four years
we will say?
Mr. Runcie. Well, there has been no material breach. There
is a possibility that there might have been an incident here or
incident there in terms of student aid data but none to my
knowledge.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. They don't tell you?
Mr. Runcie. I would be informed if there was, and I'm not
aware of any.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. I yield the remainder of my time.
Ms. Foxx. Thank you very much.
I am ready to close. I have none of my colleagues on the
Democrat side, so I will make some very brief comments.
To not broach our protocol, I will not ask questions, but I
will let Ms. Garza, Mr. Corbin, Mr. Camus know that we will be
asking you exactly how many fraudulent returns were filed as a
result of the breach and when those people obtained that
information. And we will want an answer in what most of us
would consider reasonable time.
It has been extraordinarily difficult today to get any kind
of specific answer out of any of you. And I think Mr.
Mitchell's comments about the scarecrow were entirely apt. You
are blaming each other. The American people frankly are tired
of this kind of display of incompetence again. You all cannot
answer questions or will not answer questions. It is a little
difficult to know.
And let me tell you something. In my world, $30 million is
a lot of money, a lot of money. And you all don't seem to take
it seriously at all, that as a result of your not being able to
take action when a breach is made and you are not following the
law to let Congress know, it is even more troubling to me that
you take so long to do anything.
Mr. Grothman's comments about a document that is very
important taking seven years to update, it is pure
incompetence.
And I would venture to say that we might be able to get
better people coming into your agencies to do the work that
needs to be done regardless of the pay if they thought they
could get something done. But the bureaucracies are so
impossible to change.
And I do want to note that both Mr. Gray and Mr. Runcie
came to the Department and all of you all, too, in the IRS
under the Obama administration. Our colleagues are going to
raise Cain with the existing Departments and make it appear as
though this is the responsibility of the current
administration. And I think it needs to be made abundantly
clear that you all came into these agencies under the previous
administration and have been kept on by the previous
administration.
We will also put into the record the expanded timeline in
terms of when these problems began occurring and point out
where we possibly can the inaction of the people who are
supposed to be working for the American people and keeping
their data confidential.
So I thank you all for being here today, and this hearing
is dismissed.
[Whereupon, at 12:07 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
