- GAO'S 2017 HIGH RISK REPORT: 34 PROGRAMS IN PERIL

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

GAO'S 2017 HIGH RISK REPORT: 34 PROGRAMS IN PERIL

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

FEBRUARY 15, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-15

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
26-361 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Jason Chaffetz, Utah, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California              Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan                   Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark Meadows, North Carolina         Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Ron DeSantis, Florida                Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Val Butler Demings, Florida
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia                Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Matthew Cartwright, Pennsyvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan

Jonathan Skladany, Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Katie Rother, Senior Counsel
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on February 15, 2017................................     1

WITNESSES

The Hon. Gene L Dodaro, Comptroller General of the United States,
U.S. Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     6

APPENDIX

Response from the United States Government Accountbility Office
to Questions for the Record....................................   100

GAO'S 2017 HIGH RISK REPORT: 34 PROGRAMS IN PERIL

----------

Wednesday, February 15, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 10:02 a.m., in Room
2154, Longworth House Office Building, Hon. Jason Chaffetz
[chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Chaffetz, Duncan, Issa, Jordan,
Amash, DesJarlais, Massie, Meadows, DeSantis, Ross, Walker,
Blum, Hice, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer, Mitchell, Cummings,
Maloney, Norton, Connolly, Kelly, Plaskett, Demings,
Krishnamoorthi, Welch, Cartwright, and DeSaulnier.
Chairman  Chaffetz. The Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform will come to order. And without objection,
the chair is authorized to declare a recess at any time.
Today, the committee will examine 34 Federal programs the
Government Accountability Office has identified as high risk.
Programs are selected, among other factors, for risks posed to
public health or safety, national security, economic growth,
and privacy or citizens' rights. With this hearing, we have an
opportunity to better understand how to help agencies fully
resolve the issues identified.
Regrettably, many of the areas identified in this year's
high-risk list are of no surprise. It's been 2 years since the
GAO last issued its high-risk report. They do it for each
Congress. Since then, only one program was removed. Three
programs have been added. More concerning, six areas have been
listed by GAO as, quote, ``high risk,'' end quote, since the
report's inception 27 years ago. Twenty-seven years ago.
Members on this panel, we need to pay attention to this.
These are good people doing a lot of good work. They're telling
us, they're screaming at us to actually get something done and
address these issues.
The six areas listed since 1990 are significant programs
too such as Medicare, the DOD weapons system acquisition. These
are big, weighty issues that need to be addressed. The agencies
and these programs they administer must be doing better. And at
a time when the national debt nears $20 trillion, addressing
high risk can also have a meaningful impact on the fiscal
health of the Nation.
The GAO estimates the progress in high-risk areas during
the past decade resulted in financial benefits totaling
approximately $240 billion. It's an average of roughly $24
billion a year, but there's much, much more to be done. And
thankfully, progress is possible, and this year's report
demonstrates that as well.
GAO is removing one key area from the high-risk list. First
added in 2003, GAO is removing, quote, ``interagency efforts to
establish effective mechanisms for sharing and managing
terrorism-related information,'' end quote, a very important
topic that's important to all of our future.
Notable progress also occurred in the Department of
Defense's supply chain management and with the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration closing data gaps in weather
satellite data. This progress is welcome news, but I want all
the items on the high-risk list to be fully resolved as soon as
possible. There would be nothing better than to have Mr. Dodaro
come here and say, well, there's nothing on the high-risk list.
But I think you got some job security and the people behind you
have some job security because we aren't anywhere close to
that.
So there are literally billions of dollars that are wasted
through poor management, slow response to emerging risks, and
failure to prioritize.
I look forward to discussing with the Comptroller General
how to make significant and sustained progress towards
resolving these most critical issues.
And, Mr. Dodaro, we appreciate, you in particular have made
yourself available at every turn, a great resource and
understanding of how the government works and where it's not
working.
And I also want to thank all the men and women who serve in
this effort to make our country and make the government as
efficient and as effective as possible. We really do rely upon
you and your staff to take the time and effort that--and when
you issue these reports and have that perspective, it's my
goal, my intention, my commitment that, you know, we need to
pay attention to that to help fix these problems. You're
identifying them and you're pushing these departments and
agencies, but we also play a role in Congress to actually put
in place the legislation that's needed in order to solve many
of these issues. So we really do appreciate you in particular
and, again, the men and women who serve in the GAO. Very, very
helpful.
I'd now like to recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings.
Mr.  Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I
thank you for having this hearing today.
Mr. Dodaro, thank you for this in-depth work that you and
all the dedicated professionals at the GAO put into updating
this high-risk report every Congress. And I join the chairman
in thanking everybody, because I know that you don't do this by
yourself. Federal employees are very dedicated, giving blood,
sweat, and tears to make sure the government functions properly
and that we maintain this democracy.
GAO reports, and I quote, ``solutions to high-risk problems
potentially save billions of dollars, improve service to the
public, and strengthen government performance and
accountability,'' end of quote. The work at GAO complements
this committee's mission, and we are indeed grateful for it.
I was particularly pleased to see this year's report
highlight that progress over the past decade has resulted in
financial benefits totaling approximately $240 billion. That's
a lot of money. Real progress has been made and, indeed, it
must continue. We can always do better. We cannot afford to go
backwards. Unfortunately, I fear that we may be on the brink of
doing just that.
Less than a month into office, the President's actions
threaten to undermine many governmentwide recommendations the
nonpartisan experts at GAO have issued. Progress of three high-
risk areas in particular are in jeopardy under President
Trump's administration: Managing strategic human capital,
modernizing the financial regulatory system, and managing
fiscal exposure to the risks of climate change.
First, on January 23, 2017, President Trump issued an
executive order freezing employee hiring. GAO has stated in the
past that hiring freezes, quote, ``disrupt agency operations
and in some cases increase the cost to government,'' end of
quote. In fact, this year's GAO report states, and I quote,
``of the 34 high-risk areas listed, 15 areas had skill gaps,
playing a contributory role,'' end quote.
A hiring freeze could hamstring the ability of agencies to
address the needs of the American citizens, businesses, and
consumers. As one who represents a lot of employees at Social
Security, Mr. Dodaro, I hear over and over again where the lack
of employees has made it so much more difficult for people to
do their jobs. That's people who at one time there were four
people doing the job, then they've got one. And at the same
time, we in Capitol Hill, folks on this panel, we expect them
to still be able to produce. And what's happening in those
instances is that some people are leaving because they just
cannot take it. It could exacerbate skill gaps at the Federal
agencies, making them less productive and less effective.
Second, we owe it to the American public to continue
implementing GAO's recommendations to modernize our financial
regulatory system. That begins by protecting provisions of
Dodd-Frank and shield American consumers, not by rolling back
those provisions. That makes no sense. GAO recommends
implementing the remaining Dodd-Frank regulatory rules to
ensure the effective functioning of reforms to the United
States financial regulatory system, and I wholeheartedly agree.
We must continue to support this vital work, not undermine it.
Finally, in order to protect America from fiscal exposure
to the risk of climate change, we must address this issue head
on. How can we work together to solve a problem if President
Trump and some congressional Republicans do not even
acknowledge its existence? Duh. The generations yet unborn
deserve better than to be burdened by the potentially
catastrophic cost of climate change risk my colleagues across
the aisle seem to ignore.
I implore my colleagues to fully consider the progress we
have made on all of these issues and the harm that may be done
if we go down the path of the current administration.
I look forward to GAO illuminating all that is at stake
today. And, again, I want to thank all the employees of GAO for
doing what you do every single day.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Thank you.
I'll hold the record open for 5 legislative days for
members who would like to submit a written statement.
I'd now like to recognize and welcome our witness for today
at the hearing, the Honorable Gene Dodaro, who is Comptroller
General of the United States Government Accountability Office.
There are a number of people that we're also going to swear
in. As we found in the past experiences, as we had very
specific questions, there are subject matter experts. But in
order to testify, they too need to be sworn in. These include:
Chris Mihm, managing director for Strategic Issues at GAO; Mark
Gaffigan, not to be confused with Jim, the managing director
for Natural Resources--I'm sure I'm the first one ever to use
that line. He's the managing director for Natural Resources and
Environment at the GAO. Barbara Bovbjerg, managing director for
Education, Workforce, and Income Security at GAO; George Scott,
managing director of Homeland Security and Justice. All of
these are at the GAO. Dave Powner, director of Information
Technology; Greg Wilshusen--I hope I pronounced that right--
director of Information and Technology; Orice Williams Brown,
managing director for Financial Markets and Community
Investment; Nikki Clowers, managing director for Health Care;
and Cathleen Berrick, managing director for Defense
Capabilities and Management; Paul Francis, managing director
for Acquisitions and Sourcing; and Kate Siggerud, who is
managing director for Congressional Relations. Their expertise
is needed in this hearing.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses are to be sworn
before they testify. So we need to do this en masse. If you can
please all rise and raise your right hands.
Thank you.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you're
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Thank you. Let the record reflect that all the witnesses
answered in the affirmative.
Mr. Dodaro, you're a veteran in doing this. We'll give you
as much time or latitude as you like. We do appreciate you
being here, and we'll now turn the time to you.

STATEMENT OF GENE L. DODARO

Mr.  Dodaro. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to you, Ranking Member Cummings and members of
the committee.
I appreciate the opportunity to discuss our latest edition
of the high-risk list. As has been pointed out in both of your
opening statements, there have been areas, many areas, where
solid progress has been made. In fact, 23 of the 32 areas we
had on the high-risk list in 2015 have either met or fully met
the five criteria for coming off the list. Those criteria are
leadership, the capacity, planning, monitoring, and actually
demonstrating some progress, which is the most difficult
criteria to meet.
That progress was achieved through a lot of hard work by
the agency leaders and the staff in those agencies and by the
Congress. I really want to compliment the Congress over this
last 2-year period. Over a dozen pieces of legislation were
passed to address individual high-risk areas and some
governmentwide issues as well. And Congress held over 250
hearings on subjects covered by the high-risk hearings.
And this committee in particular is to be commended, Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, for the bipartisan approach
that has been taken to address many of these issues, which is
really needed. And so I look forward to working with you to
help resolve all these areas.
I share your interest in getting as many areas off this
list as possible. I made that a goal during my confirmation
hearing. And, you know, we'll maintain our independence. We're
not going to take anything off the list till it's ready, but
we're trying to do what we can to be specific and get them off
the list.
The one area you mentioned, managing information sharing of
terrorism-related information, has really shown steady progress
over the years, met all criteria, so it's coming off the list.
But I want to assure this committee when something goes off the
list, it's not out of sight. So we're still monitoring and
we'll keep an eye on it to make sure we don't have any
regression in that area.
On the other side, there's a number of areas that really
need some substantial attention: Veterans' health care, which
we put on the last update in 2015. DOD financial management,
which we've talked about in the past, still needs substantial
attention.
Protecting our information systems from cyber attacks and
our critical infrastructure throughout the United States is
important. We first put cybersecurity across the Federal
Government on the high-risk list in 1997. So it's the 20th
anniversary of us warning about this issue, and there's still a
lot that needs to be done.
Information technology acquisitions and operations, which
this committee has shown a lot of good oversight in a number of
hearings. Two of the subcommittees in particular have been
working together on that area, so I commend the committee in
that regard.
And reforming housing finance in the Federal Government.
Fannie and Freddie are still in conservatorship. They've been
there since 2008. The Federal Government is assuming too much
risk in the housing market, in my opinion, and things need to
be done in that area as well.
We are--as you mentioned, we're adding three new areas this
year. I'll quickly cover them in closing. Number one is Federal
activities to work with tribes and their members. Wherever we
look, if it's helping them with education, ensuring safety at
schools, ensuring adequate health care for Indian tribes and
their members, or allowing them to take energy resources off
their land and put them into production so it can generate
revenues. There is inadequate Federal oversight and support.
We've made a number of recommendations, 41. Thirty-nine are
still outstanding. This needs attention.
Secondly is the growth in environmental liability. This is
to clean up nuclear weapons complex waste as well as disposing
of civilian waste generated through nuclear power plants. This
liability has grown. It's approaching one-half trillion
dollars, and we don't believe that's even the total estimate
yet that's accurate. The government's been spending tens of
billions of dollars to try to clean up this activity over the
past several years, but the liability keeps growing. We've made
a number of recommendations. We need a more risk-based approach
in this area.
And then lastly, the decennial census, the 2020 census. If
you look back on the high-risk list, the census is one we put
on the 2010 census in 2008, and it needs attention. The cost
exceeded $12 billion for the 2020 census. This one's on track,
if you use the old methods, to be close to $18 billion. I'm
sorry, I think I said trillion. It's $12.3 billion. And on
track to be close to that. But they're trying some innovative
measures, which I can talk about in the Q and A. But those
measures, such as using the internet for response and
developing innovative ways not to do physical canvassing on
street-walking all the communities introduces a lot of risk,
and we think there's--much more needs to be done to manage that
risk so we have a cost-effective and an effective census, which
is very important.
So, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Cummings, I appreciate
your comments about the GAO workforce. We have a very talented,
dedicated group of people. We look forward to working with you
to resolve all the areas on the high-risk list. So thank you
for the opportunity to be here.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Dodaro follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman  Chaffetz. Thank you. Thank you for being here.
We'll now start by recognizing the gentleman from
Tennessee, Mr. Duncan.
Mr.  Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And, Mr. Dodaro, thank you for your work. I do appreciate
the work that you do and your agency. It's very helpful to this
committee.
There are several areas I'd like to get into very quickly,
but the ranking member mentioned Dodd-Frank. And we had a
hearing in here 2 or 3 months ago with the head of the FDIC,
and it's been brought out that something like one in five banks
and credit unions have gone under since Dodd-Frank, or have
disappeared. And you mentioned in your report, quote,
``mounting regulations stemming from Dodd-Frank.''
Do you and your experts--we had one witness who said you
have to have probably at least $1 billion in assets to survive
in the banking business today. Do you and your experts foresee
a continuation of this, of so many banks going under or being
forced to merge or at high risk?
Mr.  Dodaro. There have been a number of areas we've looked
at, particularly small community banks and what the burden
would be for them. The number of banks--you know, we do the
audit of the Federal Deposit Insurance Fund. The number of
banks that have failed have been going down over this past
several years, and the number on the troubled list or the watch
list that they have has been going down as well. So it may be
in some other sectors of the economy.
I have Orice Williams Brown here. But there are definitely
some things that need streamlined, and we've made
recommendations. The stress test that the banks are put under.
I think we have to look for ways, and the way we've advised the
Congress is looking for ways to make refinements that reduce
the regulatory burden but still do not undermine the need for
banks to have adequate capital reserves to withstand downturns
in the economy. We're looking very carefully now at the bank
examination process because of concentrations in commercial
real estate lending and auto lending as well.
Ms. Brown is with me today. She's our expert in this area.
I'll just ask her to address this issue.
Ms.  Brown. We currently have work underway looking at the
effect of various pieces of legislation on small banks,
community banks. So we're looking at the issue of regulatory
burden. We are trying to identify if there are certain
characteristics of legislation or laws that particularly impact
small banks. We're also looking at exemptions and a variety of
issues. So that work will be coming out later this year that
specifically addresses this issue.
Mr.  Duncan. Well, you do agree, I think everyone agrees,
that this regulatory burden is much more difficult for the
small banks to work with than these large, giant banks. And the
total deposits of the five largest banks have gone up from 22
percent total deposits to 44 percent since the passing of Dodd-
Frank.
Let me ask you, Mr. Dodaro, about another area. Several
years ago, I received a letter from the BLM and a
recommendation from OMB. BLM identified over 3 million acres of
land that they would like to sell or dispose of. And we did
pass a bill last year, the Federal Assets Sale and Transfer
Act. The GAO has identified 273,000 buildings that the Federal
Government either leases or owns.
Are we making any progress toward raising some money from
some of the sale of some of these lands? We seem to have
continued taking over more land instead of getting rid of some
of this land that even the government, even the different
agencies don't want.
Mr.  Dodaro. There's some progress being made. There's a
national strategy that was issued. You mentioned the
legislation. Congress passed two pieces of legislation late
last year that will help in that area.
One property we reported in our testimony is Cotton Annex,
they've been trying to sell. We understand they just got a bid
on that. I think this board that the Congress has set up to
independently identify some high-value properties is an
important area as well. And the agencies need to make sure that
the property, some of the properties are properly maintained
and upgraded so that they're actually able to be sold or
disposed of in adequate means. So we're making some progress in
that area, but there's a lot more that still needs to be done.
Mr.  Duncan. I think it's pretty clear that the Federal
Government owns or leases far too many buildings.
Let me quickly get into one other area. The President has
advocated a $1 trillion increase in spending on transportation,
yet you say in your report that spending has not improved
system performance in the transportation area. Why do you think
that is?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. That's because the programs that were
set up by the Department of Treasury--or, excuse me,
Transportation really did not adequately measure the results of
the investment that the Federal Government had made. We knew a
lot of money was being spent, but was it actually improving the
safety of the system, the condition of the roads, the condition
of the bridges? So Congress mandated a more performance-based
system, which Transportation's in the progress of issuing
regulations and will soon be implemented. So by the next
update, we'll know whether that's working well or not.
But our putting this on the high-risk list emanated from
the financing issue, that there's really--the Highway Trust
Fund has not been adequate enough for a number of years now.
Congress has been supplementing that with general appropriation
funds. They really need to find a permanent financing vehicle.
Congress did find a temporary one that will get us through
2020, but between 2021 and 2026, CBO is estimating there'll be
over $1 billion shortfall in what's needed to maintain the
roads.
So there are two issues: Finding the money and then making
sure the money is producing the right results. And that's what
we've been focused on.
Mr.  Duncan. All right. Thank you very much.
Chairman  Chaffetz. I thank the gentleman.
We'll now recognize the gentleman from Virginia, Mr.
Connolly, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And welcome, General Dodaro and your team. I don't know if
anyone is left at GAO today, but we're glad you're all here.
And, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you for this hearing.
And I think this is one of the most important hearings we have
every year, and I think this is one of the most signal pieces
of work done by the Federal Government about the Federal
Government. And I thank GAO for the contribution, because it
could virtually be the work plan of this committee. And it
brings us together, it's not partisan, and there's a lot of
good work we can do in collaboration with our colleagues at
GAO. So thank you.
I was listening to Mr. Duncan, who got in a little dig at
Dodd-Frank. So since we passed Dodd-Frank, did I understand
you, Mr. Dodaro, to say the fact of the matter is bank failures
have gone down, not up? Is that correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. That is correct.
Mr.  Connolly. And is it also true that there have been no
bailouts since that legislation was passed? Any additional
bailouts?
Mr.  Dodaro. I can't think of any. I don't think so.
Mr.  Connolly. Not any, yes. And in 2008 and 2009, what was
the total amount of banking bailouts to the taxpayer in this
country?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, it was a lot. It was hundreds of
billions of dollars.
Mr.  Connolly. Hundreds of billions of dollars, right.
That's a lot, I agree.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Connolly. It's a technical term, ``a lot.''
I want to talk about the census, if I can, because to me,
that's the intersection of IT and the function of government.
The census is a critical piece of work that must be done. A lot
flows from it, including representation in this body. The
people, you know, have their representation allocated based on
the findings of that census. Allocation of resources from the
Federal Government to the States flows from data from the
census.
And in looking at your report, I want to make sure I
understand this, you state that with the technology they're
using in field tests, 25 percent of households could not be
contacted by Bureau enumerators even after six attempts. Is
that correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. Let me call up our expert in that area, Mr.
Mihm.
Mr.  Connolly. Mr. Mihm, welcome.
Mr.  Mihm. Thank you, sir. Yes, sir, that is correct.
Mr.  Connolly. That's astounding. Twenty-five percent. That
calls into question the accuracy of the census itself. What's
the nature of the problem?
Mr.  Mihm. Well, it's a number of things, and a lot of it
is just the changing nature of American society. We have
increasing gated communities, and so it can be very difficult
to work with property managers and others to get access then to
the individual housing units. You have increased, obviously,
diversity in languages. We have to make sure that we send
enumerators that can speak the language in the community in
which they're enumerating. A lot of--it's a lot of the
complexity there.
There are also some changes that we were urging in census
rules on how they do that followup, to make sure that they're
not just following up at the same time on repetitive days, that
they're actually going at different times. They need to adjust
their rules to allow them to do that.
Mr.  Connolly. One of the problems, though, I think you
highlighted was--I get that and, obviously, that's not a
technology problem. But the technology piece there is the
software makes it hard to leave notes when an enumerator, in
fact, knocks on your door and you're not home. Is that correct?
Mr.  Mihm. Yes, sir. And that's also part of what I was
mentioning. The third element there is allowing then subsequent
enumerators to know not to go back. You know, if they go at
noon for three straight days in a row and there hasn't been
someone there at noon, if people are all working, they need to
be able to say, okay, we'll come back at 5 o'clock or we'll
come back before, you know, people leave for work.
Mr.  Connolly. This committee had hearings with the Census
officials on the technology piece. And what happened in 2010
was kind of a disaster in terms of technology, custom-made, you
know, handheld devices and so forth. And so this time, they
were going to use off-the-shelf, you know, with modifications,
and it was hopefully going to lower cost. The 2010 census was
the most expensive in history, $12.3 billion.
Mr.  Mihm. Yes, sir.
Mr.  Connolly. So how is that working out for us, in terms
of these modified off-the-shelf devices and the hopeful goal of
lowering the cost?
Mr.  Mihm. It's still an open issue, sir. I mean, there are
three big technology issues that they're confronting is, one,
to make sure that we can have the internet response option.
Second is that they have a major processing technology----
Mr.  Connolly. Let me interrupt you when you say that just
so we all understand what that means. In other words, a
subject, a citizen, can go on the internet and respond if an
enumerator hasn't reached me.
Mr.  Mihm. Yes, sir.
Mr.  Connolly. Yeah.
Mr.  Mihm. And the second is a major processing effort,
which is called CEDCaP. And then the third then is the mobile
devices, and which you alluded to was a big problem last time.
There are unresolved issues with all three of these major
technology issues. It was a major driver as to why we put the
2020 census on the high-risk list.
Mr.  Connolly. My time has run out, but just bottom line,
how worried should we be that, here we go again, the Census
Bureau, with best intentions, is facing 3 years out a serious
problem both with the technology and with the budget, the cost
of this enterprise, or are these just glitches that we're
confident can be worked out?
Mr.  Dodaro. If we weren't worried, we wouldn't put it on
the list.
Mr.  Connolly. Thank you, Mr. Dodaro.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Mihm. I agree.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Mr. Mihm, if you can just stay right
there. I'm going to go ahead and recognize myself. I want to
follow up on what Mr. Connolly was saying about the census.
What's your biggest worry right now?
Mr.  Mihm. The biggest worry right now, I think, is that
they have a series of innovations that are very important
potential innovations that can have huge cost-savings
implications if they work out. So they have a series of these
innovations at the same time that they are canceling tests in
the field for later this year and into 2018.
They need to make sure that they are able to have these
innovations, the internet response, increasing use of
administrative records, and others, be able to work together in
concert in census-taking operations. That's a----
Chairman  Chaffetz. How far behind schedule are they?
Mr.  Mihm. It's not so much that they're behind schedule.
It's that they're, in a sense, racing to--they need to make
sure that they maintain the schedule that they're on. They've
canceled a test that's coming up, you know, for a variety of
reasons, which they say is primarily driven by budget concerns,
you know, budget concerns related to the continuing CR and
other issues.
We're quite concerned that they need to make sure that all
these innovations are tested in census-like operations. That's
key to making sure that they maintain the quality of the
census, but then also delivering on a more efficient census as
well.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Now, one of the things that is
important to executing on a census are going out and finding
what ends up being a couple hundred thousand people to go out
and do the enumeration.
You know, I've been an advocate since I've been here to tap
into the Postal Service. We actually have a workforce of people
that have uniforms. They have clearances. We trust them. We've
identified them. And they're familiar with the neighborhoods.
They don't need to go remap the world.
Have you done anything or looked at anything? We're working
towards introducing a piece of legislation that would allow
postal workers to do this. They may need to make more money to
do it. It's going to take money to still train them. But
they're already walking the routes. They already know the
neighborhoods. Have you looked at that at all?
Mr.  Mihm. We've looked at it indirectly. I mean, I know,
as you mentioned, Mr. Chairman, this is an issue that has been
or a question that's been asked of the Census Bureau for at
least the last two or three census about the increasing use of
the Postal Service in taking the census. There are cost
implications.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Sure.
Mr.  Mihm. Typically, a letter carrier will make more than
a census enumerator that would take place. It is, you know,
pretty labor-intensive, and so we'd have to figure out where
they could find the time within their schedule.
On the other hand, as you point out, they do know the
neighborhoods and, in fact, in many cases would know where the
hidden households are, which is a major challenge that the
Bureau faces. It's not just a postal address but are there, you
know, basement units or something like that. That's the
tradeoff that would have to be made.
Chairman  Chaffetz. And we also trust them I think is a big
part of that issue.
Mr. Dodaro, I want to go back to the post office. This
committee is looking at legislation dealing with the post
office. What happens if we do nothing? The current financial
trajectory of the post office, what's your view of that?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, right now, they're not making the
prepayments for the retirement benefits area, and that's a big
problem. That's a growing issue. That means at some point,
those benefits are going to have to be paid. And if the Postal
Service hasn't prefunded it over a period of time, that's going
to be a problem. They're already maxed out on their borrowing
from the Treasury Department at $15 billion. They can't borrow
any more money from the Treasury at this time. Their other
liabilities for workmen's compensation are going up. Their
total liabilities, I think it's about 130 percent of their
revenues at this point.
So--but the underlying problem is the business model's
really broken. You're not--first-class mail has been going
down. It's likely to go down for the foreseeable future. It's
the most profitable margin that they have. And they've taken
major cost-cutting moves, but they don't have any major other
cost-cutting activities planned. So they really need help.
So we've put on a list. Congress has to act. There needs to
be a reform in this area.
Chairman  Chaffetz. And we're looking at a bailout if we
don't fix it, correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes.
Chairman  Chaffetz. This is something that I think is of
urgent need for this committee, and I'm glad that we're on top
of it, but we do need to pass a piece of legislation to fix the
systemic problems.
Fannie and Freddie, they--as a quasi-government agency,
there isn't much exposure that the public gets to see and look
under the hood. I'm working on a piece of legislation to give
Freedom of Information Act requests that the public could
actually issue a FOIA request to Fannie and Freddie. Do you
have any opinion or thoughts on that?
Mr.  Dodaro. I could give that some thought. I mean,
generally, I'm a supporter of the Freedom of Information Act.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Is there any reason you can think of
off the top of your head, though, why they shouldn't be subject
to FOIA requests?
Mr.  Dodaro. Not off the top of my head, unless--there's a
lot of litigation right now, and I think that may be a
complicating factor, but that is true for every Federal agency.
Chairman  Chaffetz. That is true for every agency. It just
seems that the American public--we have all the liability for
Fannie and Freddie, correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Do you have any--again, you're amazing
with numbers off the top of your head, but what is the ongoing
liability at Fannie and Freddie?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, there's in law, I think it's over $200
billion that potentially--Orice has the specific numbers. But
it's over $200 billion that they could still potentially draw
from the Treasury Department. They've paid more back than what
the government lent them during the crisis, but if there's
another downturn in the housing economy, their capital reserve
is going toward zero by 2018. At least at this time, we have a
regulatory entity. You know, for years we warned that they
weren't regulated enough, but it came too late.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Did you have anything you wanted to add
to that?
Sorry, your microphone.
Ms.  Brown. So Freddie and Fannie received $187.5 billion
from the Treasury. They have $258.1 billion available that they
can receive in additional assistance. And they have repaid more
than $250 billion in dividends to the Treasury. So right now,
they've paid more to Treasury than they received initially in
assistance.
Chairman  Chaffetz. It just seems to me, with so much
exposure to the Federal taxpayers, the taxpayers should be able
to issue a Freedom of Information Act request.
Mr.  Dodaro. I might say also, Mr. Chairman, on this, we've
issued a number of reports about a framework that could be used
to make decisions on Fannie and Freddie and some of the options
available. So we'd be happy to share that information for the
record.
Chairman  Chaffetz. Thank you.
I now recognize the ranking member, Mr. Cummings.
Mr.  Cummings. Mr. Dodaro, the high-risk report states that
the Office of Personnel Management and the Chief Human Capital
Officers Council, along with agencies, identified six
governmentwide occupations with mission-critical skill gaps.
One of these occupations is auditor.
As you know, agencies across the government have auditors
within the Offices of Inspector General who are tasked with
helping detect and prevent fraud, waste, and abuse, a mission
that helps our committee in oversight. Do the auditor positions
described in the report include those within the Inspector
General's office?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes.
Mr.  Cummings. And so is it correct to say that the IG
offices do not have enough highly skilled and qualified
auditors?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, I think that's always a concern for that
community. I know, you know, we have issues we're focused on as
well.
So let me ask Mr. Mihm if he has any more insight.
Mr.  Mihm. Yes, sir, it's two things. It's in one case, or
in some cases, it's obviously just a number of people. It's
also a skill set that's an issue. As, I mean, this committee
and others was instrumental in passing the DATA Act, which will
provide just a wealth of additional information. And so data
analytics is a skill set that both agencies need but also
auditors need to better target their audits. And so it's both
skills in terms of competencies as well as numbers of people.
Mr.  Cummings. Well, President Trump ordered a hiring
freeze during his first week in office. What will be the likely
impact of a hiring freeze on the government's ability to
address the mission-critical skills gap of auditors?
Mr.  Dodaro. It will make it more difficult. I mean, we've
looked at hiring freezes in the past by prior administrations,
and they haven't proven to be effective in either reducing
cost, and they cause some problems if they're in effect for a
long period of time.
Now, in this case, they've made a number of exceptions to
that area.
Mr.  Cummings. Is this one of them? Is this one of them?
Mr.  Dodaro. I don't believe so. But they're supposed to
come up with a plan. I think a lot of it will depend on what
kind of plan they come up with at the end of this temporary
hiring freeze. But a sustained hiring freeze is not the best
way. It's better to do it through a budget or workforce plan.
Mr.  Cummings. What kind of problems does it cause?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, it causes--you already--we know there
are already skill gaps. You mentioned in your opening statement
that----
Mr.  Cummings. Social security.
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, social security. I mean, cybersecurity,
acquisition workforce, oil and gas management, petroleum
engineers. A number of areas on our high-risk list have human
capital. Nurses at the VA. You know, there's a lot of areas.
And there will be, likely, emerging skill gaps. And you're
going to have a lot of people retiring. There's a lot of people
retiring in the Federal Government. So you have to be able to
realign the workforce. The retirements give you an opportunity
to realign your workforce, but you have to have that committed.
I mean, if you want to reduce the number of Federal
employees, in my opinion, you have to reduce the functions that
those employees are doing. If you don't reduce Federal programs
or eliminate programs or reduce things or find some other way
to do it, if you just eliminate the people but keep all the
functions there, you're going to have a problem.
Mr.  Cummings. Yeah. If the ability to hire skilled
personnel to address the skills gap is taken off the table, you
know, one of my fears is IGs will be hampered in their capacity
to detect and prevent waste, fraud, and abuse. So you, I take
it, based upon what you just said, would agree with that?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, we're going to monitor that issue. If it
stays in effect for a long period of time, it's going to have
effects. What we found before was that it reduced revenue
coming to the government because IRS wasn't able to hire
revenue agents. It caused agencies to hire contractors or
temporary employees. It really didn't end up saving much,
reducing the size of the workforce as much as anticipated, and
it caused agencies problems in implementing their missions.
Mr.  Cummings. So when we go out and we hire these
contractors, what kind of problems does that--I mean, have you
looked at that overall?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah.
Mr.  Cummings. I mean generally.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah, yeah. I mean, there's a number of
contract management issues already on the high-risk list. We've
got DOD contract management. We've got DOE, Energy Department
contract management, NASA, acquisitions.
And so managing--having the right people to oversee the
contractors is very, very important. And if you don't have that
in place, then you don't have necessarily a good prospect of
getting the requirements right in the first place and proper
direction and oversight over the contractors.
Mr.  Cummings. Now, your report also states, and I quote:
``According to OPM, data governmentwide, over 34 percent of
Federal employees on board by the end of fiscal year 2015 will
be eligible to retire.''
It also says, and I quote: ``A potential wave of employee
retirements could produce gaps in leadership and institutional
knowledge and threaten to aggravate the problems created by
existing skill gaps.''
Can you explain how a retirement wave exacerbates the skill
gaps? And then I'm finished.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. Chris.
Mr.  Mihm. Well, it's in two senses or at least in two
senses. One is that if you have staff with critical skills that
are retirement eligible and they leave without effective
succession planning programs within agencies and knowledge
transfer programs, you can have basically some of your very
most skilled people walking out the door. Likewise, at a
leadership level, that you can lose a core of your senior
executive and other leadership can go out if you don't have a
good succession planning program.
As the comptroller general has mentioned, is that it
provides an opportunity for agencies to rethink what their
skill gaps or what their competencies are that they need. So
retirements are not necessarily a bad thing. It's just
retirements that aren't factored in as part of a succession
planning program are a bad thing.
Mr.  Cummings. All right. Thank you very much.
Mr.  Palmer. [Presiding.] The chair now recognizes the
gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Walker, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Walker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, would you take a few minutes and, as we
discussed the Medicaid program, I have a couple questions
there. And I don't know how you are able to do this so much
from memory, but we'll give it a shot here as we move forward.
Can you tell me what the improper payment rate of the
Medicare program is right now?
Mr.  Dodaro. I think it's over 10 percent, and it's gone up
recently.
Is that correct, Nikki?
Yes, that's correct. It's over 10 percent. It was about $36
billion last year in improper payments in Medicaid. And I don't
believe, Mr. Walker, Congressman Walker, that that's even the
true magnitude of the problem, because the managed care portion
of Medicaid shows very small improper payment rates, because
they're only measuring what they pay the contractor, not what
the contractor pays the beneficiaries.
Mr.  Walker. Okay.
Mr.  Dodaro. So we got them to put a new rule in place that
I think will shed more light on this. They're going to audit
the Medicare contractors. Medicaid, excuse me.
Mr.  Walker. Thank you. Is that 10 percent higher or lower
than last year?
Mr.  Dodaro. It's higher.
Mr.  Walker. So we're trimming, obviously, the wrong
direction.
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, I'm very concerned about both Medicaid
and Medicare. They're the fastest growing programs in the
Federal Government's portfolio. They're estimated to continue
to grow at, you know, over 6 percent for the foreseeable
future. And most of the improper payments--governmentwide was
$144 billion. $60 billion of that was Medicare, $36 billion was
Medicaid.
Mr.  Walker. Okay. Let's drill down a little bit further if
we can then. How did the improper payment rate change from
before the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was
enacted to after States began to expend Medicaid?
Mr.  Dodaro. Nikki.
Ms.  Clowers. The rate has continued to go up over the past
2 years.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. One of the reasons that they cite,
Congressman, for the rate going up is that States didn't have
the proper systems in to determine eligibility under the new
Affordable Care Act regulations. So it's had some effect on
that. Not to say that some people may not be; they just haven't
been able to demonstrate that they're eligible.
Mr.  Walker. Okay. Is there anything that you guys are
doing or have done or could do, past, present, or future, in
examining the reasons why these rates continue to change?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. We've had a lot of recommendations in
those areas. First is to get better data. The Medicaid data is
really not good at all that the Center for Medicaid and
Medicare studies has. It's old data. It's a year or two out of
date. It's very inaccurate, very unreliable.
We've recommended that they audit these managed care
providers. I've worked with State auditors. In fact, the State
auditor from North Carolina was involved in our discussions to
try to get the State auditors to do more oversight and
continuous auditing of the Medicaid program since it's such a
large percent of the State budget activities. We've suggested
and Congress has given the go-ahead to take the Social Security
numbers off Medicare cards. We thought that that was leading to
a problem. We tried for about almost a decade to do that.
Mr.  Walker. Okay.
Mr.  Dodaro. So we've got a number of other
recommendations, but they need to----
Mr.  Walker. Sure.
Mr.  Dodaro. We're working on it. I've given this a high
priority. You know, since Congress has required improper
payments to be reported, measured and reported, since 2003,
it's over $1.2 trillion that have been reported. And last year,
it was 112 programs at 22 different agencies. So it's not just
confined. Medicare and Medicaid are the largest, but it's more
of a pervasive problem than I would like to see.
Mr.  Walker. Speaking of the different States, I'm going to
pick one. I'm going to pick Arkansas. A recent review of the
Medicaid enrollees in Arkansas found 43,000 people who had
moved out of the State, yet remained on Medicaid. Seven
thousand of these had appeared to have never lived in the
State. So it is very likely that two States may be paying two
different insurance companies for that same individual.
Any proposal of what we can do with such a problem?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we've recommended that they
make sure that they have adequate eligibility determination.
There are two issues: One is providers, to make sure that only
proper providers are in the programs; and second is eligibility
determination.
Let me ask Nikki if there's anything else she wants to add.
Ms.  Clowers. I was going to mention the eligibility
determinations as well as checks for duplicate coverage, that
they need to do that on a regular basis.
Mr.  Walker. Thank you, Mr. Dodaro.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr.  Palmer. I thank the gentleman from North Carolina.
The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Illinois, Ms.
Kelly, for 5 minutes.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Welcome to the witnesses.
Mr. Dodaro, your report states, and I quote: ``Over the
past several years, GAO has made about 2,500 recommendations to
agencies aimed at improving the security of Federal systems and
information. These recommendations would help agencies
strengthen technical security controls over their computer
networks and systems, fully implement aspects of their
information security programs, and protect the privacy of
personally identifiable information held on their systems. The
implementation of these systems are critical to addressing the
privacy concerns of citizens in an age where hacking seems
rampant.''
Can you explain why, as of October 2016, close to half of
those information security-related recommendations have not
been implemented?
Mr.  Dodaro. I've been very concerned about the pace of
agencies implementing our recommendations in this area. As I
mentioned in my opening statement, we had first identified this
as a governmentwide problem--it was the first time we ever
designated anything across the entire Federal Government high
risk--in 1997. It was hard to get agencies' attention to put in
place comprehensive systems.
Secondly, there's a lot of legacy systems, old systems,
where they just can't keep up with patching things
appropriately, and they need to replace the legacy systems, as
I know you're aware of that as well. They don't have
comprehensive systems in place. And despite the breaches that
have occurred most recently, there's more attention being given
to this area but not enough, from my opinion, sense of urgency
and actually fixing these problems.
So I'm hoping, as I meet with the new officials from the
new administration, the Cabinet officials, I put this on their
radar screen for prompt attention.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you. In your report, you also discuss the
need for the Federal Government to improve its ability to
detect, respond, and to mitigate cyber incidents. To that end,
we've heard encouraging news about the implementation of
continuous diagnostics and monitoring, or CDM. In your opinion,
how are DHS, GSA, and other agencies doing in its
implementation and what challenges are they facing?
Mr.  Dodaro. Greg Wilshusen is our expert in this area. He
has good insights in that. Greg. Hit the mic.
Mr.  Wilshusen. Yes. Certainly, we believe that CDM is a
tool that can help agencies better secure their systems by
looking at the configurations of those systems, making sure
that they're in compliance with agency standards, identify
vulnerabilities, and even just to identify the devices on the
networks.
What we have found and what we will be looking at, because
we are going to be starting an engagement to look at the CDM
program specifically, is that agencies generally do not do a
very good job of configuring their systems in accordance with
sound security principles. It's something we identify at just
about every agency we go to, including just the installation of
patches, for example, in a timely manner and using software
that's no longer supported by the vendors.
CDM and having a continuous monitoring program in place
that's effectively in place across the entire enterprise will
help to identify those instances and, hopefully, agencies will
act on that information.
Ms.  Kelly. Okay. Now, CDM is just one of the many steps
that we need to take if the Federal Government is to be a
leader in cybersecurity. And we also passed the bipartisan
Modernizing Government Technology Act, or MGT. But we also need
to improve cybersecurity in the procurement process.
In 2013, GSA and DOD published a report recommending the
incorporation of cybersecurity standards into the Federal IT
acquisition process. How helpful would these standards be in
improving the Federal Government's overall cybersecurity?
Mr.  Wilshusen. Well, I would just like to say that it's
critical for information security controls to be designed into
systems at the very beginning. Trying to come back and add on
security features after the system is up and running is usually
not as effective and more costly. So, clearly, designing and
including security controls in those acquisition is key.
What's also key is making sure that the acquisition
officers and the team that's acquiring this have the
cybersecurity expertise in order to assure that those security
controls are being specified in the contracts and indeed are
being adhered to by the contractors.
Ms.  Kelly. And one last question. What chief
recommendations does GAO have to directly deter cyber attacks
from other nations?
Mr.  Wilshusen. Well, one would be, of course, in terms--
one is just for the agencies to be adequately secure to help
prevent those attacks, but recognize that attacks are going to
continue, and even in good security, they're likely to succeed,
because of their sophistication.
In terms of working against--with other countries, one of
the key things is to have an international strategy that
addresses cybersecurity and come to an agreement with agencies
of like mind to identify what those cyber norms are and to try
to come up with procedures to protect against it. And when
those countries or whomever attack us is make sure that there's
some sort of consequence as a result.
Ms.  Kelly. Thank you. I know I'm out of time.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr.  Palmer. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Georgia, Mr. Hice, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to probably go down a similar path here while
we're on it. Of course, we spend billions of dollars developing
and acquiring the best technologies that we can have for our
military. Obviously, we want to maintain the advantage as much
as possible.
As I understand it, protecting these technologies, there
are a lot of different agencies involved in administering the
protection, from DOD to DHS and State, Treasury, a host of
different administration. Are any of these agencies more
effective than others at protecting our technologies?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. Mr. Francis is our expert in this area.
It's a good question.
Mr.  Francis. I think the agency--there are at least six
agencies involved. I don't know that any one is doing better
than another, but in the export control area, where we actually
have a formal process for end items, State and Commerce are
doing, I think, a pretty good job in coordinating their
licensing list and their licensing processes.
It's the individual efforts by other agencies on antitamper
and things like that, where the individual programs are not
well coordinated. And we've made a simple recommendation, why
don't you all just get together once a year and talk about what
you're doing. That's not happening yet.
Mr.  Hice. Why is that not happening, do you think?
Mr.  Francis. I don't think there's an incentive to do it.
The agencies are all working----
Mr.  Hice. This is a major deal. Obviously, our
technologies are massively critical to the national security of
our country and so forth. What would need to happen to get the
proper incentive for those communications to occur?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. I think legislation by the Congress.
Where we've seen very effective interagency coordination
mechanisms, there needs to be a statutory underpinning for
those mechanisms so they transcend administrations, and having
regular reporting requirements to the Congress.
I've been having meetings with OMB and the agencies on the
high-risk list for a number of years now. And I think when we
had one on the export control area, it might have been the
first time everybody got together to talk about these issues.
And so I think it's very important to do this, because, as Paul
mentioned, all these agencies have interrelated pieces, and
they need to work together very effectively in order to make
sure and keep things up to date, share information. Technology
is rapidly advancing, as you point out, Congressman, and they
need to be on top of this. But it'd be very effective, I think,
to have some legislation. We'd be happy to work with you on
that.
Mr.  Hice. Okay. Yes. Well, let's please do.
So you're saying the coordination is not there. Is that
correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. Particularly in the nonexport area. This would
be, as Paul mentioned, the antitamper area, foreign military
sales, and some other things. So on export control, they're
doing a little bit better job in that area. They have a plan to
reform it to go further, but they'll need legislation. So
legislation is going to be needed in both areas, in my opinion.
Mr.  Hice. Okay. If you would please, work with our office.
Let's see how we can get that. This is a critical issue that
needs to be addressed.
Mr.  Dodaro. Sure.
Mr.  Hice. Speaking real quickly, and I know I don't have
much time, but you mentioned NASA a little while ago. And, of
course, they are, from what I understand, planning another big
major launch sometime next year, latter part of 2018, I
believe. Do you have concerns that NASA may not be ready for
that type of big-scale launch?
Mr.  Dodaro. Go ahead, Paul.
Mr.  Francis. Yes, we do have concerns. It has three
elements: It's the launch system, the ground system, and the
Orion space capsule. Right now, they're all on fairly high-risk
schedules, not much margin left. They're not all that well-
coordinated. We think it's a very high risk of them not making
that November 2018 date.
Mr.  Hice. All right. But they believe that they are right
on schedule, meeting all the requirements. You would disagree
with that, with their assessment?
Mr.  Francis. I think they know they're on the edge.
Mr.  Hice. On the edge of what?
Mr.  Francis. Not making it.
Mr.  Hice. So why are they saying that they're making it,
that they're on schedule?
Mr.  Francis. Well, I think they've done internal analysis.
They have not come out and said they can't make it yet. But
every indication we have, it looks very unlikely that they are.
So I think maybe it's a matter of time.
Mr.  Hice. So in that case, you would disagree with their
internal analysis?
Mr.  Francis. Yes.
Mr.  Hice. Okay. All right. Thank you very much. Appreciate
you all being here.
I yield back.
Mr.  Dodaro. Congressman, I would also like to thank you
publicly for help in our bill to get the mandates reduced to
GAO. It's helped us focus on our more important areas. Thank
you.
Mr.  Hice. Well, thank you. And I appreciate your letter
saying so. It meant a great deal to me. Thank you.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
The chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs.
Demings.
Mrs.  Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
And good morning Mr. Dodaro, and to all of our witnesses,
welcome.
The GAO has found that sufficient progress has been made
since 2005 to remove the high-risk designation from one area
this year establishing effective mechanisms for sharing and
managing terrorism-related information to protect the homeland.
In its 2017 high risk report, GAO states, and I quote,
``While the progress is commendable, it does not mean the
government eliminated all risk associated with sharing
information or terrorism-related information.'' I understand
that GAO has switched the designation of this area from risk--
to risk rather than high risk. Is that correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct.
Mrs.  Demings. This is a concrete step, no doubt, in the
right direction, and I hope we can continue to build on this
progress, but I have to admit that I am worried that we may be
losing some of the progress we have made in this area.
Recently, the President issued an executive order
pertaining to homeland security without seeking advice or
conferring with Congress or any of the agencies whose mission
it is to protect our Nation. Orders meant to truly protect our
country should be implemented and conducted in a thorough
fashion and one that shares information in a productive manner.
The American people deserve a government that directs its
resources at well-planned and well-communicated efforts.
Mr. Dodaro, how important is information sharing to the
security and well-being of our Nation?
Mr.  Dodaro. It's absolutely essential. I mean, that was
one of the issues after the September 11, 2001, attacks that
was cited as a weakness. Congress passed an Intelligence Reform
Act that there be established an information-sharing
environment, so there was sharing among all the agencies and
that's what's been implemented effectively.
It's taken a number of years, a number of steps, and we've
made a lot of specific recommendations, but they've made a lot
of progress over the period of time and have demonstrated some
result. Particularly in geospatial information, sharing law
enforcement databases, and also in maritime domain awareness
where there--in monitoring the sea.
So we've seen some good progress. We'll be keeping a
watchful eye to make sure that that progress continues.
Mrs.  Demings. What are some of the things you would
suggest that we can do to sustain the progress or maximize it?
Mr.  Dodaro. George.
Mr.  Scott. Good morning. A couple areas where we think
that continued focus is needed. It's important to ensure that,
as we've said in the report, while we've taken it off the high-
risk list, that does not mean that the risk does not remain.
And so just ensuring that there is continued leadership,
attention, and focus on this issue.
Oftentimes, a number of the issues that we face, whether it
is information sharing or other issues, it's less about sort of
technology challenges; it's more about sort of leadership
commitment and staying focused on these issues. So I think that
is one area where we can continue to pay attention in this
area. And the other issue is making sure that they continue to
develop and measure their progress in meeting goals for the
program.
Mrs.  Demings. Thank you very much. I yield back.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentlewoman yields.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
DeSantis, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  DeSantis. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, in terms of the DOD acquisition, I know there
has been problems with the F-35, with the LCS. What steps is
DOD taking to ensure that that doesn't happen in the future?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah, I'll ask Mr. Francis, our expert in this
area to address that. But you're--I'm concerned.
Mr.  Francis. Good morning. Yes, DOD is taking a number of
steps. They have an initiative called Better Buying Power that
involves doing better cost estimates, better monitoring.
They're doing a report every year to check on how they're
doing, so we think those are good things. They've improved the
acquisition workforce, also good things.
But we still see programs that are going forward without
really measuring up to all the best practices they should, at
start, like technology maturity, design, and having good cost
and schedule estimates. And if those programs aren't right at
the beginning, we're playing catchup the rest of the way. So
DOD is not doing quite as well there, and I think there's a
real important role for the Congress there to hold programs
accountable and say no to programs that aren't measuring up.
Mr.  DeSantis. Yeah. And the problem that we have is we
don't do it at the beginning, like you said. Once you get to
the F-35, there's so much money invested. It'd be stupid to
say, now we're not going to do it and just abandon it. So we've
got to get this right early on.
So did you read--there was an article in the Washington
Post at the end of the year about a report that had been
commissioned within the DOD. It identified a number of
effectively dead weight costs that could be mitigated over a 5-
year period. I think it was 125 billion. As I read the article
in the report, none of that really affected the actual
warfighter. DOD kind of deep-sixed it. Have you been able to
review that report, or are you familiar with the issues?
Mr.  Francis. Go ahead.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah, we're familiar with the issues. That was
a defense business board report, and their estimate over the
125 billion was over a number of years. They cited a lot of the
same areas that we've cited where there are opportunities for
savings. Some of the areas we were comfortable with their
numbers; others we weren't.
So, no, they were headed in the right direction. I'm not
sure there's that magnitude of savings available over that
reasonable period of time, but there are savings to be had and
it's----
Mr.  DeSantis. Do you know why the DOD leadership was so
hostile to it after it had been put out?
Mr.  Dodaro. Where's Kathy? Excuse me. She knows. This is
Kathy Berrick.
Mr.  DeSantis. Revolving door, whatever works----
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah right.
Ms.  Berrick. They agreed with aspects of the study and, in
fact, have internal reviews within DOD where they're looking
for efficiencies. They had some disagreements on the amount of
money that could be saved. But I would say, overall, they had
some agreements with the specifics of the study, but weren't in
full concurrence with the overall conclusions about how much
money could be saved. Some of these efforts are still ongoing
within DOD, some of these reviews. So ultimately, it could
result in some savings moving forward.
Mr.  DeSantis. So we on the committee here, we are going to
be reviewing kind of that report. I think that's going to
happen in a couple weeks. We're going to do the full committee
hearing. And I think the thought is is that obviously we have
budget pressures, defense is our number one priority. Whatever
deadweight is in there, I mean, to be able to get and root some
of that out, that ultimately is going to free up more money for
the warfighter so it really benefits the people who are on the
front lines.
But my fear is, if you don't start early in a new
administration, a lot of this stuff just goes by the wayside.
So we would definitely want to take your recommendations. We're
going to do some fact finding but then try to facilitate even
more reforms, because if we get this right, it could
eventually, I think, really be helpful to folks who are
frontline warriors.
Mr.  Dodaro. No, I agree with you completely. Actually, if
you look at the high-risk list, probably a third of the areas
on high-risk lists are DOD business management practices. I
mean, we have the best military in the world, but when it comes
to the business practices, there's a lot of room for
improvement. We can help. But the fundamental----
Mr.  DeSantis. What can we do though for the business
systems? Are there recommendations?
Mr.  Dodaro. Oh, we have lots of recommendations. We'll
share with you all those recommendations. But the fundamental
problem that everybody has is the lack of reliable information
over there. DOD is the only major Federal agency that's never
been able to pass a test of an independent audit.
And so therefore, the room for people to quibble over the
data is--there's a large playing field there that there
shouldn't be, even in, you know, how to gain the $10 billion
Congress has mandated in headquarters reductions. You know,
what's the baseline? How do you measure that? So we have a lot
of insight into those areas. We can help you a great deal.
Mr.  DeSantis. No, absolutely. And it was supposed to be
audited, I think, in the early 1990s, just never happened. And
so it does make it more difficult; there's no doubt about it.
So, I appreciate you guys, and I yield back the balance of my
time.
Mr.  Dodaro. Thank you.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields. The chair now recognizes
the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr. Cartwright, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And General Dodaro, welcome back.
Mr.  Dodaro. Thank you.
Mr.  Cartwright. It is a pleasure to have you back here. I
first met you 4 years ago when you came in with the high-risk
report at that time. And at that time, that was the first year
you had climate change on one of the action items for the high-
risk report.
I just want to cite a statistic I saw today: ``Between 2005
and 2015, FEMA issued more than $67 billion in grants to assist
communities and individuals devastated by extreme weather
events.'' And Mr. Dodaro, you guys picked up on this. GAO has
reported on climate change for a number of years now. The high-
risk report cites climate change findings of the National
Research Council and the U.S. global change research program.
The report states, quote, ``According to the National
Research Council, although the exact details cannot be
predicted with certainty, there is clear, scientific
understanding that climate change poses serious risks to human
society and many of the physical and ecological systems upon
which society depends.''
GAO has done substantial work on the issue of climate
change. The question is, what does the body of scientific
literature suggest as to whether climate change is, in fact,
occurring?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. Well, we've deferred largely to the
scientists at national academies and the global research group
that you mentioned which are made up of the agencies.
Our angle on this, and the reason we're concerned, is the
fiscal exposure of the Federal Government.
Mr.  Cartwright. Me too. Fiscal exposure, that's what we're
all here to talk about, the fiscal exposure of the Federal
Government. And you wrote in your report, ``The Federal
Government is not well organized to address the fiscal exposure
caused by extreme weather events.'' Right?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct.
Mr.  Cartwright. So how large are these exposures, and how
high might the associated cost of inaction be?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. The exposures are in several different
forms. We don't have an overall number, I'll say that upfront.
Number one is the Federal Government as a property owner.
I'm very concerned. DOD has raised this issue on the impact on
its own operations, but this--particularly on coastal areas, of
protecting all those DOD assets that we built both domestically
and internationally.
Second is on the Federal Government as an insurer. The
flood insurance program already owes over $20 billion to the
Treasury Department. It is not actuarially sound, and it's
subject to a lot of additional exposure.
Crop insurance, the payments for the Federal Government for
crop insurance have doubled over the last several years from
what they were before so there's likelihood there.
The other issue is the Federal Governments never reform the
criteria it uses for declaring a natural disaster that it's
going to step into. We're still using a per capita amount, you
know, in individual States. We suggested that needed to be
reformed.
And then the budgeting area is another area. We don't
budget as a national government for major disasters. We budget
for anything that's under $500 million. But when something big
hits, we just go--you know, we take care of it----
Mr.  Cartwright. You take care of it.
Mr.  Dodaro. --but we've got to borrow.
Mr.  Cartwright. So we're talking about the American
taxpayers are property owners, they are insurers----
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Cartwright. And they bail out when there's a FEMA
emergency.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Cartwright. And this is why this is on the high-risk
report because we need to prepare for these crises. And your
finding was that the Federal Government is not well organized
to plan ahead for resilience and planning and things like that.
So I have introduced legislation working with your office
to create an oversight and governance structure and a process
that requires agencies to implement governmentwide resilience,
preparedness, and risk management priorities, and elevating the
role of OMB to ensure proper funding and implementation for
these initiatives.
The support for this has been bipartisan. My brother, Mr.
Farenthold, is a cosponsor of this. He's not here right now,
but we also have a lot of taxpayers groups that love this
legislation: Taxpayers for Commonsense, National Taxpayers
Union, Coalition to Reduce Spending, Taxpayers Protection
Alliance, even the Reinsurance Association of America.
People who are concerned about fiscal soundness and saving
taxpayers money love this bill. It is the PREPARE Act. I will
be reintroducing it again this Congress.
And I want to thank you for all your work and your
foresight in working on this problem.
Mr.  Dodaro. Thank you very much.
Mr.  Cartwright. I yield back.
Mr.  Dodaro. Congressman Cartwright, thank you.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from Michigan, Mr.
Mitchell, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Mitchell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
General Dodaro, you may have to change, rotate experts
there, sir.
Mr.  Dodaro. I need a chair on wheels.
Mr.  Mitchell. What's that?
Mr.  Dodaro. I say, I need a chair on wheels.
Mr.  Mitchell. Yes, you do in here. If you're a Member of
Congress, you need wheels as well. Trust me on that.
I'd like to talk a little bit about transportation, surface
transportation. The GAO report found--yep, somebody knew. The
GAO report found that several agencies failed to document key
award decisions when making decisions regarding discretionary,
I would say, allegedly competitive grants that resulted in poor
decisionmaking.
Specifically, GAO found that DOT failed to document key
decisions and deviated from established procedures in awarding
the TIGER grants, the Transportation Investment Generating
Economic Recovery grants. What were your offices findings--
recommendations regarding that matter?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. We were very concerned about the lack of
documentation and the clear--and the transparency on which
these grants were awarded. Ms. Siggerud can explain the details
there. We've made some recommendations. They've taken some
actions, but not enough, so I think congressional follow-up
would be helpful.
Kate.
Ms.  Siggerud. GAO has looked at several different types of
discretionary grants given by the Department of Transportation,
including the TIGER grants that you mentioned, as well as more
recently some transit grants related to emergency situations.
Mr.  Mitchell. Sure.
Ms.  Siggerud. In all of those cases, we found both a lack
of transparency at the beginning about the criteria and then
explanation of how those criteria were applied throughout the
entire process, including documentation of any decisions that
were made outside or not in agreement with those criteria.
So we made sort of a wrap-up recommendation in December of
this year regarding all of the discretionary grant programs at
the Department, and we will be monitoring how the Department
looks at both that upfront criteria setting as well as the
decisionmaking and the documentation throughout.
Mr.  Mitchell. Did you look at how much money was spent
outside the anticipated intent or guidelines? Did you look at
the amount of money that was, let's say, misallocated, for lack
of a better term? Did you get an estimate of that?
Ms.  Siggerud. I'd like to get that number to you for the
record. We did look at grants and identified some that were
elevated above others in apparent disagreement with the
criteria that were originally established.
Mr.  Mitchell. When you provide that, if you could provide
not only the amount but which grants and which locations they
were for.
Ms.  Siggerud. I'd like to get back with our team on that
so we could determine the level of detail that we have.
Mr.  Mitchell. Sure, if we could.
And if we could put that in the record, Mr. Chair, when we
do receive that, I would appreciate it.
Mr.  Palmer. Without objection.
Mr.  Mitchell. One more quick question for you while I have
time. One of the findings you note is that funding for
transportation, highway transportation has eroded in part
because of inflationary impacts and failure to raise the gas
tax.
Has the Department made any recommendations regarding
efficiency, regarding administrative cost cuts that can be made
at DOT to, in fact, put more money in the highways?
Mr.  Dodaro. We've not--we've not--you mean, by the
department, you mean the GAO?
Mr.  Mitchell. Oh GAO, yes, sir.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. I'll get back. I'll look at that and
we'll get back to you for the record. Nothing springs to mind
offhand in that area. I think our main recommendations have
been mostly geared toward making sure that the States' use of
the highway money is producing good results.
Mr.  Mitchell. Sure.
Mr.  Dodaro. And that has been our primary area of concern.
I don't think we've identified other areas that could be cut to
shift money into that area.
Mr.  Mitchell. Well, the question I would ask is, how
efficient are we being with the money and how much money is
being transmitted onto the States rather than spent on, I would
say, bureaucratic overhead that, in fact, doesn't put highway
miles, doesn't fix roads, which in Michigan and across this
country, is significant concerns.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right, right. No, while go back--I'll go back
and take a look and submit something for the record for that
area. Offhand, nothing comings to mind.
Mr.  Mitchell. I appreciate the review. Thank you very
much.
And I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
The chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from New York,
Mrs. Maloney, for 5 minutes.
Mrs.  Maloney. Thank you Chairman Palmer for yielding.
And it's always good to see you, Mr. Dodaro, and we all
rely on the GAO in our daily decisions for your independent and
professional judgment, so thank you.
I'd like to direct my questions on the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau. And as you know, the CFPB has returned over
$12 billion to over 27 million Americans who have been victims
of fraud and deception. And you rightfully applauded them for
this achievement.
Now, the high-risk report indicates that the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau has addressed all of GAO's previous
recommendations. In fact, the report states that Congress
should consider, and I quote, ``transferring other regulators'
consumer protection authorities to the bureau.'' I can assume
that these statements are due to the bureau's effectiveness and
efficiency.
Specifically, why are you recommending that other
regulators and consumer protection transfer it over to the
CFPB?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah, let me ask Ms. Williams to respond to
that.
Ms.  Williams. So we issued a report last year that looked
at the regulatory structure. And one of the things we observed
in the consumer protection space is that there's fragmentation;
that while the CFPB was created there were certain
responsibilities that went to CFPB, and there were others that
were retained by the existing regulators. So this creates a
potential for unevenness in terms of protecting consumers.
Mr.  Dodaro. It's part of--if I might, Orice, it's part of
an overall look that we had of the banking regulators. And we
still think that there's a lot of overlap and duplication in
the bank regulation area at large, and then within that
framework consumer protection issue was raised.
Ms.  Williams. Yes. We also looked at the regulatory
structure for depository institutions and also insurance.
Mrs.  Maloney. Okay. I'd like to ask today about the
recommendations in your report for the overall financial
regulatory system. And the report indicates, and I quote,
``Congress and financial regulators have made progress in
improving the financial regulatory systems,'' so that's really
good news.
And the report indicates that the Financial Stability
Oversight Council, or FSOC, quote, ``represents advancement in
addressing systemic risks and threats to the U.S. financial
system,'' end quote. And even that--and I quote, ``its legal
authorities may not be broad enough to ensure that it addresses
all of the threats effectively.''
Now, can you comment on why you felt that it's not
addressing everything effectively, it could be broader. Could
you address that more?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. I'll ask Orice to give particulars. But
I'm very concerned about this. You know, one of the issues when
we put it on the high-risk list, one of the reasons in 2009 was
there was not a systemic risk focus by any of the regulatory
areas. And this was one of the major failures that led to the
global financial crisis, and the crisis we had in our country.
And so instead of designating a regulator, they gave the
responsibility to FSOC to do. And we've looked at their work,
tried to encourage them to be more transparent and thorough and
also have a better research group, not duplicate what the
individual regulators were doing.
And in some of the recommendations we had, if I recall
correctly, they believed they didn't have the legal authority
to do it. So we recommended that Congress clarify it.
Orice can provide the specifics.
Mrs.  Maloney. Okay. Could you elaborate on that?
Ms.  Williams. Yes. So the council consists of independent
regulators. So if a problem is identified by the council, they
aren't able to bind any of the regulators to take action to
address any particular risk that may emerge in the system.
And that's what--the matter that we had spoke to was
perhaps, if FSOC is going to be the systemic risk entity, then
it should have responsibilities and authorities commensurate
with the helping to identify and address systemic risk issues.
Mrs.  Maloney. That's interesting, because some of my
colleagues are working to abolish the CFPB, which seems to be
incredibly successful in helping consumers and I would say the
financial system, because the overall financial system thrives
when consumers are also successful. And that the FSOC does not
have implementation powers as strong as they should.
I want to thank you for your very helpful insight into this
and basically your statement that abolishing these new
safeguards for the financial system would be a mistake and hurt
the overall economy.
So my time has expired, so I want to thank you for your
hard work. I love GAO. I probably ask for too many reports from
all of you, but they're always insightful and very helpful, and
I'm very appreciative. It's helped advance our work in a
bipartisan way. Thank you.
Mr.  Dodaro. Thank you very much.
Mr.  Palmer. The chair recognizes the gentleman from North
Carolina, Mr. Meadows, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, thank you so much for your work. And as I look
out into the audience with a lot of your fellow colleagues, a
real thank you to all of you as well. I know this is not your
first rodeo, and we do appreciate your work.
And it makes a difference. I think I need to stress that,
that the recommendations that many times--you know, a lot of
times we can do these recommendations and think that no one is
listening and no one is hearing, but I can tell you that not
only do we listen normally, whether it's census or even--Mr.
Dodaro, I think strategic oil reserves is one of the things
that you mentioned that we needed to address.
So it got used as a pay-for at least three or four times
after your hearing. I think we only had, you know, 25 billion.
I think we used it four times, $100 billion worth.
So as we become more accustom to some of the
recommendations that you make, what I'd like to do is for us to
look just for our accountability, and it may be for GAO's
benefit, is the number of recommendations that actually get
implemented and not just by agency but overall those cost-
saving recommendations. I know that you're doing that as they
come off the high-risk list, but the more specific where you
can actually get the feedback to the individual sector that is
working, so whether it's DOD or the IRS or anything else, if we
could do that.
So let me go very specifically to two--if your DOD person
would come back up real quick on foreign military sales.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes.
Mr.  Meadows. And something that I need to get more
clarification on, primarily because I've got somebody coming in
to ask me about something today, as it would happen. They're
not in my district and so I feel like maybe I can speak out a
little bit more clearly.
But with regards to foreign military sales and what I would
say sole-source procurement, where there is one person that
ultimately gets the contract and where they get disqualified
because of not having dealt with the bureaucracy of the United
States before, is that a common practice, and if that is a
common practice, does that not present a barrier to entry for
anyone else wanting to compete for the same type of business?
Because the reason supposedly was that they don't normally
deal with the bureaucracy of the Federal Government even though
they are qualified to sell to the government. But because they
haven't done it, they got thrown out. Is that common?
Mr.  Francis. I don't know how common it is, but it
happens.
Mr.  Meadows. Have you seen it before?
Mr.  Francis. Yes. Yes.
Mr.  Meadows. Okay. So if you've seen it before, and we
have a barriered entry, and because you haven't done business
with the Federal Government you can't do business with the
Federal Government in the future. Does that not have a chilling
effect on competition?
Mr.  Francis. Yes. And it keeps nontraditional firms from
entering into the DOD market, and we're not able to take
advantage of some of the commercial innovation. And we're
taking a look at that right now.
Mr.  Meadows. All right. Well, will you take the message
back that there's one member from North Carolina that is not
going to give up on this particular issue and that he has the
support of two very senior Senators in the upper chamber that
would--not necessarily from my State, that are looking at this
very exact thing.
And so if you would take to them that if they're going to
have a chilling effect on competition, we're going to look a
lot closer at the procurement aspects as it relates. Would you
do that for me?
Mr.  Francis. We will do that.
Mr.  Meadows. All right. Great.
Mr. Dodaro, in the 49 seconds I have remaining, let's look
at tax gap and truly at where we are in terms of not collecting
taxes. I understand the newest one is--$406 billion is the tax
gap.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Meadows. Eventually that becomes real money. Doesn't
it?
Mr.  Dodaro. In a hurry.
Mr.  Meadows. Yeah, in a hurry.
So when we look at EITC, and the earned income tax credit,
it shows that improper payments average around 25 to 26
percent. Is that correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. I believe that's right.
Mr.  Meadows. And so is that a historical trend which
typically doesn't change much year to year?
Mr.  Dodaro. As I recall, it has been pretty much in that
neighborhood over the time. I'll go back and I'll give the
exact numbers for the record. There was a slight drop this past
year, but there's no big changes that I've seen. There's some
structural issues with that area.
Mr.  Meadows. Okay. So if there are structural issues, at
what point do we get serious? Because even just on the improper
payments there, according to my notes, it's between $13 billion
and $15 billion.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right. It's the third largest improper payment
behind Medicare and Medicaid.
Mr.  Meadows. So how do we fix it?
Mr.  Dodaro. There are a couple of things that have to be
looked at: One is the statutory basis for the earned income tax
credit. That's a very complicated situation. And I think----
Mr.  Meadows. So are you suggesting that Members of
Congress passed something that was very complicated? I'm
shocked.
Mr.  Dodaro. In this particular case, I might say that that
it could be simplified. And it----
Mr.  Meadows. Okay. You need to run for office. That was
very political, yeah.
Mr.  Dodaro. I'm happy with my current job.
Mr.  Meadows. As you should be. I've run out of time, so I
will give you some for the record. I want to be sensitive to
the chair.
And if we would--I'll yield back, but I'll follow up and
give your tax experts some--we need some as we look at the
Affordable Care Act, the repeal replacement. We're about to
make some more complicated decisions that I don't want to make
sure--I want to make sure we don't make the same mistake.
And I'll yield back.
Mr.  Dodaro. Okay.
Mr.  Palmer. The chair now recognizes the gentlelady from
the District of Columbia, Ms. Holmes Norton, for 5 minutes.
Ms.  Norton. I thank the chairman.
I have a question about the effect of the elimination of
regulations that is going full board here now.
So let's start with one. Mr. Dodaro, the management of
Federal oil and gas resources by our country has been put on
the high-risk list since 2011.
According to your report, some progress has been made on
implementing the GAO's recommendations in this area. And I note
that resources from oil and gas amount to $49 billion, at least
I'm quoting now from fiscal years 2011 through 2015, and
therefore, one of the governments' largest sources of nontax
revenue.
Now, past GAO work had has found that the American people
or that the country may not be getting a fair return from oil
and gas produced from Federal leases. The Bureau of Land
Management revises its--recommended--I'm sorry GAO recommended
that the Bureau of Land Management revise its regulations to
charge higher royalty rates to companies producing oil and gas
on public lands.
Now, I understand that this recommendation was implemented
as part of BLM's final rule on methane and waste reduction.
Now, I like your view on the effect you envision given what you
know about your recommendations to put it into effect in the
first place. What would be the likely effect if this rule were
finally overturned?
Mr.  Dodaro. I would like to ask Mr. Gaffigan to address
that. He's our expert in that area.
Mr.  Gaffigan. Thank you for your question.
Yeah, our recommendation was in the revenue collection
area, basically that BLM should provide itself some flexibility
to change the rates. They hadn't been looked at in a long time,
and BLM went through a long process to do that and was, as you
indicated, able to do a proposed rule, which allows for this
flexibility.
What happens in the future is very dependent on where the
resource is, what's at stake. They obviously want to provide a
competitive rate. They don't want to price themselves out of
the market by having a rate that's too high, but at least
they've set the stage for providing the flexibility to collect
revenues. And as you mentioned----
Ms.  Norton. They had done that in the rule.
Mr.  Gaffigan. They've done that in the rule in November of
2016.
Ms.  Norton. Uh-huh. So the notion that one of these rules
may actually deprive us of revenues is almost laughable if it
weren't so sad.
GAO has looked intensively at this area, and it's also
recommended that BLM update other regulations, including--I
understand this is called onshore order number three to help
BLM accurately determine how much is due in royalties, and that
this was implemented.
With onshore order number three, if we see its elimination,
how would you characterize the potential effect?
Mr.  Dodaro. Go ahead.
Mr.  Gaffigan. I think that there's a lot of things
happening in that area of revenue collection. We still have it
in sort of a partially met status in terms of where BLM is in
this, because I think we need to see how it plays out. One of
the issues----
Ms.  Norton. What do you mean by partially?
Mr.  Gaffigan. The criteria for coming off the high risk.
We think they have made some progress, but they haven't fully
met it. And we have it at the partially-met category because we
think it needs--we need to see it implemented. And I think
there's still some remains-to-be-seen work that needs to be
done in this----
Ms.  Norton. How much of it has been implemented?
Mr.  Gaffigan. I'm sorry?
Ms.  Norton. You say it has been partially implemented.
Mr.  Gaffigan. Right.
Ms.  Norton. So are we almost there? Are we halfway there?
Mr.  Gaffigan. I think they set the stage for them to be
able to do some of these things. To increase----
Ms.  Norton. So you must have some view then on what would
happen if that halfway or that were eliminated?
Mr.  Gaffigan. Well we're going to continue to monitor it
and continue to monitor this area, as we have for a number of
years, to see. We think there has been some progress made, but
there's more work that needs to be done.
Mr.  Dodaro. If in some of these areas, when we're--we're
monitoring them all the time. If we see progress has regressed,
we will state that. We will let the Congress know.
In fact, in this oil and gas area, we're saying for the
reorganization area on high risk, they've regressed. They
haven't fixed--in their safety and environmental management,
they haven't--they're still using pre-Deep Water Horizon
Investigation rules. They haven't fixed that. They're having
problems in planning and documenting and have quality assurance
over their investigations.
In the environment area, they're still operating on a 30-
year-old agreement with EPA. They haven't changed that yet. And
their enforcement mechanisms, they haven't been very clear on
that area as well. And they've changed, in some of the
environment area, reversed their reorganizational structure
plans that they had in place.
So that's an area where we're saying this year, for that
aspect of it, they've moved backwards not forward. And we'll
keep an eye on these other areas as well.
Ms.  Norton. Thank you very much.
Mr.  Palmer. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Kentucky, Mr. Massie, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Massie. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Dodaro, I see on here, on the list of 34 at-risk
programs, is improving Federal oversight of food safety. I
missed your opening comments, but if you'd like to say
something about that, I'd love to hear.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. We've had that on the list for a number
of years. It's a very fragmented system that we have. You know,
there's, you know, 30 different laws about 16 different Federal
agencies that are involved in food safety, and we've
recommended that there be, you know, comprehensive reform; that
they have a food safety governmentwide plan that spells out
what needs to be done. There's metrics on how to do it.
They used to have a--the executive branch used to have a
food safety working group. That's fallen by the wayside. We're
saying Congress, we believe, should at a minimum reestablish
that group, ask for a governmentwide plan with measures and
milestones, particularly as we're importing more food as well.
I mean, the number of imported food now has almost doubled that
in the past several years. And so I think it's very important
that they address this issue.
Mr.  Massie. What are the potential contributors to the
increase in reported multi-State outbreaks of foodborne
illness?
Mr.  Dodaro. Mr. Gaffigan is our expert in that area too.
Mr.  Massie. Okay. Great.
Mr.  Gaffigan. I don't quite have the range he has, but
there's a couple things going on. You know, we have more and
more of our food that's imported across the world. We have more
and more of our folks eating raw, unprocessed foods. And we
also have more vulnerable populations; as people age, they're
more vulnerable to these things. So those are three factors
that can contribute to more of the multi-State outbreaks.
Mr.  Massie. How about the centralization of foods, food
processing and preparation and production?
Mr.  Gaffigan. You know, we haven't--that hasn't been cited
as a contributor one way or the other. I think our main concern
is having 30 different agencies involved in this. And we're
just talking about the Federal agencies. There's a lot of
efforts at the State and local level that are involved in our
food safety system, and there's really a need, I think, for a
national strategy to get these stakeholders together. And like
any crosscutting issue, it starts with leadership, who's in
charge, defining roles and responsibilities.
And we have a report that has just come out that reiterates
some of this. We gathered some experts from the--with the
assistance of the national academies, brought folks in, former
FIS folks, former FDA folks, folks from the grocery industry
and throughout. And it's really a phenomenal group of experts,
and that was a theme of theirs. You know, a lot of folks doing
a lot of good work, but we need somebody to kind of take charge
and assign these roles and responsibilities.
Mr.  Massie. Well, from the folks that I talk to, they say
that, you know, our food supply system is actually--the more
centralized it is, the more brittle it becomes and at risk,
because if you have an issue in one slaughterhouse or in one
field, it could show up in twelve different States very
quickly. And so, you know, we've seen a lot of recalls that are
nationwide instead of the local grocery store or something.
So here's--based on what both of you have said, here are a
couple things that I have noticed that I want to comment on. I
know a lot of small farmers. I've noticed that they're
decreasing in number. The number of dairies is decreasing. The
number of abattoirs, slaughterhouses is decreasing, and it's
becoming more centralized. And this actually puts us--it's more
efficient, but it's also a riskier system in terms of the
magnitude of an outbreak if it happens.
Here's the ironic thing: What's pushing this trend is the
fact we have 16 different, you know, administrative facilities
for enforcing the laws, and the small guys, the small producers
are being forced out by the regulations that are intended to
keep us safer. So the regulations are leading to a greater
centralization, just the overhead of compliance, for instance,
for a local slaughterhouse puts--you know, they go out of
business and then it consolidates.
So I would just say, I'd like to keep that in mind as we
promulgate more and more regulations, that the little guys
aren't going to be able to keep up with so you can't buy food
from your local processer or local farmer. You've got to buy it
from another State. So keep that in mind.
Another thing that disappointed me a couple years ago, and
I think this somewhat puts the consumer more at risk is, here
in Congress, we got rid of country-of-origin labeling for beef
and pork, a couple years ago, in the omnibus bill. And we were
told we had to do this for trade reasons.
But as you pointed out, we doubled our consumption of food
overseas, and I think everybody can agree there's not a uniform
food safety law across the globe. And I think the best thing
you can do is say, okay, buyer beware, this is the country that
it's coming from.
So I think for food safety, let's just keep in mind that
more regulations doesn't mean always safer food because it gets
more centralized--leads to more centralized production. And I
think labels are always a good thing.
So with that, I'll yield back to the chairman.
Mr.  Dodaro. Just for the record, we are not calling for
more regulation.
Mr.  Massie. Okay. Great. Thank you.
Mr.  Dodaro. We're calling for a streamlined, simplified,
more cohesive system, which could lead to a streamlining of the
regulations.
Mr.  Massie. And I think that would be great for smaller
producers and actually make our food supply system less brittle
if they could deal with one agency instead of 16.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah, and we'll submit our most recent report,
which I think was just issued this past week, for the record.
Mr.  Massie. Great. Thank you both. I yield back.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
DeSaulnier for 5 minutes.
Mr.  DeSaulnier. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate your
leadership skills today.
So I wanted to talk a little bit about tax law enforcement
and identity theft, whoever is going to move up to the chair
for that. While you're doing your well choreographed, I just
want to----
Mr.  Dodaro. I can handle some of these.
Mr.  DeSaulnier. I'm aware. I'm aware. Just the fact that
you admitted that you didn't want to run for office is a good
indication of your intellectual capacity.
And to all of you, seriously, thank you for the work you
do. This is really incredibly important work. It may seem out
of the limelight in our political environment, but I wish we
did more of it. And as others have said on both sides of the
aisle, this is really the meat and potatoes of what we should
do in Congress in a bipartisan way.
So in your 2015 high-risk report, you included tax law
enforcement and identity theft for the IRS. As much as $14.5
billion you identified in tax fraud was attempted in 2015; 85
percent of that we were able to recover.
So the question is, just the pressures between us not
investing in the Internal Revenue Service and then whatever
impact the hiring freeze would have on attracting the best
quality people, because I just--I assume that the bad guys are
constantly out there trying to push the envelope, and obviously
it's in everyone is best interest to make sure that people are
protected but also that people who pay their taxes on time,
both their Federal and State and local taxes, realize the
integrity of the process.
So if you could comment on the challenges to making sure
that the personnel and the infrastructure are--we're investing
properly in it, in regards to both the decrease in our support
of the IRS overall and the potential impact from the hiring
freeze.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right. In the identity theft area--and then
I'll turn it over to Chris for specifics--they've actually
allocated more resources to that area, which is one of the
reasons they made some progress.
I was also pleased to see the Congress implement our
recommendation that you accelerate the W-2 information
reporting from employers from March or April to January. This
will enable IRS to better match the information, but they'll
need to have the systems in place to be able to do that to
effectively take advantage of that congressional flexibility
that that's being given to them.
The skill issues, Mr. Mihm, is focused on that, and I'll
turn it over to him.
Mr.  Mihm. Yes, sir. Thank you for the question. In
addition to the additional resources IRS has put on it under
its own initiative, Congress also provided additional resources
in this particular area as well as the service side last year
to make sure that they could augment their capacity to detect
and respond to identity theft issues.
The challenge that they face is precisely the one that you
mentioned, is that we have an adversary that's adaptive. And so
it's the moment you put in one set of controls or one set of
ways, detection technologies, they are able to figure that out
and, you know, are working very aggressively to get, you know,
around that.
So the big ongoing challenge that the IRS faces is making
sure that they have authentication procedures in place; that
they can really know that when you or I are saying we are you
or I, we are indeed ourselves and not somebody in a foreign
country.
Mr.  DeSaulnier. So on the issue of attracting and
retaining young people who can make a good deal of money in the
private sector doing this kind of work, are we able to keep up
with that challenge to attract and retain the best people?
Mr.  Dodaro. This is an issue of cross-government----
Mr.  DeSaulnier. Right.
Mr.  Dodaro. --not just the IRS. And we put the strategic
human capital management on a high-risk list in 2001, because
we were concerned that the government is behind in that area.
It's something that I am concerned about governmentwide. I'm
very concerned about the Federal workforce in terms of skill
gaps, impending retirements. And the complexity has increased
in terms of some of the issues the Federal Government has to
deal with; cyber is a classic example of this.
But acquisitions is another area where acquiring much more
sophisticated weapons technology, satellite systems, space-
based systems, et cetera. So this is an area that I would, you
know, really underscore that needs careful attention. I know
I'm more worried about it. You know, I'm fortunate that I'm
able to attract and retain talented people in GAO. We're not in
the executive branch system. You know, we have our own
personnel authorities, which I attributed largely to the reason
we're able to operate effectively. But you're right to be
worried about this, not only at the IRS but across the
government.
Mr.  DeSaulnier. In regards to the hiring freeze, how does
that concern you? I was reading one of your reports from the
1980s talk about the implications of a hard hiring freeze, but
particularly when it comes to revenue collection.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. A hiring freeze is not an effective way
to manage the workforce. So our past work has shown that not to
be true. In this case, they are doing it temporarily. They are
going to come up with a plan. I'm anxious to see what the plan
would be that they come up with in order to do this. They've
made some exceptions in some areas, which is important to do as
well.
But you really need a good workforce plan, and you also
need to make decisions about what you want the government to
do. If you still have all the requirements for government to do
things but you have less people to do it, you're going to have
problems. There will be breakdowns. There will be unsatisfied
objectives.
So if you reduced some of the functions of government, then
the people that go along with those functions you can reduce it
that way. So either through budgetary controls or through
strategic workforce planning would be the most optimal way to
deal with making sure you have the--not only the size workforce
you want but the one with the right skills.
Mr.  DeSaulnier. Thank you. Thank you, all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
The chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Issa, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Issa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you again.
Mr.  Dodaro. Good to see you.
Mr.  Issa. Just to put it in perspective, because I think
the gentleman from California did tee it up pretty well, but
today, the Federal Government in its--all of its programs,
including Medicare, Social Security, and so on, consumes a
greater portion of our gross domestic product than ever before.
Isn't that correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct.
Mr.  Issa. So government has grown in the size and amount
of money that it takes in. So in a nutshell, is it fair to say
that if we're getting more money as a percentage of the total
wealth of the country, we have no one to blame if we don't have
enough money for vital programs than ourselves?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's true.
Mr.  Issa. But I'm going to go back to something you said.
I'm not trying to hold you accountable, but I know a little bit
about what you try to do. How many slots do you have today, and
how many of them have you been able to fill because of limited
resources?
Mr.  Dodaro. We have--we don't have a set number of slots--
--
Mr.  Issa. But you used to have a lot more full-time
equivalents?
Mr.  Dodaro. Oh, yes, yes, we did. Most recently we had
about 3,250 before the sequester. We've been under 3,000 people
most recently. So----
Mr.  Issa. So the IRS isn't the only group that's being
told to do more with less and leverage technology. Are they?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct. And we think, just for the
record, in the IRS that they could do more with the resources
they have. We don't think they've measured good return on
investment about different enforcement strategies and allocated
the resources.
Mr.  Issa. And isn't it true, if you know, that the IRS has
done very little to deal with the kind of fraud that has become
rampant where people, through identity theft, basically file
your tax return quickly and get a return from the government.
That's a growing industry. Isn't it?
Mr.  Dodaro. It's a growing industry, but they have taken
some measures. We give them credit for it in this report and
also the Congress for giving them additional legislation to get
the W-2 information from employers earlier, which will help
them match. Previously, people could file their returns and
they didn't have the W-2s.
Mr.  Issa. Right. In The old days a quick filer comes in
early January and just defrauds and gets away with it. It's a
little harder now.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah.
Mr.  Issa. I want to go to one of the areas that you note.
It's a new area. You have a fairly broad group of problems for
Native Americans.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes.
Mr.  Issa. And this is new. Education is failing. We, the
Federal Government, are failing in our responsibility to bring
education to the tribal areas. Correct?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct, and particularly the condition
of the schools.
Mr.  Issa. Indian Healthcare Service is not meeting its
responsibilities. Is that true?
Mr.  Dodaro. That's correct.
Mr.  Issa. And when Native American tribes try to do energy
programs, energy development programs, you noted that they're
finding extreme burdens in trying to do their own programs on
Native American land?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes.
Mr.  Issa. So first time, but it looks like there's an
attack on Native Americans on three fronts: Their education,
their opportunity to have energy and employment, and, of
course, their health. How are we going to fix this?
Mr.  Dodaro. I think you need better leadership over at the
Bureau of Indian Affairs and Indian Health Services. It has to
be a higher priority. When I meet with the new Secretary of
Interior, once there is one, I'm going to raise this issue to
them. This is a serious problem.
Staffing isn't up to where it needs to be at a lot of these
locations. There are no healthcare standards and metrics that
they're supposed to have. They're still allocating the money
for contract care for health care using a formula they used in
the 1930s. I mean, it just--I mean, lack of attention would be
the underlying theme, Congressman Issa, that I would----
Mr.  Issa. So this is----
Mr.  Dodaro. We put it on the list to elevate attention it
to it. It needs a leadership commitment.
Mr.  Issa. And that leadership failure is, in fact, at the
Department of the Interior. They've gotten to where you now see
three separate parts of our dealing with our obligation for
these tribal lands in a way in which it has got to be almost
job one of the Secretary of Interior to find himself some key
lieutenants and put them to work.
Mr.  Dodaro. Exactly. And there's--Department of Health and
Human Services has a role here too.
Mr.  Issa. Well, they do have a Secretary now. So that's--
--
Mr.  Dodaro. I plan to meet with Secretary Price.
Mr.  Issa. Well, I plan to meet with him on this issue too
because California, as you know, has a fairly extensive amount
of Native American assets.
You've been doing this for a long time, and I did note that
you're doing more with less. But in the remaining seconds, just
tell me, if you could have one thing from this committee, one
thing to make your job easier and more successful, what would
it be? We'll leave money aside.
Mr.  Dodaro. Attention and more hearings on the high-risk
areas.
Mr.  Issa. Well, I look forward to that. I might add one
that I hoped you would say, but I didn't prep you, and that is
the type of interference that you have had from previous
executive branch where they found you a nuisance, they argued
over what your statutory authority was, and denied you access.
Would that also be something you'd put high on the list?
Mr.  Dodaro. Oh, definitely. I'll be on your doorstep right
away if there's a problem.
Mr.  Issa. Well, Mr. Chairman, it is--I ask that question
for a reason. I know Will is going to be next, but the last
administration, I think, failed, and it is our obligation to
hold this administration to a much higher standard to cooperate
with the GAO because without them our oversight is not
meaningful. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Hurd,
for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Hurd. Thank you, Chairman Palmer for saving the best
for last.
Mr.  Palmer. Well, I'm actually last.
Mr.  Hurd. Oh, there you go.
Mr.  Palmer. But I accept the compliment.
Mr.  Hurd. Mr. Dodaro, great to see you. When I was elected
to Congress, what, three Novembers ago, I never would have
expected that GAO would be my new favorite department. And what
you and your team do is integral to our role as oversight and
to helping make sure that our Federal Government is lean, mean,
and responsive to the citizens that they serve. And so thank
you to you and your team for all that work. And I don't start
any project off without saying, hey, what does GAO say about
that and not try to recreate the wheel.
What I'd like to talk to you about is the VA. Your recent
report indicates there are significant gaps between the VA's
stated plans and its actual progress. You flag improving access
to timely medical appointments as requiring immediate action.
This is after the VA has already spent $127 million over 9
years to modernize outpatient scheduling.
What's the current status of the VA's scheduling system?
What actual progress has there been in improving the scheduling
of veterans' medical appointments, and why is this such a
problem?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yeah. The current scheduling system they have
is 30 years old. It has been a problem because it hasn't been
properly managed. Their IT structures, we just issued a
report--Dave Powner, who I'm sure you're very familiar with.
Mr.  Hurd. Yeah, he's fantastic. I see him over there.
Mr.  Dodaro. He's here, and he can explain their IT
problems in more detail. I'm very concerned about this area. I
raised the high-risk list last update because I knew it
wouldn't be fixed right away, but I'm disappointed in a lack of
progress.
Mr.  Hurd. And to both of you, General and Mr. Powner, it's
always good to see you, and thanks for your work that you and
your team are doing on the scorecards that we offer--provide
to--on the agencies.
I had a veteran come up to me recently, had heart problems,
had high blood pressure, and he lived in Texas. He was in
Florida visiting his kids. He goes into the Florida VA because
he was having real problems, didn't have his medicine. Took 9
hours to get him--to get entered into the system. It's 2017,
for God's sake. This is--you know, you should be able to pull
him up.
Is the enterprise so big that it requires years to
implement a scheduling system, in your expert opinion?
Mr.  Dodaro. No, no, absolutely not. I mean, they should go
to a commercial solution. There are commercial solutions, so
obviously scheduling medical appointments is not unique to the
Veterans Affairs Department. They will tell you that as well.
I'm also concerned that they're not measuring wait times
for patients. You know, they don't start measuring wait times
until some--a veteran can call for an appointment, then they
have to check eligibility, then eventually a scheduler will get
back to the person, and then they'll ask them when they're
first available to have an appointment, and then they'll say,
well, I'd like to come in on the 17th, let's say, for example.
And they say, we don't have anything on the 17th.
So they'll start only from that time, counting wait time,
when it could've been many days before this even transpires.
But Dave can talk about the IT. They spend over $4 billion a
year, and we're getting very limited return on that investment.
Mr.  Hurd. I'm glad this table is attached to the floor
because I'd flip it over on the next topic, and that's DOD and
VA electronic healthcare interoperability.
Mr.  Dodaro. I'll come and help you.
Mr.  Hurd. How long is it going to take us to achieve true
interoperability?
Mr.  Dodaro. You know, we flagged this issue probably 15,
20 years ago.
Mr.  Hurd. Yeah.
Mr.  Dodaro. You have the two most bureaucratic government
entities trying to work together in this area. They haven't
done it. They still haven't provided us a good rationale for
why they decided not to have an integrated system and they're
going off on their own way. DOD has a system that they bought
now, a commercial system. Maybe VA ought to consider, you know,
that as an option as well.
You know, I don't want to limit competition and
procurement; I'm not saying that. But studies that were done
show that 90-plus percent of the requirements are the same for
the two systems.
Mr.  Hurd. Mr. Powner, you can have the remaining time I
have or do not have.
Mr.  Powner. Well, I think the key here with both
scheduling and electronic health record, they can hand in hand.
So you could modify the current systems or you can go
commercial. With commercial electronic health records, there's
typically scheduling modules.
VA is piloting those initiatives right now. They're leaning
towards the commercial decision. Now that the Secretary is in
place, they're waiting for a decision to be made. The decision
should be go commercial. That will go a long ways towards
interoperability with DOD.
Mr.  Hurd. Buy, not build.
Mr.  Powner. Correct.
Mr.  Hurd. Excellent.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. And these will be
rapid fire, if I may. I mean, if you need to go into an
extended explanation, then do so.
On the enforcement of tax laws, the information that I
have, you show a $385 billion tax gap in 2006. Do you know what
it was in 2016?
Mr.  Dodaro. It's the equivalent number. The net tax gap's
about $406 billion.
Mr.  Palmer. Okay. And how about 2015?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, they only measure it every once in a
while.
Mr.  Palmer. Every once in a while?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. So they don't measure it every year. The
latest estimate is a net tax gap of over $400 billion.
Mr.  Palmer. I saw a number yesterday. Well, the net. Now,
I'm glad you clarified, because the total tax gap was like 456.
Mr.  Dodaro. That is correct. Then they expect to collect
so much. I gave you the number that compared to the 385.
Mr.  Palmer. Thank you. And I appreciate the clarification.
On the improper payments, that's a big deal with me. I
think we've had this conversation before. The improper payments
doesn't account for all the improper payments on Medicaid. You
said it's $36 billion.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Palmer. And then approximately another $60 billion on
Medicare.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Palmer. On the Medicaid, you said it didn't account
for all of it. Do you have a ballpark on----
Mr.  Dodaro. No, I don't. Unfortunately, I don't.
Mr.  Palmer. How about on Medicare, do you think that
represents all the improper payments there?
Mr.  Dodaro. That estimate is pretty good on Medicare, now
that they're measuring all parts of Medicare.
Mr.  Palmer. So we're right at $100 million a year. And
this has been going up.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes, that is correct. It's been going up.
Mr.  Palmer. So it hasn't improved. I was informed a few
days ago that there may be some indication that not all Federal
agencies are reporting improper payments.
Mr.  Dodaro. That is correct. I am very concerned about
that. I pointed that out. There were at least a dozen programs
that did not report this past year. One was the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program, SNAP, or the old food stamp
program.
The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families has never
reported. They don't believe that they can do it. I've
encouraged Congress to pass legislation to require them to make
that effort. And a number of agencies just haven't done it.
So the estimates, governmentwide estimate of $144 billion
for 2016 is not a complete estimate. And we've flagged this for
a number of years on our governmentwide audit is that the
Federal Government doesn't have reasonable assurance that it
knows the full extent of improper payments and can address
those issues.
Ninety percent of the improper payments over the last few
years are overpayments. Some are underpayments. That's a
problem, too, because somebody that should be getting a benefit
isn't. But most of it are overpayments.
Mr.  Palmer. Well, here's the thing that concerns me. I'm
also on the Budget Committee, and I made this point that there
are days I feel like my head will explode. We're expending
money improperly and not properly funding other programs where
we're now obviously deficit spending.
So we're literally borrowing money and paying interest on
it as a result of improper payments and the failure to fully
collect all the taxes.
Mr.  Dodaro. That's exactly right.
Mr.  Palmer. When you add these two together--and, again,
to your point that we don't know that this is all that's being
expended improperly--we're talking almost $600 billion. And in
our 10-year window, that's $6 trillion, and it's going up.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right.
Mr.  Palmer. And we're laying that on future generations
plus interest.
Mr.  Dodaro. Right, right.
Mr.  Palmer. That's maddening.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. Yes, it is. I testified before the Senate
Finance Committee on this very issue. I'd like to submit my
statement for the record, both on the tax gap and improper
payments.
I think--I mean, it won't solve our long-term sustainable
fiscal path, but it will make a huge contribution if we could
get these two areas under control.
Mr.  Palmer. I thank you for that and, without objection.
Mr.  Palmer. I want to go back to something Ms. Holmes
Norton brought up about the revenues from the Bureau of Land
Management. And how much is reported that we collected in
royalties and revenues?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. I'll have to--here, I have an answer
quick for you. We're rapid fire.
Mr.  Palmer. Well, I have the gavel, so we'll be a little
flexible.
Mr.  Gaffigan. About $10 billion a year for oil and gas.
Mr.  Palmer. Okay. There's a number of reports that
indicate that the revenues over a 15-year period as a result of
repealing the ban on exporting crude oil should increase.
But one of the things that I found out--and I want to
clarify this, make sure I heard it right--the last that I
heard, we hadn't increased the royalty rate since the 1920s. Is
that correct or did that change?
Mr.  Gaffigan. There have been changes since the 1920s.
There's the major law. One of the major laws is from the 1920s.
But there hasn't been a huge change in recent years on the
royalty rates, both onshore and offshore, but there has been
some tweaking.
Mr.  Palmer. What is the royalty rate?
Mr.  Gaffigan. It ranges from about 12 to 18 percent,
depending if it's onshore or offshore.
Mr.  Palmer. What's the royalty rate that the private
sector, private landowners get?
Mr.  Gaffigan. That can range, and we could give you some
estimates of that. Obviously, we are only familiar with the
Federal rules.
Mr.  Palmer. On the high end, though, I think it's less--
it's more than what the Federal Government gets.
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. There's a study that compared the Federal
Government to the State governments and what they receive as
well as the private sector. We can get you a summary of that
study.
Mr.  Palmer. I'd appreciate that.
Continuing on our rapid-fire deal on the improper payments,
and I think you may have addressed this, but on the Social
Security Disability programs, I know we're expending money
improperly there as a result of the failure to do the 3-year
reviews. If we could, I'd like to--if you've got a number on
that, you can submit that to us later.
Mr.  Palmer. I want to ask you something about Federal real
property. Has there been any estimate for how much could be
sold and how much revenue would be generated from that?
Mr.  Dodaro. There's not an estimate I'm aware of. I'll
double-check and, if so, I'll submit it.
Mr.  Palmer. If you do that, could you also include
estimated savings on maintenance and upkeep?
Mr.  Dodaro. Okay.
Mr.  Palmer. Because that is an annual expenditure that we
want to address.
I want to ask you another one, and this has to do with--
you've made progress in getting these agencies to meet the
criteria and you showed that the benefits, approximately $240
billion over that 10-year period, about $24 billion a year. Do
you have any idea what that financial benefit would be to the
Federal Government if all of the agencies met the criteria?
Mr.  Dodaro. No, I don't have an estimate on that. But most
of that money comes from DOD weapon systems that we've been
able to curtail. A lot of it's Medicare or Medicaid and the tax
revenue side. So it's all big areas. If we could continue to--I
think those areas have huge potential. I know it's tens of
billions. I just don't have a complete estimate.
Mr.  Palmer. All right. And Mr. DesJarlais--no, it was Mr.
Cartwright--I apologize, another mistaken identity here--
brought up the issue of climate change.
Has the GAO looked into the Federal Government and the
national, the Nation's exposure to an EMP event,
electromagnetic pulse event?
Mr.  Dodaro. Actually, we have. And I'll submit those
reports for the record.
Mr.  Palmer. Without objection.
Mr.  Palmer. And then the last thing, and this is a
clarification. When someone was asking about the Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac and indicated that they have guarantees backing
them up that are $ 200 billion, maybe a little bit more, there
was an article in the Washington Post last October that
indicated that that guarantee was only about $83 billion. Could
someone just check into that and clarify that?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. We'll clarify for the record, but I'm
pretty confident on our number.
Mr.  Palmer. Yes. Well, I just saw that. And I'm not
questioning your number. I just want to make sure that we're
all on the same page on that.
Mr.  Dodaro. Okay. Well, we'll check what the Post was
talking about and we'll check our number and then I'll give it
for the record.
Mr.  Palmer. The chair now recognizes the gentleman from
Wisconsin, Mr. Grothman, for 5 minutes.
Mr.  Grothman. Thank you.
GAO removed the personnel security clearance as a high-risk
area a few years back, 5 years ago now. Since then, the
security clearance system has seen a lot of changes, reform
initiatives. You guys are not listing it as high-risk now, but
your report discusses ongoing reviews of the overall reform
effort.
What do you think is going right in the reform effort, and
what concerns does GAO have as you move forward?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. Well, I think--they're implementing a
number of the recommendation that they had from the reviews
that were done after the Washington Navy Yard incidents and the
incidents with the OPM breach. But I'm still concerned about
several areas.
One, you have this new entity, the National Background
Investigations service that's just been stood up in October.
There's also a move to transfer the IT systems to DOD to manage
those systems. The National Defense Authorization Act is
requiring DOD to consider taking over the background
investigations again for DOD. So there's a lot of moving parts
right now.
And I'm also concerned about whether or not adequate
changes have been made to properly protect the security of
these very important systems.
So we're looking at all those areas right now. And the work
we are going to do should be finished by this fall, and if, you
know, I'm concerned about it at that point, I'll add it to the
high-risk list out of cycle. I've done that before if
circumstances warrant it.
Mr.  Grothman. Okay. The National Background Investigations
Bureau was supposed to be responsible for conducting security
clearance investigations. There's a feeling that things are
moving a little bit slowly there. Do you have any
recommendations for Congress?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. Cathy Berrick is our expert in that area.
Mr.  Grothman. Oh, good. Well, we get somebody different.
Ask the right question.
Ms.  Berrick. There is currently a significant backlog at
NBIB. They came into existence, became operational in October
of 2016. There's already a 569,000 backlog of personnel
security clearance investigations that need to be conducted.
So I think one of the first things they need to do is
develop a plan for how they're going to work through that
backlog. They are hiring an additional couple hundred people.
They also doubled their number of contractors from two to four.
But I think actually having a concrete plan on how they're
going to work through that is going to be important.
I also think it's important for them to work with the DNI,
the Security Executive Agent for security clearances, to
develop governmentwide quality metrics for personnel security
clearances. So they're not just focused on the backlog, but
they're also focused on the quality of investigations. I think
those are probably the two most important things they should
do.
And now I'll throw a third in as well, which is oversight
over their contractors, since contractors conduct the bulk of
background investigations for both initial and reevaluations.
So oversight is important, and that's something we're also
currently looking at.
Mr.  Grothman. At the current path, are they going to work
their way through the backlog?
Ms.  Berrick. They have no specific plan or timeframe on
when they'll work through it. They've just said it's going to
take time.
Mr.  Grothman. Do you know is the backlog getting greater
or lesser?
Ms.  Berrick. It's gotten greater over recent years, in
part due to the OPM data breach, in part due to new
investigative standards.
Mr.  Grothman. Okay. According to the most recent reporting
by the Performance Accountability Council, the time it takes to
conduct an investigation has been the highest it's been in
years. Do you think that's a problem?
Mr.  Dodaro. Well, timeliness was the reason we put it on
the high-risk list in the first place, so--and that was after
9/11 occurred. So more things became classified and secret
sensitive and things, so more people needed background
investigations.
So timeliness is something we'll look at, but quality and
quality standards is also important. So we'll be looking at
both of those issues.
Mr.  Grothman. Both of them. Can you give me a timeframe
right now?
Mr.  Dodaro. Yes. We'll issue our reports in the fall.
Right.
Ms.  Berrick. Right.
Mr.  Grothman. I mean not your timeframe, but their
timeframe. What is the standard wait?
Mr.  Dodaro. Oh, oh, oh.
Ms.  Berrick. It varies within the intelligence community.
Outside of, you know, sometimes it could be over 200 days. It
just varies, depending on the agency.
Mr.  Grothman. Okay. Like what agency would be 200 days?
Ms.  Berrick. I'll have to get that information for you,
and we could submit it for the record.
Mr.  Grothman. Okay. Thanks.
I'll yield the remainder of my time.
Mr.  Palmer. The gentleman yields.
I would like to thank our witness, Mr. Dodaro, I always
enjoy our time together, and all the folks from GAO who
accompanied him for taking time to appear before us today.
Several members asked for additional information for the
record, so we would appreciate your provision of the
information requested.
I ask unanimous consent that members have 5 legislative
days to submit questions for the record. Without objection, so
ordered.
If there is no further business, without objection, the
committee stands adjourned.
[whereupon, at 12:16 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
