- EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL BARRIERS TO INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL BARRIERS TO INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON THE INTERIOR,
ENERGY, AND ENVIRONMENT

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTTEE ON INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MARCH 1, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-1

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://www.house.gov/reform

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
25-084 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2017

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
http://bookstore.gpo.gov. For more information, contact the GPO Customer Contact Center,
U.S. Government Publishing Office. Phone 202-512-1800, or 866-512-1800 (toll-free).
E-mail,
[email protected]
.

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Jason Chaffetz, Utah, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California              Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan                   Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark Meadows, North Carolina         Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Ron DeSantis, Florida                Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Val Butler Demings, Florida
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia                Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas                     John Sarbanes, Maryland
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan

------

Jonathan Skladany, Majority Staff Director
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Ryan Hambleton, Senior Professional Staff Member
Kiley Bidelman, Clerk
Subcommittee on the Interior, Energy and Environment

Blake Farenthold, Texas Chairman
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona Vice Chair    Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis Ross, Florida                 Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama              (Vacancy)
James Comer, Kentucky                (Vacancy)

------

Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Affairs

Gary J. Palmer, Alabama, Chairman
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin, Vice      Val Butler Demings, Florida
Chair                            Mark DeSaulnier, California
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       (Vacancy)
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           (Vacancy)
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        (Vacancy)
Thomas Massie, Kentucky
Mark Walker, North Carolina
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on March 1, 2017....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Richie Beyer, County Engineer, Elmore County, Alabama
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Wayne D'Angelo, Counsel for the Steel Manufacturers
Association, Kelley Drye and Warren LLP
Oral Statement...............................................    16
Written Statement............................................    18
Mr. Nicolas Loris, Herbert and Joyce Morgan Research Fellow in
Energy and Environmental Policy, Institute for Economic Freedom
and Opportunity, The Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    23
Written Statement............................................    25

APPENDIX

Statement for the record from Kevin Rames, regarding Amalago Bay
Resort, submitted by Ms. Plaskett..............................    58
Statement for the record from Alicia Barnes, Former Commissioner
of the Government of the Virgin Islands, Department of Planning
and Natural Resources, submitted by Ms. Plaskett...............    62
Questions for the record to Nicolas Loris, submitted by Mr.
Farenthold.....................................................    64

EXAMINING ENVIRONMENTAL BARRIERS TO INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT

----------

Wednesday, March 1, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on The Interior, Energy and
Environment Joint with Subcommittee on
Intergovernmental Affairs,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 10:01 a.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Blake Farenthold
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Interior, Energy and the
Environment] presiding.
Present: Representatives Farenthold, Palmer, Ross, Duncan,
Comer, Massie, Plaskett, Demings, and DeSaulnier.
Mr. Farenthold. Good morning. The Subcommittee on the
Interior, Energy and Environment and the Subcommittee on
Intergovernmental Affairs will now come to order. Without
objection, the chair is authorized to declare a recess at any
time. The chair notes the presence of our colleagues from the
full Oversight and Government Reform Committee, and we
appreciate your interest in this topic and welcome your
participation today. I'd like to ask unanimous consent that all
members of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform be
allowed to fully participate in today's hearing. Without
objection, so ordered.
Well, good morning. Today's Subcommittee on the Interior,
Energy and Environment, and the Subcommittee on
Intergovernmental Affairs, will examine Federal impediments to
infrastructure development. Numerous reports over the last
decade have documented how burdensome environmental regulations
have delayed, if not completely derailed, important
infrastructure projects. Today, we'll explore where these
regulations have gone wrong in the hopes that we can pinpoint
solutions that benefit American infrastructure and development.
Under the Clean Air Act, every 5 years, the Environmental
Protection Agency is required to evaluate and, if needed, set
national, ambient air quality standards--and that's called
NAAQS for those of you who don't speak government vernacular--
to ensure that pollutants are not hurting public health or the
environment. Currently, in my home State of Texas, we have got
two regions, Dallas and Fort Worth, that are classified as
being in nonattainment, which means they don't meet current
standards for NAAQS.
Because of this, the State Department of Transportation and
Metropolitan Planning Organization, located within these two
regions, are obliged to comply with transportation conformity
requirements. Failure to do so can result in a loss of Federal
highway funds for those counties, along with many other issues
associated with being in nonattainment. Conformity requirements
entail additional analysis to determine how a potential product
could impact air quality. These requirements lengthen an
already significant planning process by a minimum of 6 months,
and have resulted in cost delays costing over $65 million, just
in the Dallas-Fort Worth and Houston regions.
By forcing State and local governments to spend more money
on burdensome red tape, fewer roads are paved, meaning there is
fewer construction jobs, and more traffic congestion, which, in
fact, results in more emissions. In October of 2015, the EPA
revised NAAQS and lowered the standard for ozone, a recognized
pollutant, from 75 parts per billion to 70 parts per billion.
Under this proposed revision, the San Antonio and El Paso
regions will join Dallas-Fort Worth and Houston in
nonattainment, costing even more jobs, running up expenses, and
hindering much-needed infrastructure projects.
In addition to the nonattainment issues, the National
Environmental Policy Act, known as NEPA, has become one of the
most burdensome regulations facing project development in
America. This law was passed with great intentions almost 50
years ago but has been expanded by constant tinkering by
Federal agencies. The time for a full environmental review for
a highway project has grown from 2 years to over 8 in some
cases. State and local agencies have to navigate reams of
Federal regulations in an alphabet soup of Federal agencies,
all of whom need to sign off on a project under NEPA.
If they're able to make their way through the process, they
often get the added joy of a lawsuit from an opponent, often an
environmental activist group, or a not-in-my-back yard group
who wants to stall the development, or stop all development.
While I have addressed highway infrastructure projections,
rail, airports, pipeline, oil and gas development, and private
sector development all face similar burdens. We have to find a
way to stop this paralysis by analysis and get America building
again while still protecting our environment.
So that's my opening statement, and I now recognize our
Ranking Member, Ms. Plaskett, for the Subcommittee on the
Interior, Energy and Environment, for her opening statement.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for calling today's hearing concerning barriers to
infrastructure development. And I want to thank our witnesses
for being here.
More than most places, my district, the U.S. Virgin
Islands, understands the importance of striking the balance
between environmental regulations and development. The Virgin
Islands are home to just under 107,000 people. With the cost of
living 33 percent higher than even the District of Columbia's
outrageous cost of living, every dollar in the local economy is
crucial to the survival of the citizens of these Islands. This
is why we cannot afford drawn-out delays in permitting for
economic development projects. There are many projects in the
Virgin Islands that have been subject to numerous delays
through the Federal permitting process. One of those projects
has been ongoing for the last 10 years with no final decision
from the Federal Government. A draft biological opinion was
issued, but it has been 18 months since the last correspondence
to address the findings in the opinion. This is completely
unacceptable.
Tourism is the primary industry for the Islands now.
Tourism and travel, including the effects of investment,
account for about 30 percent of the Islands' GDP. Nearly 3
million tourists come to the Islands every year. Many of the
tourists come to the Virgin Islands to enjoy our beautiful
beaches, dive to see the coral, so we understand that
protecting our natural resolutions and species is crucial to
the Islands' economy, and we also understand that protecting
the environment can add time and expense to the completion of a
project that will employ our citizens, but we must find an
appropriate balance.
The U.S. Virgin Islands and other insular territories,
while not major emission sources of greenhouse gases, and thus
not contributors to global warming, are experiencing
exponential adverse impacts of initiatives and regulations to
remedy those things. While I am mindful that measures should be
taken to ensure sustainable development, in many instances,
technocrats within the ranks of Federal agencies approach the
Virgin Islands and places like us, development permitting and
other enforcement regulations are done blindly, and simply do
not take into consideration the socioeconomic implications of
those actions.
One of the primary problems to moving projects out of the
environmental review have been inadequate staffing at the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, or NOAA, the
Federal agency that handles projects having an impact on coral.
There simply are not enough staff to do the consultations that
would allow permitting. Currently, the southeast region of the
United States is one of the fastest growing regions in the
country. Despite that fact, NOAA only has 14 full-time
employees handling endangered species-related consulting. The
West Coast has 150 full-time employees doing the same
consultation.
The Governor of the Virgin Islands wrote the White House
back in August about excessive delays to a hotel being built on
St. Croix. We have been raising the alarm from the Islands for
a while now. We are concerned that under President Trump, the
problem may be exacerbated. President Trump has declared a
hiring freeze, and so there will be no hiring in permitting
agencies that are already understaffed. President Trump has
also announced that he will cut budgets in agencies needed for
economic development. The hiring freeze and budget cuts to come
will hurt infrastructure development in the future. For
example, NOAA recently did a listing in 2015 of 19 additional
coral species on the endangered species list. This will
increase permitting time, and the cost for the Army Corps of
Engineer process.
I speak for the Virgin Islands regardless of who's in the
White House. The President has to understand that a hiring
freeze is going to bring development in the Virgin Islands and
the whole southeast region of the United States to a screeching
halt. I hope today we can discuss some sensible solutions to
these issues. Thank you.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. I'll now recognize Mr. Palmer,
the chairman of the Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Affairs,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thanks to the
witnesses for appearing here today. We're going to hear from
witnesses who can attest to how the Federal Government is a
roadblock to States and local communities in infrastructure
projects, and, hopefully, develop some ways that Congress can
assist in getting the Federal Government out of the way. And
States and localities know the needs of their communities. We
want to increase their ability to handle these projects. They
should be trusted to use funds to fulfill those needs with the
least Federal Government interference.
Many of these environmental regulations have become
irrelevant, outdated, and abused by groups and organizations
simply looking to block economic development rather than
protect the environment. As Chairman Farenthold mentioned,
examples of environmental regulatory burden are the National
Environmental Policy Act, NEPA, and the Endangered Species Act.
Policy uncertainty emanating from Washington discourages
investment in private infrastructure projects that is a major
part of President Trump's efforts to rebuild and improve our
national infrastructure, which will help spur economic growth
and provide more jobs. Duplicative responsibility between the
States and Federal Government for planning of federally funded
projects, many projects require State and Federal officials to
oversee them when only one is necessary, also helps to drive up
the cost.
In 1956, the year the Highway Trust Fund was established,
total Federal, State, and local expenditures on administration
and research accounted to 6.8 percent of construction costs. By
2002, that had risen to 17 percent. And overall, a former head
of the Federal Highway Administration, Robert Ferris, suggests
that Federal regulations increase costs by 30 percent. I think
in some projects in my home State of Alabama, we have seen that
those costs were doubled. According to one estimate, complying
with Federal rules raises overhead costs to approximately 25
percent of project cost, while the overhead costs represent
only about 5 percent of project costs for locally funded roads
that do not have to comply with the Federal Rules.
Compliance with NEPA regulations is complicated and
involves detailed documentation procedures. If planners do not
know whether a project will have a significant environmental
effect, an environmental assessment must be prepared. If the
assessment finds that a project will have a significant effect
on the environment, the Federal Highway Administration must
create an environmental impact statement to document the
expected effects of any reasonable alternative actions. Because
they have to meet so many different requirements, many affected
by NEPA, major highway construction projects take as long as 10
to 15 years to complete. For example, California's
transportation corridor agencies have spent the last 15 years
attempting to comply with Federal environmental review process
for a toll road under construction. Since NEPA became law, the
average time required to complete an environmental impact
statement for a Federal infrastructure project has increased
from 2 years to more than 8 years.
The Obama administration recognized the burdensome nature
of the NEPA process when it exempted 179,000, 179,000, stimulus
projects from environmental review. The goal, according to
Secretary of Energy Steven Chu, was to get the money out and
spent as quickly as possible. What I would add is that these
regulations, particularly the Endangered Species Act, can serve
to halt contract projects that have created extensive delays
and added significant cost increases, especially on projects
that have already started. We are holding this hearing today as
part of an effort by Congress to find ways to continue
protecting our environment while simultaneously encouraging
infrastructure development and economic growth. I look forward
to our hearing this morning and how it can play a role in
beginning to streamline the regulatory process and devolve
control back to the States. I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, sir. I'll now recognize Ms.
Demings, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Intergovernmental Affairs, for her opening statement.
Mrs. Demings. Mr. Chairman, good morning, and thank you so
much for this hearing today. And to our witnesses, thank you so
much for being with us.
I certainly support new projects aimed at repairing the
Nation's crumbling infrastructure, and expanding the
infrastructure to meet the needs of the population and the
modern commerce. There are significant barriers to achieving
that goal. Inadequate Federal funding for infrastructure is a
significant barrier. According to the American Society of Civil
Engineers, $3.6 trillion in new investment is needed to fix the
Nation's network of bridges, roads, waterways, levies, and
dams. Inadequate staffing at Federal agencies to process
development applications is a significant barrier. President
Trump's hiring ban will worsen backlogged development permit
applications because vacant positions cannot be filled, and
more civil servants are approaching the age of retirement. But
environmental protection laws are not a significant barrier.
Some opponents of the National Environmental Policy Act, or
NEPA, say that NEPA is the primary cause of delays. Not so. In
fact, 95 percent of major actions that are reviewable under
NEPA are considered to be part of the categorical exclusion,
which means that they do not require environmental analysis.
Even with the remaining 5 percent of major projects that
require additional environmental review, NEPA does not
constrain the agency if the agency determines that the benefits
of a particular development project outweigh its environmental
impacts.
I, for one, do not want to return to the days before NEPA.
At that time the public had virtually no input into public
infrastructure projects, even if it literally ran through their
backyard. The only considerations for major projects like the
interstate highway system was whether there was an available
open space, and whether the acquisition cost was low for that
space. It did not matter if this available open space was a
historic site or a public park. It did not even matter whether
the space was not open in some instances. Often infrastructure
was built on the backs of the urban poor and minorities. For
example, a segment of Interstate 4 was constructed directly
through Parramore, a community on the outskirts of downtown
Orlando, Florida, and the growing business district.
Prior to I-4 construction, Parramore was a thriving African
American community with several successful civic organizations,
black-owned businesses, including a tailor shop, a theater, and
several professional offices. Dr. William Monroe Wells, a
prominent physician, opened a hotel and a South Street casino
which hosted now legendary jazz and blues performers.
Unfortunately, the interstate highway that helped make
Orlando the vacation capital of the United States had
disastrous consequences for one of central Florida's most
thriving African American communities. Built along the historic
Division Street, named for the segregation boundary in postwar
Orlando, I-4 displaced 551 homes and severed access to downtown
Orlando. For decades, Parramore struggled to remain a strong
community. The neighborhood that once boasted more than 10,000
residents dwindled to 5,200 by 1980, while movie theaters,
libraries, grocery stores, and community centers closed their
doors. Fortunately for Parramore, the neighborhoods like it
across the country, Federal, State, and municipal officials
understand that communities always do better when those
impacted have a seat at the table. We do not want to return to
that past where the Federal Government steamrolls a vibrant
town into a second thought.
Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. And we'll hold the
record open for 5 legislative days for any member who would
like to submit a written opening statement.
We'll now recognize our panel of witnesses. I'm pleased to
welcome Richie Beyer, County Engineer with Elmore County in
Alabama; Mr. Wayne D'Angelo is a partner with Kelley, Drye &
Warren LLP. He serves as counsel for the Steel Manufacturers
Association and is testifying on their behalf today. And
finally, Mr. Nicholas Loris. He is the Herbert and Joyce Morgan
Research Fellow in Energy and Environmental Policy at the
Institute for Economic Freedom and Opportunity at the Heritage
Foundation. We had a couple of other witnesses we were trying
to get. We actually ran up against a couple that were concerned
that their testimony here might interfere with their company's
permitting process, which is another issue we might need to
address at some point. Anyway, to those of you with the courage
to attend, welcome.
Pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be sworn in
before they testify. Would you please rise and raise your right
hand. Do you solely swear or affirm that the testimony you are
about to give will be the truth, the whole truth and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Let the record reflect all witnesses answered in the
affirmative. You all may be seated. In order to allow time for
discussion, we would appreciate it if you would limit your oral
testimony to 5 minutes. Your entire written statement will be
made part of the record, and the members of the panel have
copies of it.
So, Mr. Beyer, we'll recognize you for 5 minutes. You've
got a timer in front of you. The green light will go for 4
minutes. The yellow light will come on when you have 1 minute
left, time to start summing up. And the red light means time's
up. Mr. Beyer, you are recognized for 5 minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF RICHIE BEYER

Mr. Beyer. Chairman Farenthold, Chairman Palmer, Ranking
Member Plaskett, and Ranking Member Demings, and distinguished
members of the subcommittees, thank you for holding this
hearing today. I am honored to testify before you today on
behalf of the National Association of Counties and the National
Association of County Engineers. My name is Richie Beyer, and I
serve as the county engineer for Elmore County, Alabama. Elmore
County serves a population of approximately 82,000, and is one
of the fastest growing counties in our State. My experience in
infrastructure extends not only to Elmore County, but to the
national level as well, as I am a past president of the
National Association of County Engineers and currently serve as
vice chair of the National Association of Counties
Transportation Steering Committee.
Elmore County is responsible for 1,000 miles of road and
127 bridges. Our funding resources, however, are not sufficient
to maintain our infrastructure, as we operate on about one-
third of the revenue needed. The situation is not unique to
Elmore County, though. My county shares many similarities with
counties across the Nation who work every day to stretch the
taxpayer dollars they are entrusted to manage to ensure their
effective and efficient use. Counties are innovators, and in
many cases, do so to survive. The Federal Government can assist
this innovation by providing a regulatory environment designed
to empower project delivery, not hampering it. My remarks to
this committee today will provide recommendations to strengthen
this effort.
Currently, counties are required to follow the same
exhaustive Federal requirements on a small sidewalk or
preservation project as they would for mega projects, and this
simply doesn't make sense. Let's take a look at a simple
resurfacing project in Elmore County where we want to place 1-
1/2 inch wearing surface on a roadway with new traffic stripes
and markers. Once the contractor completes the project, this is
what the county will have: a project file 20 times thicker than
the overlay that was placed; we would have paid on average two
times the cost of a similar project funded solely with local
funds; we would have spent 9 to 12 months longer to get the
project to construction than if it was funded with local funds;
and we would have a road that is materially the same regardless
of the funding source.
Another example, after years of working to secure Federal
funds for two areas of need in our rapidly growing county, we
have been working to make intersection and corridor
improvements at two different locations. The projects will have
immense safety benefits to the public, yet small impact to the
few residents adjacent to the improvements. As the project
start times are separated by one year, we have been in the
design and environmental approval phase for the two projects
for 15 and 30 months, respectively. Currently, we are on pace
to deliver these projects to construction in another 2 years.
Construction costs for these two projects are small at $1
million and $3 million, respectively.
I would like to provide the committee one last example of
the type of issues these Federal impediments can create. On
Christmas Day 2015, many Alabama counties, including Elmore
County, were impacted by torrential rains. A portion of the
county sustained severe damage that caused the closure of
several roads. Our largest damage site was on Holley Mill Road
in the northeast part of the county. A 50-plus-year-old
drainage structure failed under the immense water pressure. The
failure created a chasm in the roadway, sending several hundred
yards of roadbed downstream. Our county team met with State and
Federal officials within weeks of the disaster, and after
meeting with them, we were made aware that FEMA was not
recognizing a provision in the FAST Act exempting emergency
work from environmental reviews.
That same day, we contacted Fish and Wildlife and the U.S.
Corps ourselves. The county received approvals and clearances
from these two Federal agencies the next day. Despite those
clearances and approvals though, we were told that our projects
would still have to go through a full FEMA review. To avoid
loss of reimbursement, we were forced to immediately halt our
project, despite the fact that it was vital to restoring
services to our citizens.
Thirty days later, we were given approval to move forward
with our work. So you may be thinking, well, that's fast for
approvals compared to some of the other environmental horror
stories that we hear, but the real issue is every day we
delayed work, our community, our citizens, and our environment
were negatively impacted.
These examples point to some of the challenges we face in
local government, and I offer the following two recommendations
for ensuring we can provide our citizens the best possible
services given our limited resources: First, we would like to
recommend that Congress build on the principles introduced in
MAP-21 and furthered in the FAST Act by creating an exemption
from all Federal requirements if the project receives less than
$5 million in Federal funding. Second, creation of an exemption
that removes all Federal requirements from emergency repairs to
any transportation facility damaged by a disaster would
expedite restoration of services to our citizens, lower the
cost of repairs, refocus the Federal resources to be available
to support and assist with recovery efforts, all while being
accomplished without harm to the environment.
In closing, counties stand ready to work with our Federal
partners to achieve our shared goals for strengthening
transportation networks, improving public safety, and advancing
our economic competitiveness.
Thank you again, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Members, and members
of the subcommittee, for the opportunity to testify today, and
I will be pleased to answer any questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Beyer follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, and we'll get to the
questions after everybody has given their testimony. Mr.
D'Angelo, you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WAYNE D'ANGELO

Mr. D'Angelo. Thank you. Thank you, Chairman----
Mr. Farenthold. You need to get that mic really close to
your mouth. In our budget consciousness, we got budget mics.
And turn it on.
Mr. D'Angelo. There it is. Okay. That's better. We're
talking with our hands a little bit here, so I apologize if I
knock the mic. I am very happy to be here. I'm thankful for the
invite. I have the privilege of testifying on behalf of the
Steel Manufacturers Association, the leadership of which is
sitting behind me today. And they have the privilege of
representing steel mills, which account for over 75 percent of
domestic steelmaking capacity. SMA members are not just
steelmakers, they're recyclers. Through the use of electric arc
furnaces, SMA members make steel from a feed stock of over 90
percent recycled scrap, millions of tons of scrap that would
otherwise be disposed of in landfills. So they don't make roads
or bridges or pipelines, but they will take this Nation's aging
infrastructure, aging bridges and rebar, and turn it into the
infrastructure of tomorrow, and that's pretty cool. And I can
tell you that SMA members, SMA's leadership, and the 60,000 men
and women that SMA companies directly employ are immensely
proud of that fact, and that's why I'm here today.
And I'm here talking about statutes like NEPA and ESA. So
U.S. steel mills have a list of regulatory requirements that is
far longer than my arm, and I'm not talking about those. I'm
talking about NEPA and ESA, two statutes which most
environmental managers don't have to worry about because steel
mills are stationary sources and they generally don't have to
interact with Federal agency action that would implicate those
statutes.
And if we think about that, that's kind of a big deal
because this is an industry that is fighting one heck of a
fight against international competition, and fighting against
nations that don't have the environmental health and safety
controls that we do, and they're not here talking about those
controls that they're faced with, but those controls, which
American infrastructure and American government action are
faced with. And those barriers, we identify as NEPA and the
ESA, and the reason they are barriers is because we as a Nation
have chosen to erect them as barriers to infrastructure
development. NEPA, for instance, started with a very
commonsense notion that we should look before we leap. We
should consider the implications of our actions before we take
those actions, actions like Ms. Demings spoke about. But we
have sort of lost sight of the underlying purpose of NEPA, and
that's to get to an action.
We have heard about all the horror stories, how long it
takes to get to a final environmental impact statement. These
environmental impact statements take years and years, cost
millions of dollars, and are thousands of pages. We have to ask
ourselves, are we asking questions that are providing the
answers we need? Or is this the information we need for
rational, informed decisionmaking? Or are we simply armoring
ourselves against litigation? Now, some environmental groups
will cheer this analysis paralysis, but real world
environmentalists, like Ms. Plaskett talked about, and like my
clients understand, that you need infrastructure development to
further environmental protection.
We have also weighted down our environmental analysis with
more and more searching analyses that have really protracted
decisionmaking, and there's no better example of this than the
ESA. Again, considering the potential impacts on threatened and
endangered species is a really good idea, and the ESA was a
great idea for Congress. Now, that made a lot of sense when we
were dealing with 70 to 80 of the most threatened and iconic
species in America. It makes a lot less sense when we're
dealing with 2,400 species and a list that grows every single
year. How did we get there? It's not because thousands more
species have been pushed to the brink of extinction in the past
40 years. It's because a couple of litigious groups have
learned to game the statute, exploit inflexible deadlines, co-
opt the services listing agenda, and rob the listing services
of the ability to prioritize species and conservation.
The listing services, I have some sympathy for them, but
they've also overreached themselves. They've passed rules just
this past year with respect to how they designate critical
habitat. Right? Critical habitat, again, that's an important
concept that we should consider it, but when we are now
designating critical habitat where the species has never been,
and if you put it there, could not now survive, we have ceased
to ask questions that are relevant to this analysis. Same thing
with environmental analyses. The ESA requires critical habitat
be accompanied by an environmental analysis, and yet through
rule, Fish and Wildlife Service determined that they can up
sign all of the costs away from critical habitat analyses
through a bookkeeping trick, and they're free to ignore all
types of critical--all economic costs in making their
decisions. They are doing precisely what Congress admonished
against, and that is, designating critical habitat as far as
the eye can see, and the mind can conceive.
Now I recognize here I'm out of time. I just want to make
one further point. None of this helps conservation. This hurts
conservation. SMA is proud of their role in furthering
environmental standards, and I'm glad to answer any questions.
I appreciate the opportunity to be here today.

[Prepared statement of Mr. D'Angelo follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, Mr. D'Angelo. Mr. Loris, you're
recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF NICK LORIS

Mr. Loris. Well, thank you and good morning. I want to
thank the distinguished members of the two subcommittees for
this opportunity to examine environmental barriers to
infrastructure development. My name is Nick Loris, and I am the
Herbert and Joyce Morgan fellow at the Heritage Foundation. The
views in this testimony I express are my own and should not be
construed as representing any official position of the Heritage
Foundation.
America has a clean, healthy environment, as well as safe,
high-quality infrastructure. However, we can improve upon both.
Infrastructure investment and protecting the environment are
certainly not mutually exclusive. Environmental policies that
respect the rule of law, protect private property rights, and
transition power to the States will drive economic growth and
responsible stewardship. On the contrary, perpetuating the
status quo, or increasing the Federal Government's regulatory
overreach hinders infrastructure investment, creates perverse
incentives, and centralizes power in Washington, all for little
to no meaningful direct environmental benefit.
Our country's major environmental policies and regulations
are long outdated and in dire need of reform. My written
testimony identifies several environmental roadblocks, and I
will briefly discuss four of them. As discussed, one major
roadblock is NEPA, a statute that has evolved to serve as a
tool to significantly delay and obstruct investment in job
creation. As we have heard, the average time to complete an
environmental impact statement for highway projects increased
from 2.2 years in the 1970s to 8.1 years in 2011. Currently 148
energy and transit projects are in NEPA review with nearly $230
billion in stalled investment.
Some of the major problems with NEPA include differing
interpretations of NEPA requirements, failed interagency
coordination or a lead agency, a lack of hard deadlines,
administrative bottlenecks, and the inclusion of assessing
manmade climate change's impacts on these projects.
Reforming NEPA will not compromise public health or safety
but instead remove duplication and establish a more streamlined
efficient process. In fact, the Obama administration recognized
this when effectively waiving NEPA requirements for projects
funded by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Another
issue is the social cost of carbon, which allows regulators to
artificially inflate the environmental cost of a project.
The Federal Government relies on three statistical models
to calculate the alleged monetary cost of manmade climate
change to society, which is defined as the economic damage that
one ton of carbon dioxide emitted today will cause over the
next 300 years. Not only is this calculation wasteful in terms
of time and resources, these models the government uses to
calculate the SCC are useless for cost benefit analysis and for
regulatory rulemaking. Subjecting the models to reasonable
alternative inputs, such as changes to the discount rates and
equilibrium climate sensitivity, which estimates the warming
impact of a doubling of CO2 emissions shows just how different
the results can be. For example, in one of these models, using
a 7 percent discount rate instead of 3, combined with an
updated equilibrium climate sensitivity, decreases the social
cost of carbon by $34 per ton, a 102 percent decrease.
Furthermore, attempts to forecast economic damages
centuries into the future significantly strains the credibility
of these models, but the use of SCC has significant real-world
policy implications, including for infrastructure development.
Yet another problem is the EPA's 2015 regulation for ground
level ozone, where the new standard is so stringent it
approaches background levels in several areas and will force
many new areas into nonattainment. These standards would have a
direct adverse impact on the construction of all types of
economic activity, including roads and other infrastructure,
all for diminishing marginal environmental benefits.
Perhaps most oppressive are the requirements for
nonattaining regions to offset emission increases with cuts in
emissions elsewhere, which means potentially redirecting funds
or canceling infrastructure projects.
The reality is that national average ozone levels have
fallen 32 percent since 1980 and are on track to continue to
decrease. The Federal Government should not continue to move
the goalposts as States continue to meet the attainments of the
1997 and 2008 standards. Withdrawing the 2015 standard would
unlock economic activity at the State and local level, and
prevent the threat of sanctioned Federal highway funds or other
penalties.
Lastly, policymakers should examine and reform
environmental roadblocks to privately funded energy
infrastructure investments, not just examine traditional
infrastructure projects. Federal ownership of land and
resources, time-consuming leases, permitting and environmental
review stages needlessly slow energy infrastructure
development. A few years ago, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce
compiled a list of 351 energy projects stalled by environmental
barriers. The authors estimate that the investment phase of
these projects would generate $577 billion in direct investment
over a 7-year construction period. And importantly, regulatory
reform will benefit all energy sources and technologies as
nearly 40 percent of these projects were renewable energy
infrastructure.
In conclusion, antidevelopment regulations serve more as
tools to protect the desires of special interests than protect
the environment. Reforming environmental regulations with a
focus on transitioning authority to the States, creating market
incentives, and removing costly, ineffective regulations
entirely will safeguard the environment at a lower cost and
stimulate infrastructure development of all types.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Loris follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Loris. I'll now
recognize myself for the first round of questioning for 5
minutes.
Mr. Beyer, you're an engineer, and in your testimony, you
told the testimony of actually having to do a full review of
just doing a topcoat on an existing road. As an engineer, by
topcoating that road, you're not taking any more land. You're
not endangering any more species. I assume the runoff is going
to be constant whether you've got an inch or two, the road is
an inch or two higher or an inch or two lower. Is there any
environmental impact at all? I assume there's got to be some.
Can you tell me what that sort of change makes?
Mr. Beyer. Chairman Farenthold, that's a very good
question, and I believe it was Ranking Member Demings that
mentioned categorical exclusions in her discussion. And there
are categorical exclusions for those activities. But even with
the categorical exclusions, the other oversight that is
involved to get to the point where you are categorically
excluded makes that process much more lengthy, and that's when
I'm referring to the 9 months to 12 months to get that project
out there. In terms of the environmental impacts, we're
preserving the road that is there, the impacts that we are
mitigating by preserving that road, sealing that road up,
allows for smoother traffic. It allows for shorter trips. It
takes away from the citizens having damaged vehicles, things of
that nature, all things that actually would create more
environmental problems if it wasn't done. That's just one
example. I'm just trying to show you that a simple project like
that gets bogged down and then how that translates to the
larger ones.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. And you also spoke about some
infrastructure that was damaged as a result of a natural
disaster. I assume that the procedures and techniques for
building a road or a bridge in 2017 are substantially different
than in the 1950s when maybe some of this infrastructure was
originally developed. Does replacing infrastructure from the
'40s or '50s with infrastructure designed to today's technical
standard using today's technical process actually make them
more or less environmentally friendly?
Mr. Beyer. First of all, I will admit that I wasn't around
in the '50s when those were being built, so from what I've seen
in my experience, yes, sir, they are much different in the
construction processes. One of those examples about the
emergency repairs, though, we're sitting there waiting for
approvals with a roadway that is wide open that has 20 foot
embankments going down into a live stream that is carrying silt
and sediment downstream, and we can't get in there to work
because we don't get a clearance. So we're actually doing more
damage to the environment by waiting than we are by going in
there and doing our actions.
The other thing is we have got several hundred yards of
material that we're laying downstream in the channel that we're
sitting there looking at with the Federal officials, and
they're all worried about whether or not, with all due respect,
whether I'm going to hurt a yellow-bellied salamander or
something like that, and you've got the whole roadway sitting
down there in the channel. If they were there, they're down
there with the debris. So realistically, that doesn't make much
sense to us when we're trying to get services back to our
citizens, sir.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Super. Mr. Loris, you work at
the think tank, and you study this a lot. There's some concern
that all these delays would go away if we would just hire more
people to do the reviews and create a bigger Federal
bureaucracy to deal with that. Do you think that's the case?
Mr. Loris. No, I don't think so. In a lot of respects, we
have tried to do that, and we have seen increasing bottlenecks,
lack of coordination. I think it fails to address the real
roots of the problem, which is so much meddling through Federal
Government and through this alphabet soup of agencies that
there is a lack of coordination. So I think we need to, in
fact, go the opposite approach and not hire more Federal
workers, but devolve a lot of these responsibilities down to
the State who are more responsive to these things.
Mr. Farenthold. So as part of the NEPA review process,
there are a wide variety of Federal agencies that review this.
Part of the changes that the Transportation Committee made in
the recent transportation bills is to try to streamline that
and get some of these reviews going concurrently. Is that
working, or are we seeing situations where all the agencies but
one don't like it, and then you've got to go back to square
one? How is that working----
Mr. Loris. I think, at most, it's a Band-Aid for a bullet
hole. It really fails to address, again, these problems that so
many agencies can still effectively stall, and without real,
hard deadlines, if you have one agency that's capitulating to
the needs of a special interest group, or someone who opposes
the project, it can still delay the project. So I know they
tried to make reforms in the FAST Act to streamline the NEPA
process, but it really doesn't address those fundamental needs
that would go a long way towards reducing those timelines.
Mr. Farenthold. All right. Well, I see my time has expired.
I'll now recognize the Ranking Member, Ms. Plaskett, for 5
minutes of questions.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to the
witnesses again for being here. This is, to me, a really
important topic. I'm very concerned about impediments to
communities being able to grow, being able to sustain
themselves, and recognizing that there has to be a balance.
Everyone here on this panel agrees on the importance of
infrastructure. Mr. Beyer, you probably stated it best in your
testimony when you said finding the balance between regulations
and reality is key. I agree with that wholeheartedly. The
economy of the Virgin Islands is heavily reliant on protecting
its natural resources. For an example, we had, some years ago,
the EPA, their Petroleum Refinery Initiative mandated that all
U.S. refineries install best available control technologies,
BACT--you know, I'm not a scientist, but this is what they tell
me--to reduce greenhouse gasses emission by 20 percent.
In the U.S. Virgin Islands, this developed a consent decree
between the EPA and our then-oil refinery at the time, Hovensa,
that required the refinery to install a $700 million emissions
control equipment. Shortly after signing that consent decree,
Hovensa announced its closure in the Virgin Islands. We had the
second largest oil refinery in the Western Hemisphere. After
they left, we, on the island of St. Croix, our unemployment
skyrocketed to 18 percent. So these are things that are very
dear to our hearts, we're very concerned about.
Mr. D'Angelo, you also seem to recognize there is a need
for a balance, and you testified that the Steel Manufacturers
Association does not believe we should abandon the deliberative
process required by NEPA and ESA. Is that correct?
Mr. D'Angelo. Yes, that's correct.
Ms. Plaskett. And as someone who's familiar with the
process, what value does the SMA believe the deliberative
process should be adding?
Mr. D'Angelo. Well, I think as Congress intended in
developing NEPA and the ESA, we want to look before we leap. We
want to consider our actions, and we want to be able to involve
stakeholders. But I question what stakeholder is going to be
involved 8 years down the line and read thousands and thousands
of pages of EIS, and how are stakeholders helped simply where
these processes become used as barriers to development, and
they're used as paperwork exercises as opposed to ways to make
reasonable, wise, informed decisions that avoid impact, but
also, let important projects go forward. That's the balance. It
has less to do with NEPA or ESA. Right? Those were great ideas.
Those were important ideas, and they were necessary, and
they're necessary today. The problem is that we got a little
bit far away from our purpose.
There was a couple groups that figured out that these are
really, really powerful tools, and if you don't like
infrastructure and if you don't want development, then you can
invoke processes that will mire down any prospect of growth.
Ms. Plaskett. So right now, and I'm not undervaluing that,
I believe that there are those in the agencies that that is
their mandate. One of the other things I'm concerned with in
some of these agencies, however, is the understaffing, and we
in the Virgin Islands and many people on the East Coast have
really experienced that, that they can't move fast enough
between the projects. I talked in my opening testimony about
the differences between the West Coast and the East Coast in
terms of the personnel that's assigned.
Mr. Beyer, you being part of that southeast region in
Alabama, do you believe that there are inadequate staffing
levels in the southeast region which add to the delay in the
development process?
Mr. Beyer. I think that the focus is off target, and that
if their focus was on the larger projects and getting those
through the process instead of some of the more simple,
realistic projects that are the bread and butter of State and
local government, I think that would address a good bit of your
problem. When they're spending time on the simple examples I
gave you instead of focusing on the larger capacity projects
that are impacting communities and things of that nature, I
think their efforts could be better used there.
Ms. Plaskett. So even with the shift in those, you think
that would solve the problem entirely, that there wouldn't
still be a problem of staffing issues?
Mr. Beyer. I think it would go a long way to solving that
problem, yes, ma'am.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. I know that in the Virgin Islands, we
believe that, yes, there is maybe too many hands that are
involved; the process takes too long. But we have had instances
as well where I think a large part of the issue for us has been
that they have not been able to deploy people appropriately to
the issues, to the projects that we would like to have, and I
think that that's the thing that we are concerned with, is
striking that balance between having the process move along
smoothly, but ensuring that we have the right individuals to
take that place.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. I'll now recognize the chairman
of the Subcommittee on Intergovernmental Affairs, Mr. Palmer,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Beyer, you had
direct experience in seeing the interaction between Federal and
local levels of government in that emergency situation with the
Christmas flood back in 2015. Can you expand on how further
control can be delegated to the States in the local level in
both emergency and nonemergency infrastructure development, how
that would impact your ability to respond?
Mr. Beyer. Yes, Congressman. Number one, there's a
duplication of efforts from the Federal and the State levels,
and that is the most noticeable change that could be made, is
to shift those responsibilities down. But even further than
that, there is a lot of this work that occurs in the existing
right of ways and existing roadways that we have that as,
especially in Alabama where we have 67 county engineers,
professional engineers, you know, we're charged with that as a
responsibility when we get our professional license. We are
charged to look after the environment, and to make the most
expedient and efficient use of the taxpayer dollars to protect
the environment and traveling public. But I don't want you all
to get it wrong that everybody that we deal with at the Federal
or State government are problems. We have a lot of good people
that are out there that help us. That example I gave you about
the flood, if we didn't have a very good FEMA person on the
ground with us that helped us navigate through their red tape,
we would have been longer than those 30 days getting those
approvals.
So I think--that's where I see the balance is, you know,
there are certain things that reach a level where the Federal
Government should be involved on the oversight of the
environmental part. But most of the stuff that we deal with on
a day-to-day basis, or in those disasters, are not something
that rises to that level. The example I gave you is one of
those. An example that does rise to that level, when we got hit
in 2011 with tornados in our State, one of the most massive
destructive days in our State's history, we had a large amount
of debris that was dumped in one of the largest and greatest
reservoirs in our State, Lake Martin, and we had to have the
Federal help to get that cleaned up. I mean, you had houses and
debris all scattered through that lake, and we had to rely on
the Corps of Engineers to help us navigate that. That is one of
those examples. A 14-foot diameter plate arch pipe going out
and leaving a 200-foot hole in the ground that we need to get
back open with water services and sewer and other things that
were affected, that doesn't really necessarily rise to it, so I
guess that kind of goes back to the comments about focusing the
resources in the appropriate manners.
Mr. Palmer. One of the things that I'm concerned about is
the cost imposed in terms of road construction, road repair,
and in your testimony, you made the point that you pay, on
average, two times of the cost of a similar project funded
solely with local funds. It's $160,00 per mile for a Federal
project versus $80,000 per mile for local projects. And we're
trying to ramp up the infrastructure improvement in the United
States. And what I want to ask you is, in what ways can the
regulatory and statutory burdens imposed by the Federal
Government be reduced so that counties and State projects can
go forward? How will that help the infrastructure development?
Mr. Beyer. That's a very good question as well,
Congressman. I think one of the misnomers in the discussion of
a categorical exclusion is that that responsibility for
oversight on that project is pushed down to the State level to
view the operations of the projects until it's audited. The
categorical exclusion process clears you through the
environmental process, but now the State is sitting there with
all these Federal requirements that they have to ensure are
met. And by doing that, they add cost to the project, and in a
lot of cases, they don't understand the outdated reasons for
the regulations themselves. So you have levels of regulations
that add to the cost. You mentioned 25 percent being added to
the cost just in administrative. That is a very good number in
our State from what we see from our State Department of
Transportation. Then you also have the levels of you have the
contractors that are bidding these jobs that add costs to them
handling the administration of dealing with the regulations as
well. On average, when we take local bids for our projects,
those numbers I gave you, $80- to $160,000 are very accurate in
terms of what we see. Some of it also has to do with the extra
things we have to do because it has Federal money tied to it
for a project. That overlay project, there's all sorts of
things we'll have to do that are ancillary to it that don't
allow the money to go as far.
Mr. Palmer. In your written testimony last night, you
talked about the lack of trust between the Federal Government
and the local agencies and implied that the people with the
money don't trust the people down the line that they have the
capability to handle it. And I think you quoted Ralph Waldo
Emerson that said distrust is expensive.
Mr. Beyer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Palmer. I think that's true. And, Mr. Chairman, I hope
as we go through this process, this is not an attack against
Federal agencies. I think we have confidence that the agencies
can do the job. We also need to transfer that confidence down
the line to the State and local government and reduce these
regulatory burdens as much as possible while also protecting
the environment. I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much, Mr. Palmer. I'll now
recognize Ms. Demings, the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee
on Intergovernmental Affairs, for her first round of questions.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. In my
opening statement, I talked about impact on communities, and
it's been stated, or suggested, that the Federal Government can
be a roadblock to economic development in those communities, so
we're trying to find balance to protect but also to move
forward. Building America and keeping America moving is
important. The steelworkers who are here today help to do that.
But I represent communities. You do, too, as well, Mr. Beyer,
and so we have to balance the impact to those communities with
keeping our country moving forward.
Mr. D'Angelo, you talked about stakeholders, look before
you leap. When you think about people who have been displaced
in various communities, who are the stakeholders that should be
at the table because I think we always do better when we
include people who are directly impacted in communities in the
decisionmaking process? Who are the stakeholders and what do
you really mean by ``look before you leap'' today?
Mr. D'Angelo. Well, that's a great question. I think the
stakeholders are the people that are impacted by these
decisions, and those are the people that are local, that will
benefit or be hurt by the potential infrastructure projects and
others. Those that are going to be stakeholders in building
that, that will provide jobs. I think there's a wide range of
stakeholders, and I think good decisionmaking requires casting
the net far and wide with who we talk to, and the kind of input
the Federal Government receives. And so when I'm talking about
looking before we leap, we want to have an understanding of the
impacts, and we want to understand alternatives, right? Are
there ways we can mitigate an adverse impact? Is there some
glaring thing that we can identify if we stop, pause, take a
breath, and say here's how we see this project going. Is there
a better way to do it, right? But then, we're going to weigh it
against the benefits of those projects and those stakeholders
for the benefits. Communities are not benefited when trucks and
cars are forced to idle in inner cities. If we have ways that
we can move people more efficiently, if we have ways that we
can mitigate how much people pay for energy, these are
considerations as well.
So that's what I mean by looking forward. It's shocking
that NEPA came out in 1969, and that was the first time that we
ever had the thought of doing that. I'm glad we do, but I want
to rein it in to where it's actually providing information
that's useful for the decisionmaking.
I'll give you an example. We do, with greenhouse gasses,
right, and so, the CEQ came out last year with guidance that
says we have to examine life cycle analysis of greenhouse gas
emissions with respect to projects under NEPA analysis, and
that's all well and good. But there's no project in America
that is going to change climate change, right? Climate change
is the input of billions and billions of sources all over the
world. And so if we are able to assign some number to a
particular project, a discrete project, and spend lots and lots
of time doing that, what value is that returning for the
community, for the stakeholders? I'm glad we look at these
things, but I just don't know if that is returning the type of
important information in most of these projects.
Mrs. Demings. Mr. Loris, in your testimony, you talked
about how hiring additional personnel actually caused more
bottleneck, which I find a little strange. Could you give me an
example of a project where that happened, or some examples of
that?
Mr. Loris. Well, I think you can just look at the trends
and the average timeframe in which these projects failed to get
through the NEPA process.
Mrs. Demings. So you're seeing that as a direct result of
hiring additional staff. I'm trying to understand that.
Mr. Loris. I think so. I mean, if you have growing
bureaucracies that fail to address the real roots of the
problem where you don't have a lead agency, where you're not
mandating time limits, if anything, it's certainly not helping
address the problem. Maybe you're perpetuating the status quo,
but as we have seen even with increases in staff, they've
failed to address and reduce the frames to move through the
NEPA process.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. We'll now recognize the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Ross, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ross. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. D'Angelo, I want to
go straight to you, because you hit on something, and I think
my colleague, Ms. Demings also talked about it, when you talk
about the stakeholders. But I think what we're seeing here, and
I think something very crucial and very important in order to
maintain the investment that we want to have an infrastructure
in this country is going to be the cost of capital. The
stakeholders there that are going to provide the capital
necessary in order to make that investment to be able to build
our roads and rebuild our bridges and streamline what it is we
need to have done. Now the return on investment, and this is
why it's important that I think that we get this straight under
NEPA, what's the deadline for completing the permitting process
under NEPA?
Mr. D'Angelo. There are no deadlines.
Mr. Ross. There are none. So if I'm an investor, and I want
to be able to invest what capital I have to get a return, where
am I going to put it? Am I going to put it in infrastructure
subsidies--companies? Or am I going to go somewhere where
there's a guaranteed return on my investment? So would it not
be advantageous just for the simple sake of the cost of the
investment necessary for our infrastructure, to have a
timeline, a deadline, on the permitting process?
Mr. D'Angelo. It absolutely would. I mean, these analyses
will grow to fit whatever timeframe is given. If there's no
timeframe given, they will grow and grow.
Mr. Ross. It will perpetuate adversarial involvement, will
it not?
Mr. D'Angelo. Correct.
Mr. Ross. Which leads me to my next question. It has to do
with sue and settle. And, Mr. Loris, I'm going to ask you about
this, because you kind of hit on this, lawsuit reform. What's
there to prevent somebody from just interjecting in the
permitting process for the mere sake of nothing but to want to
settle a case? And is that not what we see happening under
NEPA?
Mr. Loris. That's exactly right. I honestly don't have too
much to add to that except for these lawsuits that are supposed
to be for ordinary citizens that are overtaken by these
environmental activists organizations who negotiate and settle
behind closed doors to get to a predetermined outcome without
really addressing the needs of the public citizens who, in a
lot of respects, would want these projects.
Mr. Ross. And in my experience as a litigator, it has been
that at times my clients would settle for the cost of defense,
regardless of principle. And I think we're seeing that also in
NEPA. So how do we address that?
Let's talk about standing. What standing does somebody have
other than the fact that they have to be a citizen of the
United States in order to interject themselves in a lawsuit. Is
that it?
Mr. Loris. Largely. And then you have folks, again like the
Sierra Club who are--you know, that have that standing and the
taxpayers will fund part of this litigation. And so it's this
never ending cycle where you have--you know, those are the
folks who really control the message.
Mr. Ross. And under the NEPA process right now there's no
loser pays in the attorney's fees arena, is there?
Mr. Loris. No.
Mr. Ross. So would that not give some sense of rationale
before someone files lawsuit, at least to the extent there may
be merit to their claim that they should have to bear the cost
if they lose their suit?
Mr. Loris. Yeah. There's no real stakeholder input where--
you know, you're effectively giving them all the opportunities
to get what they want with zero risk.
Mr. Ross. In the 112th Congress 6 years ago, I filed what
was then called the RAPID Act. It has been refiled by my
colleague Tom Marino in the 113th and the 114th Congress. I
hope that it is refiled again.
But what it does is it allows for a 4.5 year timeline in
order to have the permitting process. It allows for 18 months
for an environmental assessment. It requires that anybody who
objects do so during this process so that they then have
standing at the end of the day, and that there's a statute of
limitations that allows for them to respond within, in order to
have their complaints.
My question to you is is this something that would not be
embraced, not only by environmentalists. Because let's face it,
if they have an issue, they need to be at the table the sooner
the better so that issue can be addressed.
But is it not also something that I think would be
absolutely necessary in order for those that seek to invest in
our infrastructure but also those at the county level, at the
State level and the Federal level who are in the permitting
process?
Mr. Loris. Absolutely. The lack of deadlines is a huge
problem, and allowing or establishing those would give a yes or
no answer one way or the another. And then you would actually
have some regulatory certainty. And with so many projects in
limbo, are being held up by timeless delays. One way or
another, it should benefit both the economic interests of the
private producers as well as those environmental activists who
think these projects shouldn't move forward.
Mr. Ross. And lastly, Mr. Beyer, is there much duplication
in the permitting process from one agency, say a State agency
to a Federal agency in that they are doing the same thing but
requiring different timelines, although they may have same
standards?
Mr. Beyer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ross. And would not that duplication, at least being
resolved, assist in expediting the process?
Mr. Beyer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ross. Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
We now recognize the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr. Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
And first of all, I want to thank both you and Chairman
Palmer for calling this very important hearing.
This is my 29th year in the Congress. During all of that
time my main committee has been the Transportation and
Infrastructure Committee and we have tried as hard, as much as
we possibly could, or as hard as we could to come up with ways
to accomplish environmental streamlining. It has been the most
difficult problem that we've worked with.
During that time, I've chaired three different
subcommittees of that committee and I will never forget that
during the 6 years I was chairing the Aviation Subcommittee at
one hearing we heard the people from the Atlanta airport
testify that the longest run--the then longest runway at the
Atlanta airport took 14 years from conception to completion. It
took only 99 construction days and they did those in 24 hour
days, around the clock construction so they completed the work
in 33 days, but it took them 14 years from conception to
completion. And it was almost entirely environmental rules, and
regulations and red tape.
I chaired the Highways and Transit Subcommittee. We had
hearings and they told--the Federal highway people said they
had two major studies so they took an average. One study said
13 years, one study said 15 years, for a new highway
construction project. And these weren't cross country projects,
these were six or nine mile projects. And it was all
environmental stuff.
I chaired the Water Resources Environment Subcommittee and
the Maersk SeaLand people came to us at one point and told us
of a way--they had done a major project at the Norfolk port.
They worked a deal with all the environmental agencies, because
they knew it would take so long. They said, let us do your work
for you and they did. And they completed this project in 7
years. They said it would have taken probably twice as long if
they hadn't been able to negotiate that agreement to do all the
work for those agencies to their satisfaction first.
The problem was--and I led a congressional delegation in
Vietnam a few years ago, it was booming. And I asked them, I
said, you know, I asked them about starting a business over
there, they said, oh, if you want to start a business over
there now, you just go out and start it.
The problem is this, we have more competition--we got so
far ahead because we had so many socialist and communist
countries around the world that they actually followed those
systems for many years and they destroyed their economies. Now
even some of these former communist countries are allowing a
lot of free enterprise, free markets in their countries. And
we've got more competition around the world than we ever had
before.
And in most of those countries, especially the Asian
countries, they are doing these infrastructure projects in a
third or half the time that we are. We can't keep doing that.
We have made some progress in some of our more recent highway
bills and so forth. We are doing better than we were a few
years ago, but we still have such a long ways to go.
And I've noticed through the years that all these
environmental radicals seem to come from very wealthy or very
upper income families. And I'm not sure they realize how many
poor and lower income and working people they have harmed by
causing hundreds of thousands, maybe several million jobs to go
to other countries and also in driving up the prices and the
cost of everything that we have in this country.
And so this is a very, very important project--or topic.
And we need to do much more to get this under control or this
country is not going to have the future that we want it to
have.
And I appreciate you gentlemen coming here to testify. I
appreciate this hearing here today. And I thank you very much.
And I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you, sir. And we'll--seeing nobody
who has not yet asked questions, we'll start a second round of
questions and go back--I guess we'll go to Ms. Plaskett since
we have gone a long time on our side. So you're recognized for
5 minutes.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. Thank you very much for that.
What a gentleman you are, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Listen, I have been listening to a lot of the testimony and
I couldn't agree with the vast majority of what has been said.
Mr. Ross, my colleague across the aisle, I agree with him on a
lot of the delays that are taking place. I have testimony here
that I would like unanimous consent to enter into the record.
One is from Kevin Rames who is a partner and principal of a law
firm in the Virgin Islands on Saint Croix, discussing one
particular project, Amalago Bay Resort, Williams and Punch.
And then the other is from Miss Alicia Barnes who had been
the former commissioner of the Government of the Virgin
Islands, Department of Planning and Natural Resources, was the
director of energy office and is now the managing owner of the
Rittenhouse Consulting, LLC.
Mr. Farenthold. Without objection they will be entered into
the record.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. And both of those testimonies--
thank you, Mr. Chair--speak to what we've been talking about
here, the difficulties and the processes, the length of time
that investors who--you know, in the Virgin Islands we are
competing not with even other American jurisdictions that have
EPA, that have NOAA, that have National Marine Fisheries and
Army Corps of Engineers. We are competing with other Caribbean
islands who don't have anywhere near the types of restrictions
and environmental protections and such that the United States
have. And we can't keep up. We can't compete.
On the one project Amalago Bay resort is to build a project
on the island of Saint Croix because we haven't had a new hotel
built on the island of Saint Croix in 30 years. How do you have
as your major function tourism if you have not been able to
build a hotel and the one project that you have has taken over
10 years just in permitting?
That's mind boggling and it's hurtful to the people of the
territory. Because while we understand the importance of
elkhorn coral and others, it provides for our protein, our
fishes and others. I can't eat coral and my children can't eat
coral. And the children of the Virgin Islands need employment
and need something sustainable.
But another issue that I wanted to talk about and wanted to
ask you questions about was the notion of the one size fits--
first come, first served basis, one size fits all approach that
is being done with some of these agencies. Currently projects
for environmental review are prioritized on a first come, first
served basis. That means that a small residential dock on Key
West will come before a large dredging project that would have
brought millions of dollars and hundreds of jobs to the Virgin
Islands.
Mr. Beyer, have you experienced problems getting key
projects prioritized? And do you have any suggestions for how
we can assure that crucial projects, that jurisdictions
identify, can to the front of the line?
Mr. Beyer. We have experienced times where we have had
trouble getting responses back and getting an answer back from
the different Federal agencies. I can't speak to the fact of
did I get behind a smaller project or a bigger project, but we
have seen delays in that. And I know that our State DOT
specifically has actually put money into funding slots at the
different resource agencies to be able to prioritize our
project.
Ms. Plaskett. So you prioritized them at the State level?
Mr. Beyer. No, I think the Federal agency still prioritizes
them. What I'm saying is they put in money to pay for a
resource agent that will----
Ms. Plaskett. Got you.
Mr. Beyer. --actually help expedite their projects as they
come in so that still is only paying for a slot.
Ms. Plaskett. Right, okay.
Mr. Beyer. In a State.
Ms. Plaskett. So what that comes down is to the other
jurisdictions putting money into the Federal Government too.
And that doesn't make any sense. We all know that doesn't make
any sense.
So, but you know, with the prioritization and they always
say that, you know, they are taking them one at a time, they
are working on them, they are pushing them through. They at
least in our--when I've had phone calls or our governor had
phone calls they always come back to the fact that they don't
have enough. I'm concerned, and I know some on our panel may
not be, that the hiring freeze is going to exacerbate the
problem.
I understand that a quarter of NOAA's staff are going to be
eligible for retirement by 2019. And although we have a culture
that needs to be changed as well in some of these agencies, and
the fact that environmental groups may come and exert a lot of
influence, I can only imagine the backlog that will swell with
unsustainable proportions if this were the case.
There's room for improvement in the current process. We're
hoping that you all can give us some of those answers,
streamlining the process, prioritizing review of economic
significance. And more importantly, enabling these agencies to
serve the public through adequate funding and the staffing. I
think that this is an area where a hiring freeze would not be
best for the people and formulaic budget cuts is not the way to
go in this area.
But I want to thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I
yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. We'll now go to Mr.
Palmer for his second round of questions.
Mr. Palmer. Just a few questions, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate you allowing us to have a second round.
Mr. Beyer, on average how long does it take to--do you have
to wait to ensure that projects are NEPA compliant.
Mr. Beyer. A simple project like I was talking about with a
resurfacing and all that, you know, you're taking 6 to 9 months
to get through that process up to a year.
The other examples I gave you, we've been at it 12 to 18
months on those two projects in just the environmental approval
process, and those are talking about slivers of right away
around intersections that have little to no impact on species,
the residents or anything like that to put in needed safety
improvements.
Mr. Palmer. The courts have put a hold on the Waters of the
U.S. rule. And it looks like that's not going to be
implemented. But under those rules there would have been major
restrictions on--and new regulations on ditch water. How would
that have impacted, particularly for rural roads, the cost of
building or, maintaining, or repairing those roads?
Mr. Beyer. Well, first of all we are very happy that the
Waters of the U.S. has been stayed. That would have pretty much
shut down county government in terms of being able to provide
citizens the service that they need. I mean, if we have to go
out there and every time we clean a ditch out we have to go
through a permit process to do that. And I know they try to say
they operate under--they operate under permits that are general
permits, but there's still regulatory involvement there that we
have to submit documentation on. All that money that we're
spending is less money that we are putting out there to benefit
the citizens of our county.
Mr. Palmer. One other thing that the EPA is doing and that
the Federal Highway Administration is doing, is imposing
emissions rules.
One of the issues was the ozone rule, and is particularly
problematic for southern States. So, a big problem for us. It
could have a very negative impact on economic development. One
of the problems I've got with this is they keep changing the
goal post and it has a tremendously negative impact on
planning. For instance, EPA has proposed a new ozone rule,
which frankly we had a hearing and I questioned Administrator
McCarthy about it. The technology doesn't exist at the moment
to achieve this new rule.
But it was also interesting, I think this was either in
February or March of 2015 or 2016, I think it was 2015. I also
asked her when they send the implementation guidelines to the
States for the 2008 rule and they had just sent them.
So when you have Federal agencies, EPA, or any other
agency, imposing these rules and then not sending the
implementation guidelines, that has to have a very negative
impact on your ability to plan and to get investments, even
private sector investments for infrastructure.
Would you want to comment on that?
Mr. Beyer. Yes, sir, I will. The last round of ozone
requirements did not touch our metropolitan planning
organization, but we were borderline with that. And it would
have had extreme impacts on the way that we were able to plan,
whether it was on the transit side or whether it was on the
highway side. And we were fortune enough we didn't get impacted
by them, but you're exactly right, the way that the
documentation and the guidance was put out there, it was very
problematic, it caused a lot of discernment for a year or so in
the planning process as we were going through the development
of our TIP.
And so yes, sir, you're exactly right, it's very
problematic for that to occur.
Mr. Palmer. Well, I appreciate again the witnesses being
here and Chairman Farenthold's willingness to hold this hearing
as a joint subcommittee and I yield back.
Mr. D'Angelo. Mr. Palmer, if I could speak very quickly on
the NAAQS issue as well, stationary sources, the Clean Air Act
is one of the major drivers of regulatory costs for steel
mills. And the new ozone standard has been set to a level that
is near background levels. And we know, EPA has the data, that
there's been non attainment in the West and in other places by
virtue of emissions, from my industry's competing mills in
China and elsewhere. And----
Mr. Palmer. Since Mr. D'Angelo brought that up I'll share
something else with you from that hearing that we had with
Administrator McCarthy.
I asked her if it was true that they had just earlier that
year sent the implementation guidelines to the States on the
new ozone rule? And she said, yes. I said, is it also true that
there is an internal memo in EPA that indicates that if we
don't implement the 2015 rule we will be in full compliance in
10 years and she said, yes.
And I take note of the fact that not only are our foreign
competitors dumping their steel products into the United
States, they are also dumping their pollution.
I yield back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much.
We'll now recognize the ranking member Mrs. Demings for 5
minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Beyer, you're here representing the National
Association of Counties. And I believe your county is Elmore
County in Alabama. I believe you said it is 82,000, the fastest
growing county in your State. Is that correct?
Mr. Beyer. Yes, it is one of the faster growing counties.
Mrs. Demings. One of the fastest. Go ahead and take the
fastest growing.
Would you say that you probably know your county, and the
citizens in your county know the local area, better than the
Federal Government?
Mr. Beyer. Yes, ma'am.
Mrs. Demings. And do you agree that local communities
should have, I mean as a person who is representing a local
community know the needs of that community, know the people, do
you believe that your local community should have a say, just
as I asked Mr. D'Angelo, in those local projects and what
happens and what does not happen?
Mr. Beyer. Absolutely, absolutely. We are the closest
government to the people. We can't do anything in our life
without being talked to about the road conditions or the
condition of the environment. So yes, ma'am between the staff
and the County commissions, they are closest to the people and
they have a good insight.
Your example about the interstate, that was one thing that
I hoping I would get to circle back to, the question.
The local government, you know, we desire that involvement
to make sure that we are part of the that process and the
planning, so when DOTs and the Federal Government are looking
at major projects that effect communities we want to be at the
table to help to make sure all the solutions are there on the
table.
And I think that is something the national associations
have put more on the forefront, but I think we would like to
see more and more of that to where the local government gets
the citizens involved and I think that takes care of a lot of
the issues that we're here to talk about today.
Mrs. Demings. You know for someone who has worked in local
government myself, I know how important it is to get those
projects done, to serve the people in the most expeditious
manner that you can.
But NEPA was created to permit views of local citizens to
shape the development of their community and environment. Not
having deadlines is--that's another subject for another day.
But what role do you believe, looking at the needs of your
local community and how it impacts the citizens that you serve,
what role should NEPA play?
Mr. Beyer. In my opinion I think NEPA plays a role in the
development of those new corridors. I think NEPA developed--
should be at play when we are talking about major impacts to
people. I mean if you're getting a sliver of land here and
there, I don't think that is where the intent of that is.
Now the example you gave with the interstate, I think that
is exactly where NEPA is intended for. If the County was to go
out and put in a 5 mile brand new road and we were going to
impact residences and we were going to impact streams and all
that, there is a role for it there.
But I believe a couple of the other witnesses here talked
about how the role's expanded to where everything is under a
microscope. And instead of focusing those resources on those
major impacts, now we're on to every little thing that a
Federal dollar touches.
And that, I think, if we can leave you with a message
today, that's what I'd like to leave you with. There's places
where you don't need that. There's professionals in place to
handle that in dealing directly with the community. But you're
exactly right about the major communities and major projects.
And there's some comments about staffing. I think the
staffing again, if their focus was on those major projects,
instead of a small blue line creek in the northeast part of my
county, that has a couple hundred vehicles a day on it, but at
the same time it has major utilities running through there, if
their focus was on the northern belt line in Birmingham or
their focus was on the I-10 corridor in the south part of our
State, we'd get things moving along.
Instead they are worried about whether or not, as I said--
and I wasn't very very eloquent when I said it--they are
worried whether I'm going to bother some little species that
may or may not be there in my channel. Or whether I put a rock
or two of rip rap in a channel that they deem as being waters
of the United States.
There's a focus problem there. If the focus was right,
exactly what you said earlier would have been much better
handled in terms of how that community was impacted.
So I don't know if I answered your question.
Mrs. Demings. You did, Mr. Beyer. Thank you so much. And
thank you to all of the witness who are here today. Mr. Loris?
Mr. Loris. Yeah, could I just make one comment? I
completely echo that sentiment. I think communities should have
say in these projects and they are in the best position to do
so rather than folks in Washington. I think folks in the Virgin
Islands better know the economic and environmental desires
better than folks in Washington.
And so having more priorities, you know. That are limited
in scope at the national level, but activities that can be best
managed at the State and local level, will go a long way to
alleviating some of these problems.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. And I have just got a
couple of short questions that I want to wrap up with and
follow up on. I think Mr. Ross talked a little bit about sue
and settle and loser pays. It's not necessarily loser pays,
it's taxpayer pays in most of these cases.
Correct me if I am wrong, Mr. Loris, the way this is set
up, any environmental activist group can sue under, pick the
statute that we've been talking about today, to either delay a
project or get a species and list it on the endangered species
act, you name it. And then without going to trial, without a
judge making any decision at all, they can go in and negotiate
with the regulatory agency and say, all right, we sued you, if
you will--we'll use Endangered Species Act, list this animal on
the Endangered Species Act and pay our attorneys' fees, we're
going to go away.
There may be really no adversarial process in there, and
there may be no judge who actually interprets the law and makes
a decision. It's just settled between two groups that may have
almost identical interests and it's entirely funded by the
taxpayer and goes--and skirts the normal regulatory process of
public comments and hearings and everything. It's basically
done behind closed doors. Is that an accurate representation of
what happens?
Mr. Loris. Yeah, that's correct. And you're leaving out
those community stakeholders too who may have an interest
seeing these projects move forward, they may not, but they are
left in the dust as well.
Mr. Farenthold. So what would your solution to that be?
Mr. Loris. Well, there's a few. I think one is Congress
needs to reassert its authority in a lot of these major
environmental regulations and statutes. I think for too long,
too much authority has been ceded to these agencies who can--
where now we are relying on unelected bureaucrats to make these
decisions and to make these backroom deals.
So I think there's a lot that can be done, you know,
clarifying who should have legal standing, requiring bond so
that taxpayers aren't on the hook to pay for these lawsuits are
just two simple reforms that could go a long way in making sure
that it's not these environmental organizations who are
antidevelopment, keep it in the ground, are the ones making the
decisions with the regulators.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. And Mr. D'Angelo, it
is a little outside the scope of what we're doing here, but you
touched a little bit about the environmental regulations that
effect your clients building of new plants and operation of
existing plants.
There is a big dialogue now going on in our government
about bringing jobs back to the United States, making us
competitive again. How do our environmental regulations compare
with the rest of the world? I assume that we're easier to deal
with in some areas and far harder to deal with in other areas.
Where would you say we are and where do we get the biggest
bang for the buck repairing it where we continue to protect the
environment but bring jobs to the United States?
Mr. D'Angelo. Thank you, chairman. That's a great question.
The steel industry is one of the most heavily regulated
industries in the world. A lot of the--the majority of the cost
comes from the Clean Air Act. So they are--steel mills are
regulated both as an individual source and because of where
they are, through National Ambient Air Quality Standards.
States play a role with that. Federal Government plays a role.
There's even local impacts.
To ask how our environmental health and safety regulations
compare to those in other countries primarily where the steel
industry competitors lie, it's not an overstatement to say that
there is no comparison. The steel we make here is made in the
most clean, sustainable way. And if you care about climate
change, you care about making your steel here as opposed to a
factory in some other country that doesn't have these controls,
putting it on a ship and covering it in diesel to get it all
the way across the planet to be used in our infrastructure
projects. The best and cleanest steel and most heavily
regulated steel comes from right here.
I would also like--if I could have an indulgence, talk
about the ESA sue and settle because I worked on some of these.
It is not hard how these groups do it. There's two in
particular, Center for Biological Diversity and WildEarth
Guardians. They know that the ESA has an inflexible deadline,
after you file a petition the clock starts.
In 12 months if the agency has not responded to that
petition, they have a lawsuit. Twelve months, means 12 months.
Every court in the Nation has said that. It's not one of these
issues where agencies get discretion, because you can't
interpret it any other way, and so they lose every single time.
And so when one of the cases comes up, they sit down with their
lawyer, in this case DOJ. And DOJ says they got you dead to
rights and so they give it away. And who walks away? Two
organizations walk away with all--with the listening agenda.
They pick exactly what species come and what order they go in.
And those species are not ranked according to proximity to
extinction or risk. They are ranked according to wholly
distinct, policy priorities of two organizations. These are not
people in our communities.
Ms. Plaskett, I am familiar with many of the coral issues.
Center for Biological Diversity filed a petition to list, one
single petition to list 82 separate species of corals. Now you
can imagine the lack of rigger with one petition going to 82
species. And the National Marine Fisheries Service decided to
list many of those. The discussion of which is mere paragraphs
for any individual corals, right.
And Ms. Plaskett, I have heard her speak on that. She's an
advocate--she shows what the real world impacts are, what the
real folks in her community-- And I think it's sad. The 12
month deadline made sense until organizations started gaming
it. And that doesn't help in any way and it doesn't help
conversation--conservation, excuse me. Listing everything under
the sun is not going to help conservation.
It is putting something on a list. There's been this aura
built around it, but it doesn't do anything. We need to
actually fund conservation, and we're not letting our services
do that.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you. And I think Mr. Palmer has one
more question. Did you all have anything else you wanted
before--Mr. Palmer, I'll recognize you to wrap it up.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just really have a
statement in regards to something that you brought up, and Mr.
Loris responded to, and that's the problem with sue and
settlement and dissent decrees and continuing to expand the
universe, as you pointed out Mr. D'Angelo, if Federal agency,
if they are sued, if they litigate the case and they get a
judgment, the judgment is limited to the remedy for the
problem.
But if we enter into a consent decree or--as we do with the
sue and settle cases, the judge appoints a special master or a
control group and they determine whether or not the remedy has
ever been achieved and those can go on for years.
So I think it's something that would warrant further
consideration, Mr. Chairman, and look forward to working with
you and others on these issues.
I really think it has been a good hearing. And again, I
want to thank the witnesses for their participation. I yield
back.
Mr. Farenthold. Thank you very much. And I too would like
to thank you all for being here and your testimony.
I would like to ask for unanimous consent that members have
5 legislative days to submit questions for the record. And
without objection that's so ordered.
If there's no further business, without objection, the
subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:32 a.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
