- THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION REFORM ACT (FITARA) SCORECARD 5.0

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION REFORM ACT

(FITARA) SCORECARD 5.0

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

NOVEMBER 15, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov

_________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

29-502 PDF              WASHINGTON : 2018
____________________________________________________________________
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing Office,
Internet:bookstore.gpo.gov. Phone:toll free (866)512-1800;DC area (202)512-1800
Fax:(202) 512-2104 Mail:Stop IDCC,Washington,DC 20402-001

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Trey Gowdy, South Carolina, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California              Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan                   Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Mark Meadows, North Carolina         Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Ron DeSantis, Florida                Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Val Butler Demings, Florida
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Jody B. Hice, Georgia                Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Peter Welch, Vermont
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Matt Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Will Hurd, Texas                     Mark DeSaulnier, California
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama              Jimmy Gomez,California
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan
Greg Gianforte, Montana

Sheria Clarke, Staff Director
Robert Borden, Deputy Staff Director
William McKenna, General Counsel
Troy Stock, Subcommittee on Information Technology Staff Director
Kiley Bidelman, Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director
Subcommittee on Information Technology

Will Hurd, Texas, Chairman
Paul Mitchell, Michigan, Vice Chair  Robin L. Kelly, Illinois, Ranking
Darrell E. Issa, California              Minority Member
Justin Amash, Michigan               Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
------

Subcommittee on Government Operations

Mark Meadows, North Carolina, Chairman
Jody B. Hice, Georgia, Vice Chair    Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia,
Jim Jordan, Ohio                         Ranking Minority Member
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Ron DeSantis, Florida                    Columbia
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on November 15, 2017................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Dave Powner, Director of IT Management Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................     4
Written Statement............................................     6
Mr. Max Everett, Chief Information Officer, Department of Energy
Oral Statement...............................................    41
Joint Written Statement......................................    43
Ms. Alison Doone, Acting Chief Financial Officer, Department of
Energy.........................................................    53
Mr. John Bashista, Director of Acquisition Management, Department
of Energy......................................................    58
Ms. Barbara Helland, Associate Director of Advanced Scientific
Computing Research, Department of Energy.......................    58

Panel II:

Mr. Dave Powner, Director of IT Management Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    60
Mr. Wade Warren, Acting Deputy Administrator, U.S. Agency for
International Development
Oral Statement...............................................    60
Written Statement............................................    62
Mr. Jay Mahanand, Chief Information Officer, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    67
Mr. Reginald Mitchell, Chief Financial Officer, U.S. Agency for
International Development......................................    68

Panel III:

Mr. Dave Powner, Director of IT Management Issues, Government
Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    74
Ms. Althea Coetzee Leslie, Deputy Administrator, Small Business
Administration
Oral Statement...............................................    75
Written Statement............................................    77
Ms. Maria Roat, Chief Information Officer, Small Business
Administration.................................................    82
Mr. Tim Gribben, Chief Financial Officer, Small Business
Administration.................................................    84

APPENDIX

Opening Statement of Ranking Member Gerald E. Connolly...........    86
Memo from Mr. Max Everett to the Secretary of the Department of
Energy regarding the designation of the CIO as direct report to
the Secretary, submitted by Chairman Hurd......................    89

THE FEDERAL INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION REFORM ACT

(FITARA) SCORECARD 5.0

----------

Wednesday, November 15, 2017

House of Representatives,
Subcommittee on Information Technology Joint with
Subcommittee on Government Operations,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to call, at 2:45 p.m., in
Room 2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Will Hurd
[chairman of the Subcommittee on Information Technology]
presiding.
Present: Representatives Hurd, Amash, Massie, Gianforte,
Blum, Kelly, Connolly, Norton, and Krishnamoorthi.
Mr. Hurd. The Subcommittee on Information Technology and
the Subcommittee on Government Operations will come to order.
Without objection, the chair is authorized to declare a
recess at any time.
And I now recognize myself for 5 minutes for my opening
remarks.
Good afternoon. I appreciate you all being here today.
Today's hearing is part of this committee's continuing
oversight of Federal IT. This began with GAO's high-risk report
and the designation of IT acquisition on that report back in
February of 2015, and it's been a priority of ours ever since.
And due to the importance we place on this issue, our
committee staffs worked with GAO to develop a scorecard to
assess agencies' FITARA implementation efforts. This bipartisan
scorecard has been issued every 6 months, beginning 2 years ago
on November 4, 2015.
The scorecard has evolved each iteration in response to GAO
recommendations and stakeholder feedback. Scorecard 5.0 adds a
fifth graded category to assess agencies' management of
software licenses. We previewed this category as part of
scorecard 4.0. For scorecard 6.0, a measure of whether agencies
have established working capital funds as authorized by the MGT
Act, which I was pleased to see included in the final NDAA,
will be made a part of the scorecard.
Ultimately, I'd like to see the scorecard evolve beyond
FITARA implementation to more of a digital hygiene score for
agencies. Adding megabyte implementation to this scorecard is a
step in that direction.
The inclusion of software licensing had a negative overall
impact on the grades. Since the last scorecard, 3 agencies'
grades increased, 15 agency grades stayed the same, and 6
decreased. If software licensing were not included, 8 agencies'
grades would have increased, 14 would have stayed the same, and
2 would have decreased. So progress is being made, just not as
quick as it should be and needs to be.
Legacy IT is a continuing fiscal and cybersecurity risk to
our Nation. Those 17 agencies received an F on this new metric
for the FITARA scorecard 5.0. It is worth noting that each of
these agencies has efforts underway to create and use an
inventory of software licenses.
I hope to hear from each agency today how they plan to
improve their score in this area. I also hope to hear from Mr.
Powner, his thoughts on where we will be governmentwide on this
metric in 6 months for scorecard 6.0.
Today's hearing features three panels, with officials from
the Department of Energy, the United States Agency for
International Development, and the Small Business
Administration. Their grades are a D-plus, A-minus, and C-
minus.
As always, I'm honored to be exploring these issues in a
bipartisan fashion with my friend and ranking member, the
Honorable Robin Kelly, from Illinois. I'm also pleased to be
joined by Chairman Meadows and Ranking Member Connolly from the
Government Operations Subcommittee. I could not have asked for
better partners in the effort to modernize technology in the
Federal Government. And I thank my colleagues and the witnesses
and all who have joined us in person, and for those folks who
are watching online, for participating today.
I now recognize my friend, the ranking member of the
Information Technology Subcommittee, Ms. Kelly, for 5 minutes
and her opening statement.
Ms. Kelly. Before we begin today's hearing, I also want to
thank you, Chairman Hurd, Chairman Meadows, and Ranking Member
Connolly, for your steadfast leadership as our subcommittees
continue working together to oversee the improvement of Federal
IT systems. I'm glad to have such great partners in this
endeavor.
Improving the efficiency and security of the Federal
Government's IT systems is essential to our Nation's security.
Crucial to that effort is the ongoing oversight conducted by
our subcommittees to hold agencies accountable for implementing
key aspects of the Federal Information Technology Acquisition
Reform Act. An important part of that oversight has been the
scorecard our subcommittees developed for grading agency
progress and meeting the FITARA requirements.
Today, our subcommittee released the fifth version of the
scorecard. It's been 2 years since we released the first one
and held our first hearing on this issue. Since that time,
we've strengthened the role of the CIO at many agencies,
increased transparency in project management, and we've saved
billions of taxpayer dollars. I'm proud of the work we've
accomplished together so far.
The new scorecard, however, shows that progress is
difficult and that we still have a long way to go. For example,
as the chairman talked about, while some agencies like the U.S.
Agency for International Development has done well, going from
a D in 2015 to an A-minus today, others like the SBA has fallen
behind and gone from D in 2015 to a C-minus today.
Overall, the grades for only three agencies went up on the
scorecard, 15 stayed the same, and 6 actually went down. The
scorecard makes clear that agencies still have a long way to go
to address the challenge of reducing the growing number of
Federal data centers.
The FITARA Enhancement Act that was introduced by Ranking
Member Connolly earlier this year would extend the timeline for
agencies to close any unneeded data centers. The bill will also
provide greater support to agency CIOs in their effort to
eliminate and consolidate large numbers of data centers.
Since the release of the last scorecard, the subcommittees
have added software licensing as a metric of performance to
this one. The overall grades in this category indicate that
agencies are struggling when it comes to the management of
their software licenses.
I am concerned about this most recent scorecard
performance, and look forward to hearing from today's agencies
on the struggles and challenges they are facing in FITARA
implementation and how Congress can be more helpful.
There is simply too much at stake when it comes to FITARA.
This isn't just about saving taxpayer money; it's about
improving the overall general hygiene of the Federal
Government, and the scored metrics here are the basics of
running any shop.
I want to thank the witnesses for testifying today.
Mr. Powner, you might just be the most popular witness on
the Hill. This is your fifth hearing with us on FITARA. I'm
also looking forward to hearing from all the agencies here
today. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Ranking Member.
And when the other members get here and want to do opening
remarks, we can do that at the next panel. But let's go ahead
and get into our first panel.
I'd like to introduce the witnesses. As the gentlewoman
from Illinois recognized, Mr. Dave Powner, one of probably--
holds the record of number of times coming before this
committee, the director of IT management issues at the
Government Accountability Office.
Max Everett, chief information officer at the Department of
Energy; Ms. Alison Doone, acting chief financial officer at the
Department of Energy; and Mr. John Bashista, director of
acquisition management, also at DOE; and Ms. Barbara Helland,
associate director of advanced scientific computing research at
the Department of Energy. Appreciate you all being here.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn before you testify, so please rise and raise your right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you're
about to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but
the truth, so help you God?
Thank you.
Let the record reflect all witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, please limit your
testimony to 5 minutes, and your entire written statement will
be made part of the record. As a reminder, the clock in front
of you shows your remaining time. The light will turn yellow
when you have 30 seconds left, and the red is when your time is
up. Please also remember to push the button to turn on your
microphone before speaking.
And now I'd like to recognize Mr. Dave Powner for his
opening remarks.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF DAVE POWNER

Mr. Powner. Chairman Hurd, Ranking Member Kelly, and
members of the subcommittees, I would like to thank you and
your staff for your continued oversight on the implementation
of FITARA with this fifth set of grades.
We've added a fifth category to grades, software licensing,
at your request, so now the FITARA scorecard covers five of the
seven major areas of this law. Overall, three agencies' grades
went up: Education, OPM, and SBA; 6 went down; and 15 remained
the same. Of the six that went down--Energy, DHS, HUD,
Transportation, EPA, and Justice--none had a software license
inventory, and received Fs in this subcategory.
Regarding the software license area, 6 months ago when you
previewed this area with scorecard 4.0, only three agencies had
complete inventories. Now, seven do. And six of these seven
report savings in this area: Ag, Education, GSA, NASA, VA, and
USAID. Those six received As for this. Labor gets a C, and 17
agencies without inventories receive Fs. Progress, but clearly
not enough, given that this was a major section of FITARA and
was followed up with the MEGABYTE Act.
Another area where significant progress needs to be made is
optimizing data centers. SSA, EPA, and GSA report solid
progress against the five optimization metrics. Education and
HUD are out of the data center business, as they no longer have
any agency-owned data centers. The other 19 agencies have a
ways to go to optimize these centers.
The key point here is that additional and substantial
savings can still be realized as we see better utilization of
these facilities and equipment.
I'd like to conclude this overview by thanking this
committee, Chairman Hurd and Meadows, and Ranking Members Kelly
and Connolly, and your dedicated staff, not only for your
consistent and thorough oversight of FITARA, but also for your
followup with the FITARA extension and the MGT Act to give
agencies more time to implement more completely and to provide
additional avenues for reinvesting savings in modernization
priorities.
Now turning to the Department of Energy. Energy plans to
spend about $1.8 billion on IT this year. About half of this
spending is for IT programs at the National Nuclear Security
Administration. Energy's grades have fluctuated over the five
scorecards between Fs and Cs, and their current grade is a D-
plus.
The plus here is of major significance, and I would very
much like to commend Max Everett and the Department's
leadership as Energy is the only agency that has elevated their
CIO reporting since FITARA was enacted.
Another positive note is in the area of incremental
development where they received an A. This is consistent with
the report that we just issued on this topic where Energy was
only one of four agencies that had incremental certification
policy consistent with OMB guidance in FITARA.
Turning to areas where Energy needs to improve, let's start
with CIO tenure. Since 2004, the average CIO tenure at Energy
has only been 1.7 years. This is a major issue and reason why
IT has not been effectively managed.
On data centers, Energy is reported saving $21 million
between 2012 and 2017. However, they report not meeting any of
the five metrics and have no additional planned savings. Their
closures will fall short of OMB's goals for both small and
large centers. The bottom line here is that if you're short on
metrics, there is likely more closures and savings to be had.
Energy's software license inventory is not complete. It
covers CIO-controlled licenses, and they're working on
completing the inventory for the other components.
Finally, I'd like to note that our work for this committee
on IT budgeting and CIO authorities shows that Energy's CIO has
challenges in the area of IT budgeting and execution, meaning
that there needs to be more visibility into the IT budget and
better governance over their important system acquisitions.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my comments on the Department
of Energy.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Powner follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Powner.
Now every agency is going to provide one oral remark, and I
believe, Mr. Everett, you're going to do that for Department of
Energy. So now you're recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF MAX EVERETT

Mr. Everett. Good afternoon, Chairman Hurd and Ranking
Member Meadows, Ranking Member Kelly, and Ranking Member
Connolly, and distinguished members of the committee.
On behalf of the Secretary and deputy secretary, I want to
thank you for inviting me to testify about the Department of
Energy's implementation of FITARA. FITARA and its cybersecurity
complement, FISMA, provide me the authority I need to manage
DOE's information technology resources and cybersecurity
program.
I would also like to just mention, my colleagues have come
up here who are helping us, that you introduced, they are going
to be a critical part of telling you about the progress we're
making at the Department.
I would also like to acknowledge the dedicated career and
contractor IT and cybersecurity professionals across the
Department whose critical efforts transcend changes in
administration. The team provided me a strong baseline from
which to build, specifically, Mr. Robby Green, who did an
outstanding job as the acting DOE CIO prior to my appointment.
In order to effectively exercise FITARA responsibilities, I
now report directly to the Secretary and deputy secretary, as
Mr. Powner noted. They recognize not only the statutory
requirement for this, but the best practice for public and
private sector organizations to have technology leadership
represented at the executive level.
This change originated with a secretarial memorandum, and
is reflected in the DOE organizational chart. I have regular
meetings with the deputy secretary who every month calls to
order the Department's senior leadership to evaluate progress
on DOE's IT and cybersecurity strategic goals. My reporting and
working relationships with them are evidence of the success of
this FITARA requirement. Direct access to senior leadership is
critical to effective IT management at the program office level
as well.
My office is developing guidance to program offices with
embedded CIOs or officials with CIO-like functions, that they
follow the FITARA reporting model and elevate these officials
to a direct reporting relationship with their respective senior
leadership.
The deputy secretary has instructed that my office should
be engaged in the hiring process for any IT management series
2210s across the Department. Both at DOE and throughout Federal
Government, the traditional outdated model of an IT worker is a
challenge. We need professionals with multidisciplinary skills,
not just the coding and network and typical skills that we look
at for IT professionals.
With respect to consolidation and optimization of data
centers, we've closed 84 data centers since 2010, resulting in
savings of approximately $21 million, and plan to shutter
another 11 more by the end of fiscal year 2018. That said, we
need to do more in this area, which is why we're examining ways
to effectively accelerate that process.
One catalyst for optimizing DOE data centers is our
expanded use of cloud services. Our diverse department with 97
sites in 27 States can see significant value from increasing
our use of cloud computing.
The National Labs are an integral component of the
department, and as CIO, I engage with the labs through a number
of means, including the annual laboratory planning and
appraisal reviews. I have the opportunity to comment on
National Lab IT activities and can refocus our efforts to
address our concerns through development of performance
evaluation and measurement plans, which define notable outcomes
that the labs must meet in the coming year. I have regular
meetings with our National Lab CIOs. I also speak regularly
with the National Lab directors, as well as the lab operating
board and participate in their governance meetings.
DOE is closely monitoring the pending MGT Act to leverage
any benefits that come out of that. We intend to use FITARA as
well to continue to be more granular and transparent in our IT
cost in order to prioritize the digital transformation that we
need to undertake as a department.
In detailing the changes, improvements, and the many
challenges that I have seen, it's been my aim to demonstrate
that our department is moving in the right direction. The
Department's IT and cybersecurity governance mechanisms are
inclusive, transparent, and we're seeking to facilitate timely
performance of our diverse mission.
I firmly believe we're continuing to advance and improve,
which would not be possible without the authorities granted by
FITARA. I'm encouraged by the interest and the efforts of this
committee and the efforts as well shown by our leadership at
the Department, and I look forward to achieving those shared
goals.
It's been my distinct honor to testify here today. And I
would be pleased now to address your questions. Thank you.
[Prepared joint statement of Mr. Everett, Ms. Doone, Mr.
Bashista, and Ms. Helland follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Everett.
Now I'm going to recognize the gentleman from Montana, Mr.
Gianforte, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member
Kelly.
I'm new on the Hill. I spent my career in the private
sector doing IT deployments for large organizations, including
deployments at 170 Federal agencies. So I very much appreciate
you each being here.
I wanted to focus on three specific things: First, for Mr.
Powner generally and then Mr. Everett specifically at DOE,
around some best practices that are used in the private sector
and to what extent they're present. You've already mentioned
one, Mr. Everett, the movement to the cloud. Why don't we start
there.
I'm curious, Mr. Powner, to what extent is movement to the
cloud a priority within the agencies that you work with and
audit? And do you have any metrics around percentage of
enterprise applications moved into cloud facilities?
Mr. Powner. I don't have good metrics on those percentages,
but we have tracked movement to the cloud as a percentage of
their IT budget. That's been somewhere in like--on average,
it's about 4 to 5 percent when you look at agencies' IT budget.
So the bottom line on this is clearly there needs to be
more movement to the cloud. You know, we started this years
ago, and the security was the big concern, and then you had the
intel community going to the cloud. Folks felt more comfortable
with that. We clearly need to go more to the cloud.
I think when you look at the data center situation, there
are about at least a third of the agencies that project they're
going to be nowhere near optimizing their centers, and they
ought to be looking to outsource that and go towards the cloud,
you know, for many of those data centers and everything.
A couple agencies are already out of the business. We
probably need a few more of them if they can't manage this more
effectively.
Mr. Gianforte. And when you say cloud, do you mean
consolidated data centers or are you actually moving to more
commercial, multi-tenant applications?
Mr. Powner. It's all the over the board. There's--you know,
infrastructure is a service. You've also got software as a
service. So it's both the infrastructure and some of the
applications.
Clearly, when you look at the commodity or business
systems, there is--that's kind of a no-brainer. In a lot of
those areas we ought to be going more towards cloud services.
There is some big applications, electronic health records, I
know we've talked to the chairman about this a lot, with the VA
and DOD going to the common electronic health record. There's
commercial products that are out there.
Mr. Gianforte. Mr. Everett, at DOE.
Mr. Everett. Sure. So I would certainly address, across the
Federal Government, I think the numbers are disappointing. At
DOE, I think they're--you know, having come in, I think they're
very disappointing. We need to be moving much more quickly on--
again, I think you hit on that--the commodity IT activities we
need to move more quickly to the cloud. I think that will help
us certainly with data center. I think there is some value to
moving out of Federal data centers into hosted environments,
not as an end goal, but I think that starts to break some of
the workforce and cultural challenges we have.
We've got to have the right skill sets to make a move to a
cloud. It's a different--it is different skill sets. It's much
more about managing services, managing service levels, rather
than managing people and sort of the turning dials. We've got
to do a lot of work around that. Those things have to go
together. I believe they can go together in peril.
In some cases, you know--frankly, my hope is that we just
find some things and rip the Band-Aid and just move things.
We've got a lot of commodity things that should, frankly, be
able to move very quickly to the cloud.
Mr. Gianforte. Yeah. As we talk about these scorecards, it
might be interesting to look at what percentage have we moved
to the cloud. I know in our own experience doing these
enterprise deployments, an off-the-shelf cloud deployment
typically can speed deployment by 5X and typically reduces
operating cost by 80 percent over the life of the system, and
that's just good for taxpayers and it's better from a security
perspective.
The second area I want to talk on, you mentioned the
shortage of labor, particularly in the cybersecurity area. One
of the practices in the private sector is the use of commercial
third-party firms for either cybersecurity audits or
penetration testing. To what extent is that a general practice,
Mr. Powner, and then specifically at DOE?
Mr. Powner. I think when you start looking at contractors
and third parties, it's pretty heavy in the Federal Government.
I think the challenge in the Federal Government is having
enough of an IT workforce to oversee those contractors. I mean,
because we've got prime contracts and then you've got program
management that's being outsourced to private sector firms.
Clearly, the security penetration tests and all that, that's
going out.
So the challenge, I think, in the government is having
enough of qualified IT workforce to oversee those key contracts
where we don't have the internal skills.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. Mr. Everett, we have about 30 seconds.
Mr. Everett. I would concur with that. I think one of our
challenges is we're, you know--frankly, we're very contractor
heavy. We depend on the skills that our contractors bring, but
we need--our Federal workforce has got to have some skills in
terms of, again, managing them, managing business requirements,
managing the budgets around that. I think those are a critical
element to doing that. And we've got--and, again, that takes
some of the Federal workforce. They have to know the right
questions. They have to be looking for the right solutions to
then bring in the proper contracting and talent and capability.
And I think you know that recruiting, you know from your
private sector experience as I do, that's an extraordinary
challenge we face right now.
Mr. Gianforte. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Ms. Kelly for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The committee's scorecard shows that since the release of
one of its last scorecards, June 2017, many agencies appear to
have hit roadblocks in their progress under FITARA. For
example, as we've talked about, the current scorecard shows
that the overall letter grades for 15 agencies stayed the same,
6 went down, and only 3 increased.
Mr. Powner, in which of the five key areas of FITARA that
was scored has GAO found agencies are struggling the most?
Mr. Powner. Well, clearly, when you look back on the 4.0, I
think the data center optimization, because we added the
metrics category there, it wasn't just based on savings, and
that was at the request of a lot of folks.
And, again, there's about--there's 2 agencies that are out
of the data center business, 3 agencies doing a decent job, and
19 that I would say are doing poorly, and that's a big reason
why the grades went down. And then now with 5.0, when you have
17 agencies getting Fs because they don't have a software
license inventory, that's a key reason. So those are the two
big ones.
Ms. Kelly. And so what accounts for the challenges? Is it
just the software license, or what's accounting for the
challenges?
Mr. Powner. I think when you look at the data centers, I do
think it's--given where we were at, for instance, on server
utilization, to try to go from a 9 to 12 percent to 65 percent
metric that OMB has, okay, that's a big leap.
The software licensing, I have a hard time understanding
that. We did a report 4 years ago that told agencies that they
should get software licenses. It was in FITARA. It's one of the
seven sections. You followed up with MEGABYTE. I think it's
inexcusable that we do not have software license inventories at
this point in time.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Everett, the Department of Energy was one of the three
agencies whose letter grade actually went down. What are the
challenges you're facing?
Mr. Everett. There's a number, as you can clearly see. I
think, look, the reality is our scorecard accurately represents
some significant challenges we have. And Mr. Powner hit on,
frankly, two of them. One of them is we have too many data
centers that we don't have a handle around, and we need to more
aggressively--again, part of this is we're--on the data centers
we're doing some things around DCIM, which gives us some better
measurements of actually how we're using those existing data
centers.
I think that will drive some business requirements and some
business cases to close some and help us actually use them
better. But the better answer to that is move to the cloud.
Again, for things that are a simple commodity, the answer is
we've got to get to the cloud and we've got to do it faster.
I can't disagree either on--you know, look, some of my
nontechnical colleagues at the Department have asked me, why
don't we have a software asset inventory. And they're right. It
shouldn't be that hard.
Now, I will say that we did a data call. We have, I think,
over 64,000 lines within the database we collected of that. We
have a significant inventory. It's not complete, and we're not
going to represent it as complete until it is. The vast
majority of that that came back was, in fact, provided
electronically, so that exists in pockets in parts of our
department.
We have a number of gaps in the Department, areas that
don't have that capability. So one of the things we're doing is
leveraging. We're going back and looking at CDM. We have gaps
in our CDM deployment, and we're actually going back and trying
to line that up and find out, all right, where do we have gaps
within programs and offices that need help at the enterprise
level from my office to come back and fill the gaps so that we
can have a complete software asset inventory.
And, again, I just want to add, the software asset
inventory is valuable not just to have it; it drives--you know,
as I work with our acquisition team and work in conjunction
with them, it's going to save us money. We know that for a
fact.
It's going to help us reduce our threat surface because
it's going to tell us what kind of software we have or don't
have. And then it's going to help us drive our IT
transformation as we can see the gaps in capability or,
frankly, where we have overlap in capability where we probably
have people buying two or three different of the same
capability in different software packages. That just needs to
be eliminated.
So there's no painting it any other way. Again, I
understand many people are failing at it, but I don't--it's not
rocket science. It's not hard. And we are pushing rapidly
through those means to get it fixed.
Ms. Kelly. And do you have any, not saying everything all
at once, but any time projections or what do you see?
Mr. Everett. So with respect to--certainly with the
software inventory piece, we're in the process right now, we've
brought somebody into actually to help us be strategic about
CDM. And, again, our focus there is what are the gaps.
We have a lot of people that have really great capabilities
that meet many of the CDM requirements and needs. What we're
looking for is where are the gaps. And then as an enterprise,
as a department, how do we come in and help them fill those
gaps.
And, again, because we have a number--we have a very
federated, diverse department, we have a lot of good best
practices. We've got a lot of labs and other folks who have
great tools in place. We're working with them to get actually
what's working for them and try and replicate that or build it
across the Department.
I'll say on, again, on data centers, one of the immediate
things we're working on is we've had some folks working on this
DCM pilot. And, again, our labs have actually led the way. A
number of our labs have put DCM tools in place and have worked
with my team to share best practices that we can do across the
Department. So our next step there is a pilot that we expand
across the Department. That's going to give us a more accurate
picture. And I think what it's going to show is that we have a
lot of data centers. We just don't need anymore.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. My first question's actually for Mr. Powner, but
you're going to have to look for something. Towards the end of
your statement, you talked about budget and system acquisition.
I want you to pull that up. And while you're looking for that,
I'm going to go to Mr. Everett.
Mr. Everett, take about 30 seconds and tell me how your
position changed from to reporting to directly to the agency
head or the deputy agency head.
Mr. Everett. Sure. Well, I--as I walked to the Department
in July, you know, obviously I'd done a little research before
I walked in. I knew that was the case. I've been around Federal
Government and private sector the last number of years, so I
was very aware that this is a challenge across government. And
I knew walking in the door that that was something I was going
to immediately have changed.
The good news for me was I have a Secretary and a deputy
secretary, both of whom have seen in public and private sector
that that was valuable and important. They understood, without
really any argument from me, that that was simply a best
practice. And so, literally, it probably would have even
happened faster. It just took a while to get the memo written
and get it passed up to the front office.
But for our office, I'll simply tell you that our
leadership understood that it wasn't even really a question. It
was an expectation that IT would be part of the leadership and
part of this process.
Mr. Hurd. I would like to attribute that to Secretary
Perry's training at the illustrious Texas A&M University for
giving him that understanding.
And without objection, I'd like to introduce into the
record a memo from Max Everett to the Secretary of Department
of Energy about the designation of the CIO as a direct report
to the Secretary, deputy secretary.
So ordered.
Mr. Hurd. For those that are going to read about this on
FedScoop, and CIOs that are not reporting directly to an agency
head or deputy agency head, they should see this memo. And
unfortunately, there is still 12 departments or agencies where
the Federal CIO doesn't report directly.
I just want to clarify a point, Mr. Everett, because I
think you addressed it fairly well. Can you answer that you
know 100 percent of what's on your network?
Mr. Everett. Right now, I would have to tell you the answer
is no. I think the vast majority of people who tell you that,
I'm not sure that they're being accurate.
Mr. Hurd. Gotcha. Because my assumption is, if you have a
number of agencies that don't understand what software they
have on their system, they also don't know what hardware they
have on their system. And that introduction of unknown
vulnerabilities is scary.
Mr. Powner, did you find the quote I was looking for?
Mr. Powner. Yes, I did.
Mr. Hurd. Can you repeat that statement, please?
Mr. Powner. ``Finally, I'd like to note that our work for
this committee on IT budgeting and CIO authority shows that
Energy CIO is challenged in the areas of IT budgeting in
execution, meaning that there needs to be better visibility
into the IT budget and better governance over their system
acquisitions.''
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Doone, you're the CFO, correct, acting CFO?
Ms. Doone. Yes.
Mr. Hurd. What are you going to do to help Mr. Everett with
that problem?
Ms. Doone. We have been working--the CFO office has been
working with CIO since the enactment of FITARA to do just that,
to improve the alignment of the IT portfolio with the budgeting
process.
Even before the OMB guidance was issued back in 2015 for
the fiscal year 2017 budget cycle, we issued guidance out to
all the program offices to have them identifying their IT spend
by program activity and by project. CIO did the likewise, so
that their IT portfolio would start delineating the IT across
the entire department.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Doone, do you have responsibility--financial
responsibilities over the National Laboratories as well?
Ms. Doone. The National Laboratories financial
responsibility is managed by the program offices. So they
report and they submit their budget request up through the
program offices, who put their budgets included in their
program office budgets that come to CFO.
Mr. Hurd. So as the CFO of Department of Energy, you have
the similar challenges that your colleague, Mr. Everett, has
with these siloed activities by the National Labs, that even
though you're responsible for all the Department of Energy,
that you may not have the greatest insight into that. Is that
an accurate statement?
Ms. Doone. It is an accurate statement, but I would suggest
that it's getting better. With the expansion of the IT
portfolio over the last couple of years, we and CIO have
expanded the number of data elements that the program offices
are providing us. So we are now able to reconcile the IT
portfolio with the budget submission that we are getting from
the program offices.
And I think one of the biggest benefits that we've had--we
started working directly with CIO from the very beginning of
the enactment of FITARA. I think the biggest accomplishment has
been the budget and financial management staff in the program
offices and their IT counterparts working closely together for
the first time. And I think that's where we're going to begin
to see more visibility and better transparency, and it's been
both at the Federal program office level and at the National
Laboratory level.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
The gentleman from the Commonwealth of Virginia is now
recognized for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair, and welcome to the panel.
By the way, I would say to my friend from Montana, as
someone who also spent 20 years in the private sector before
coming here, in the technology sector, one might look for
metrics. If you want to know how you're doing in cloud, look at
the data on data center consolidation, because you're not
moving to the cloud if that's not being consolidated. If you're
consolidating it, you are moving to the cloud, because you have
to.
Now, Mr. Everett, let me just say, I believe you get it and
I believe you are an agent of change. And I think the memo the
chairman cited gives evidence of that. So don't take this
hostilely, but your words are welcome, but you got an F in data
center consolidation. Your score went down, not up, which
suggests regression.
And it is the Department of Energy, the National Labs, that
kind of in the dead of night went to the U.S. Senate and got an
exemption for themselves. The ink wasn't even dry in FITARA.
Last time I checked, that's under your purview, which would
suggest resistance to change, to trying to get this right.
So why should we believe, you notwithstanding, all of you
being sincere human beings, why should we not believe that,
frankly, the Department of Energy is retrograde, they're not
with the program, they're not cooperating, they're treading
water in the hopes we'll give up and stop looking, and
progress, you know, is just not in the forecast?
Mr. Everett. Well, we have to make that change.
Mr. Connolly. I can't hear you.
Mr. Everett. Apologies. Ranking Member, I think the answer
is we have to make that change. I hope that you don't give up.
Mr. Connolly. Oh, we won't give up.
Mr. Everett. I know you won't, but, you know, even beyond
my tenure, I hope that you don't give up. One of the reasons
that Ms. Helland is up here is, I can tell you, in my 4\1/2\
months at the Department, her work in the Office of Science has
been a huge help and a huge part of correcting some of those
issues.
I can tell you that our approach, and this starts directly
with my Secretary and deputy secretary, and I have been in
their presence when they told this directly to the lab
directors was that there is one department. That is their
expectation. That is the expectation they have given to me.
That is the expectation I repeat on a regular basis.
And so I believe that's--you know, history aside, I believe
that's a starting point. I'm glad that Ms. Helland joined us,
because, again, she has been an ally to me. I think she can
talk about some of the work she's actually been doing to help
us build some of the reporting mechanisms around CPIC, around
FITARA, around how we hold the labs to a level of
accountability that we expect for everyone in the Federal
Government.
Mr. Connolly. And I want to hear that from Ms. Helland,
but--just one more--but you got an F in data center
consolidation, which is the heart and sole of FITARA. It's how
we save money. It's how we reinvest in ourselves. It's how--
it's an actual metric whereby we measure are we making progress
or not. Tell me why you got an F.
Mr. Everett. Because we haven't done the job. I mean, there
is no way around it.
Mr. Connolly. All right. Have you set metrics for yourself
internally?
Mr. Everett. We have.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. How many data centers are there in the
Department of Energy?
Mr. Everett. I'll pull it up here, but there are----
Mr. Connolly. All right. Take you time while we listen to
Ms. Helland.
Mr. Everett. 289.
Mr. Connolly. 289, okay. He's telling the truth, right? No.
So 289. Have you set a goal for yourself that by, you know, a
year from now or the next report card there will be 289 minus
X?
Mr. Everett. The existing goal is 11, is to reduce it by
11.
Mr. Connolly. By 11?
Mr. Everett. By 11.
Mr. Connolly. Well, that's a pretty modest goal.
Mr. Everett. I think that's exceedingly modest.
Mr. Connolly. So can we be a little more robust in our goal
setting?
Mr. Everett. We will be more robust. We are pulling
together and working hard. I want to be thoughtful. I don't
want to give a number I can't back up.
Mr. Connolly. I understand.
Mr. Everett. But at the same time, no, the answer is 11 is
a pittance.
Mr. Connolly. But so I would just say, also again to my
friend from Montana, and I think he would agree, I have
experience both in the public sector and the private sector. If
you don't set heroic goals, stretch goals, nothing happens.
Now, not impossible goals, because then nothing happens either,
but stretch goals. And so 11 is hardly a stretch goal. And I
hope when you come back here, you're able to say, well, we said
11 and it's 110. We got it off by a zero.
My time is going to run out, but, Ms. Helland, I want to
give you an opportunity to comment on the National Labs.
Ms. Helland. Thank you. We actually started in 2015, July
of 2015, working with the Office of Science labs. And at that
time, we also had three Energy labs that we were working with
to look at our lab planning and appraisal process, which is a
way that we actually included CIOs in that process so that we
could see--we asked them to report on their current IT spending
and their current research computing, so that this instrument
became effective for the other program office--or other program
offices in the Office of Science.
Mr. Connolly. Well, I just want to say in closing that I
echo what the chairman and Ms. Kelly said. What makes me feel
better about your score is you, because I think you are
committed to making this happen, and the reporting sequence is
now right. And when you're in that kind of position, you can
make things happen, and it's pretty clear you're committed to
doing that. And so we'll back you up. We'll help you. We're not
going away.
And I applaud my colleague, Mr. Hurd, on the Republican
side of the aisle, for absolutely--and Mr. Meadows is near, but
the four of us, you know, are just not going to give up. And
we're here to try to both nudge and support and use it to your
advantage. Thank you so much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Now it's my pleasure to recognize the
distinguished gentlewoman from the District of Columbia, Ms.
Eleanor Holmes Norton, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Norton. I thank my friend for yielding, and I thank him
for this hearing, and our witnesses for their informative
testimony.
This is a hearing about the Federal Information Technology
Reform Act, the act itself. I'm trying not to use letters and
acronyms. And it's essentially about IT and the progress we are
making at a time when that can determine, in private industry,
go or stop. I regard it as just as important for the Federal
Government.
I was intrigued by the work of the chief information
officers that GAO looked at how enhanced authority was
assisting the chief information officers in certifying major IT
investments. And here's where I need clarification. They said,
and I'm quoting here, ``adequately implementing incremental
development.'' I got intrigued, what in the world is that, and
had staff look it up, and discovered that adequately
implementing incremental development is for the investment to
deliver functionality every 6 months.
So in order for me to understand what that meant, I took as
an example, since you were testifying here today, Department of
Energy, because it was among the agencies that achieved an A
score on this particular--in this particular category.
What was responsible--you make me understand incremental
development. If you apply it to the Department of Energy, and
make me understand how the Department of Energy earned an A
rating for incremental development.
Mr. Everett. So I'd love to take all the credit for that,
but that I think has been a historical strength of the
Department. And, again, some of our career folks have been a
key component of keeping that going.
The focus of that is around--I don't think it's a secret to
many of us who have been around D.C. that, historically, when
departments engage in long, multiyear projects, those tend to
have significant problems in financial management and delivery.
So the--I think it's a very good thing to be measuring
that, because the importance of that is, when you're actually
delivering capability--you know, this is--you know, in the
private industry, it would typically cause sort of agile
development. You're constantly adding showing capability.
You're demonstrating that you're actually producing something.
The flip side of that would be if we did some large,
multiyear development and said, we'll start here, 2 years
later, we'll see what happens, historically that has been a
very poor management technique in IT and certainly in the
Federal Government.
What I've observed so far at the Department of Energy is I
think we're deserving of that grade, because I think there's a
lot of focus on, again, that incremental movement to make sure
we're delivering something in sort of bite-sized manageable
chunks.
Ms. Norton. That really does make me understand it. It
certainly makes me understand why this every 6 months. And for
IT, clearly every 6 months is important.
But since you already are looking every 6 months, what will
you suggest for those who don't have--I mean, you're looking at
them every 6 months too. So what do they need to do so that
every 6 months--do we need a shorter timeframe for people who
don't have A scores, for example?
Mr. Everett. Yeah. I mean, I think you--you've got to
start--you know, you may start to drive the metric a little
shorter. You may not necessarily have delivery. But finding
ways to measure that--again, the goal of it is just practically
to be intermittently actually watching and seeing what's----
Ms. Norton. Well, does it, in fact, result in increases in
the score?
Mr. Everett. Oh, yeah, it does. I mean, it certainly has
for us.
Ms. Norton. By looking every 6 months, even with those who
haven't received this A rating, then their ratings tend to go
up because you're looking every 6 months.
Mr. Everett. Yeah. I think you've constantly got to watch
that and measure it and make sure that they really are showing
actual measurable deliverables and improvements.
Ms. Norton. Mr. Powner, did you have anything to add to
that?
Mr. Powner. No. I think it's clearly a best practice to go
with shorter deliveries instead of longer deliveries. I do
think--you know, when we measure this, we know where all the
warts are looking under the covers here. So the one thing is
this is how they plan. If you look closely at whether they
deliver against the plan, it might be a little less so we
shouldn't get too comfortable.
The other thing that I would like to say is, as we
understand more what we actually spend on IT, there's probably
more software development projects that should get listed under
this category, and it might not look so rosy.
So I don't want to rain on the parade, but I do think it's
important to make sure we understand that there's still work
for some of the those agencies that have As. Go small and it's
much better.
Ms. Norton. Appreciate that criticism.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
A couple of quick questions for you, Ms. Doone, and you,
Ms. Helland.
Ms. Doone, what are you going to do to help Mr. Everett
populate the Working Capital Fund that we are going to create
with a successful implementation of the MGT Act?
Ms. Doone. Well, once the MGT is enacted, we'll have to
take a look at the structure of the Working Capital Fund.
DOE has an existing Working Capital Fund, and there are
several line items in our current Working Capital Fund that are
managed by CIO. The most significant one is a cybersecurity
investment of about $35 million, which is intended for
enterprise-wide cybersecurity. So we already leverage our
existing Working Capital Fund to support his efforts in a
number of areas, including network support as well.
Mr. Hurd. So the Working Capital Funds created by MGT is
something that only the CIO can touch, and it's to put money
that is saved from doing things like transitioning into the
cloud, getting your software licensing under control, because
the savings that they're going to realize, they're not going to
be able to use in that calendar year.
How do we make sure that that's captured so that by the end
of next fiscal year, that money is transferring to that
account?
Ms. Doone. Yeah. That would be something that we would have
to look at. And, yes, if this were a mechanism totally
dedicated to capturing the savings from the variety of IT
savings, then that would be something that we could do and
perhaps look at that and see if that could then support it.
Because that would be a mechanism that would target that money,
those savings directly recouping them and allowing CIO to
invest into much-needed enterprise IT modernization.
Mr. Hurd. Do you think we can do that within a calendar
year, 12 months? There's only one answer to that, by the way.
Ms. Doone. It's certainly a very straightforward request to
recapture savings. The challenge is identifying those savings
and getting them captured and moving them over to----
Mr. Hurd. As long as you're in this position, are you
committed to helping Mr. Everett do that?
Ms. Doone. Oh, absolutely.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Bashista, are you involved too?
Mr. Bashista. Yes, sir. A number of initiatives that we're
supporting the CIO, as we discussed, the CFO and CIO in
procurement and contracting, we face a lot of the same
challenges being decentralized. So on a programmatic basis----
Mr. Hurd. I get it. But are you going to help Mr. Everett
make sure we capture that savings when he improves the software
licensing, introduces CDM, and figures out their technology
doesn't have, and he saves money, are you going to help us make
sure and work with Ms. Doone in getting that in an MGT Working
Capital Fund?
Mr. Bashista. Absolutely.
Mr. Hurd. Awesome.
Ms. Helland, the National Laboratory CIO's council, who
does that report to?
Ms. Helland. It actually reports to--I mean, it was formed
by the National Lab--the CIOs at the National Labs for them to
identify common practices and best practices across the labs so
that they could work together. Technically, I'm not sure it
reports to anybody, but we certainly--both Max and I sit on the
executive board.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Everett, do you have a response to that?
Mr. Everett. So the NL CIO council reports to the--I
believe it's to the National Lab director's executive council.
Mr. Hurd. Do you have insight into the types of things the
CIOs at the National Labs are putting on their network?
Mr. Everett. We do. And we're--so we don't have full--
again, and I tell you, in all honesty, I don't have that fully
on our current network. We are in the process. And, again, at
the direction of our deputy secretary, within 2 weeks of his
joining, we put forward a memo under his name that I am
responsible for as part of our iJC3, which is for our
enterprise SOC, that all elements of the Department, including
all laboratories, sites, Federal program offices, everybody is
going to be responsible. And we're working right now to deliver
certain data that I have put together a taxonomy on that will
come up for us in a consolidated manner so that we have--and,
again, that's an initial visibility across every network in the
Department.
The move from that will be to then incorporate the CDM
capabilities, to your point, so that we can see hardware,
software, all the other pieces, so that we can have that
visibility of our cybersecurity posture across the entire
Department, labs included.
Mr. Hurd. Great. And, Mr. Powner, I'm looking forward to
GAO reviewing and ensuring that is moving in that direction.
I want to thank our witnesses for appearing before us.
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Hurd. Yes, sir.
Mr. Connolly. Just a footnote to----
Mr. Hurd. I yield to my gentleman--my friend from the
Commonwealth.
Mr. Connolly. I thank my friend.
Just I was listening to your questioning of Ms. Doone, if
you're looking for more savings, maybe you might expand that
goal of 11 data centers being consolidated. I was just doing a
little quick math on the back of my envelope, and with that--if
that's our annual goal, it's going to take 27 years to address
the total number of data centers you've got at the Department
of Energy.
So, I mean, I do think there's some real room for expansion
there that would have big payoff, and the MGT legislation
rewards it. And, oh, by the way, working with Mr. Powner and my
colleagues, the FITARA extension bill that extends the sunsets,
including a data center consolidation, is, as we speak, on its
way to the President for his signature.
So there will be several more years of scrutiny over data
center consolidation. So use that time and effectuate those
savings, especially in anticipation of the authority you're
going to get, especially through the leadership of my friend
Mr. Hurd, in the MGT legislation.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
I'd like to thank our witnesses for appearing before us
today. The subcommittees will now have a very, very brief
recess, 2 minutes, to set up for our second panel.
The subcommittee stands in recess, subject to the call of
the chair.
[Recess.]
Mr. Hurd. The subcommittees will come to order.
I'm pleased to introduce our second panel. Again, the
illustrious Dave Powner; Mr. Jay Mahanand, the CIO for the U.S.
Agency for International Development; Mr. Reginald Mitchell,
CFO for USAID; and Mr. Wade Warren, acting deputy
administration at USAID. Welcome to you all.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify, so please rise and raise your
right hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm the testimony you're about
to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
Thank you.
Let the record reflect all witnesses answered in the
affirmative.
Again, in order to allow time for discussion, please limit
your testimony to 5 minutes. The entire written statement will
be made part of the record.
Again, as a reminder, the clock in front of you, when it
turns yellow, you have 30 seconds; when it turns red, your time
is up. And please turn on and off your microphone.
I now recognize Mr. Powner for an abbreviated statement.

PANEL II:

STATEMENT OF DAVE POWNER

Mr. Powner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
USAID plans to spend about $40 million on IT this year.
Eighty-two percent of this is used for operational systems,
leaving just over $25 million for new development. One of the
largest investments is its financial management system that is
used to manage and report on foreign assistance funds. Last
year, over $13 million was spent on the system, and over the
years, over $225 million has been spent on this critical
system.
USAID's overall grade jumped from three straight Ds with
your first three scorecards to an A the last two. They are the
only agency to receive an A on the FITARA scorecard.
There are lots of positives here. Their CIO tenure is
better than most. They have had only two CIOs since 2009. They
have As in four of the five areas. They report the second
highest portfolio stat savings as a percentage of their overall
spend. Management of their software licenses has been
centralized since 2004, resulting in an A in this area.
The one area where we did not see an A is on data center
optimization. USAID still needs to meet the server utilization
metrics for its 80-plus nontiered or smaller data centers.
Finally, I'd like to note that our work for this committee
on CIO authorities shows that there is still some work to do on
IT budgeting and execution, especially on improving governance
over its IT acquisitions.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my comments on USAID.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
Again, only one person is going to provide remarks for
USAID. Who is that going to be?
Mr. Warren, you're now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF WADE WARREN

Mr. Warren. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman Hurd and Ranking Member Kelly and
members of the subcommittee, for inviting me here to testify
today regarding USAID's progress on FITARA. We're grateful for
your support on this effort.
I brought with me today my colleagues, Regi Mitchell, who
is USAID's chief financial officer; and Jay Mahanand, who is
our chief information officer. They have both been very
instrumental in our technology reform efforts, and I'm happy to
have them with me here today and to help answer questions.
As you know, USAID is a global agency. Our work is often
done under the most difficult circumstances, from a tent in
Mexico City after the recent earthquake, to a small mission in
East Timor where the internet connection is less than reliable,
to a refugee camp in Jordan.
Strong and effective information technology systems are
essential to USAID achieving its mission in a modern world. And
so USAID is proud to have received the first A rating ever
given under the FITARA scorecard. But it hasn't always been
this way at USAID.
Eight years ago, USAID's IT was in disarray. In Washington,
we spent hundreds of thousands of dollars every year acquiring
new equipment and on powering and cooling our data center. What
we got for it were regular outages and a system that left
employees tethered to their desks.
In the field, the situation was even worse. USAID often
operates in countries with low bandwidth, and our old email
system did not function well in this environment, leaving many
staff waiting for long periods of time for email messages to
load, if they were able to access email at all.
Seven years ago, in February 2010, we realized that the
status quo was not sustainable, and we began taking steps that
ultimately gave USAID a cloud-based email system. And over the
last few years, the Agency has developed into the leading
Federal agency for cloud computing.
So today, I would like to share with you what we view as
the four keys to our success. First, we accepted that updating
our IT system would be risky, that we would run into problems,
and that we would not get everything right the first time. We
knew that we needed to improve, and we were willing to take
those risks. We embraced change.
Second, we had real buy-in from agency leadership. We
realized that for USAID to remain the world's premier
international development agency, modernizing our technology
had to be a top priority. We committed significant financial
and human resources to this effort and championed it from the
top down.
Third, we continue to improve, plan for what we know will
come, and deliver results. Today, we have embraced a culture of
incremental progress. And we regularly make small investments
in our information systems that keep them from going out of
date or losing interoperability. And I'm proud to say that
because of these investments, USAID is not operating a single
legacy system.
And fourth, we committed to hiring experts at a senior
level who have the technical know-how to implement these
changes and keep us ahead of the curve. We worked hard to
recruit knowledgeable, experienced staff, and provide training
and support for the staff we have.
All of this hard work has led to important increases in
efficiency for our workforce and significant cost savings that
today we are using to reinvest in our platforms.
Mr. Warren. Moving forward, we will ensure that we continue
to remain ahead of the curve and lead the U.S. Government in
our embrace and effective use of modern information technology.
To further optimize data center operations, the agency is
in the process of migrating our already outsourced data center
to a cloud environment, and USAID is taking steps to actively
manage the cybersecurity risks that we all are aware of today.
So in conclusion, we are committed to maintaining our
status as a Federal leader in IT space. We look forward to
collaborating with you to address future challenges and new
opportunities for reform.
Thank you for your time, and thank you for your support of
our efforts.
[Prepared statement of Mr. Warren follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Well, Mr. Warren, thank you for not taking all of
your time, number one. And I also want to say thank you for
what your organization does. I had the honor of serving
alongside many of the men and women in USAID, and I know the
work that you do and saw it up close and personal. And, Mr.
Mitchell and Mr. Mahanand, you facilitate that activity. So
what you do is very important, not only for our country, but
for the countries that we are working in. So I am a supporter
of your organization.
That being said, Mr. Warren, my first question is why does
Mr. Mahanand not report directly to you or Ambassador Green?
Mr. Warren. Thank you. We have--in our agency, we have an
assistant administrator for management, and she has
responsibility for the CFO function, the CIO function, the
facilities management, and the budget of the operational budget
for the agency. She reports to me. But the CIO and the CFO both
have a dotted line to the administrator. They are free to go to
him directly when they have issues that are of concern to them.
And that's the way we've been managing ourselves over the--over
the last number of years.
You may be aware, however, that we are in a redesigned
effort with the State Department now to look at how the State
Department and USAID work together and how we can change our
procedures internally to make them more effective and looking
at the reporting relationships of the CIO and the CFO was part
of what we are looking at now.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Powner, do you have any opinion?
Mr. Powner. I think clearly it's much better if you report
up to the box. Right? And I think as long as there's access.
We've seen sometimes where there's this management guru in
between, and we've heard this. The key question is whether that
access is consistent and enough to the top when you need to get
the right decisions and the right support.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Mahanand, I'm going to assume that since
there's only been two CIOs--since when Mr. Powner?
Mr. Powner. Since 2009.
Mr. Hurd. --since 2009, I'm assuming you have a positive
opinion of your access to senior leaders within your
organization.
Mr. Mahanand. Yes, I do. I mean, I've--any time there's a
need to escalate, I will do that. But in the current structure,
there is no need. The--as far as the system administrator for
management, I mean, my daily op--my daily interaction is with
her. And so I've not--don't have the need to actually go to
her--or go to the administrator. Most of my activities go
through her.
Mr. Hurd. Can you answer with 100 percent certainty that
you know everything's on your network?
Mr. Mahanand. Maybe 99.9 percent. On our network, we do
have--we do have monitoring software. I'm talking about the
physical network here. So we do have port security. We have--
anything that actually touches the network, we are notified of
that.
What we're not--what I'm not really sure about is really
the services that's purchased outside and not necessarily
connected in the network. That is something that we actually
track in terms of looking into software, but there's--you know,
there's a potential in shadow IT within the agency, and that is
the only thing that I'm not positive about.
Mr. Hurd. How do you do CDM?
Mr. Mahanand. CDM, right now, we're in phase I, and it's
scheduled to be deployed February of 2018.
Mr. Hurd. Deployed in 2018. So complete within 4 months?
Mr. Mahanand. Yes. I mean, we actually started about 2
years ago. We've piloted CDM, and so the final deployment is in
February of 2018.
Mr. Hurd. So the pilot deployment, do you have the
enforcement mode engaged?
Mr. Mahanand. I believe so.
Mr. Hurd. Can you get me an answer?
Mr. Mahanand. Yes, I can.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Mr. Mitchell, how are you going to help Mr. Mahanand create
a Working Capital Fund once MGT is complete, so when he is able
to get a complete insight into his network and saves money, he
has access to that Working Capital Fund?
Mr. Mitchell. We would--I will be able to support our chief
information officer by setting up this fund and working with
them to develop the procedures and policies governing the
operations of this particular fund.
I think it's important to note that the budget per se does
not fall under my purview, but I do have budget execution. And
I do work with Mr. Mahanand and his staff as far as providing
them with real-time data, executional data, so that he can
better have decision-making capabilities.
Mr. Hurd. So if their budget doesn't fall under CFO, who
does the budget fall under?
Mr. Mitchell. The operation budget, including the capital
investment fund, falls under the office of management policy,
budget, and planning office, and that office is located in the
Management Bureau.
Mr. Hurd. And, Mr. Warren, that is this person you
described----
Mr. Warren. Yes. This assistant administrator for
management has responsibility for the CFO, the CIO, and the
operational budget.
Mr. Hurd. So, Mr. Warren, in my remaining 15 seconds, what
are you going to do to help to make sure Mr. Mahanand has the
MGT Working Capital Fund so he can use that at the end of next
fiscal year?
Mr. Warren. Well, as I stated, the senior leaders of the
Agency, both the career and the political staff, are very
supportive of the IT function. We recognize that we can't do
our work around the world without it. And we--I--Jay and Reggie
and I work closely to ensure that our IT needs are met, so I'd
be very supportive.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Kelly, you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you.
The IT Dashboard is a public website that allows Federal
agencies, industry, and the general public to see the details
about Federal information technology investments and their
risks. Those risks are submitted by the CIO for those agencies.
Mr. Powner, can you briefly explain why the IT Dashboard
exists and what factors affect scoring?
Mr. Powner. So the IT Dashboard is there to make sure we
have visibility into the major investments. We look at the
roughly $100 billion that we spend, so that's roughly half of
what was on these major larger investments. So we know what
they are, and we also have some costs and schedule performance.
But a key part of that is the CIO rating.
So, for instance, USAID has 87 major investments.
Interestingly, they get an A in this area because they don't
have a single green on the Dashboard, everything's red or
yellow, where they acknowledge risk. You could do that
different ways. We like to see the acknowledgement of risk
because these things are typically difficult and you want to
admit the risk so that they can be effectively managed.
Ms. Kelly. And you talked about USAID, but the other
agencies in general, are they doing a good job, accurately
reporting, not doing a good job? And what are the implications
for not accurately reporting?
Mr. Powner. I think over time, especially with your
scorecard, we see more risk acknowledged on that dashboard, so
that's been a good thing. There's some agencies that had a
complete flip. They were all green, and then all of a sudden,
they're, you know, heavy on the reds and yellows, which that's
a more accurate reporting.
So we've seen improvements in these areas. There's still
some concern.
Yeah. The other area of concern is sometimes some large
investments are categorized as nonmajors, and that's one way to
hide visibility on the Dashboard. And again, we know who those
agencies are, and we're kind of watching some of those larger
nonmajors.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you.
Mr. Mahanand, in the category of transparency, USAID
received transparency in risk management an A. Can you briefly
explain how USAID goes about determining the levels of risk
facing its major IT projects?
Mr. Mahanand. Sorry. For us, we have five major business
cases. Three of them is in operations. And so--but they provide
critical function for the Agency. And so what we look--we take
a look at--we start previously taking a look at the mid rating
here, as far as the risk is concerned. So, you know, we look at
the projects that's being executed. We looked at the overall
importance of the specific program, and we make a determination
of what is happening to--specifically in activities in those
areas.
And so when the--quarterly when the report comes to me, I
take a look at it. We review it with the program staff. I make
a determination exactly where we feel that the risk grading
should reside. For the most part, we start with a three. We
usually start with a five, because some of these business cases
were in operations, and we didn't think necessarily that is
something we need to really worry about.
But given the fact, you know, we heard from GAO in terms of
we want to see the risk grading realized, and actually we
thought what we were doing and then started a three. And then
we would make decisions based on where we are with those
projects within those business cases or investments. We would
make a decision whether or not the project is risky or not
risky. But we continued this to start at a three and then we
are way back and forth between a three, between a one and a
five.
Ms. Kelly. Just out of curiosity, because you have done so
well with you're a ratings, do other agencies ever call and
find out what you've done or what your secret is?
Mr. Mahanand. Yeah. We've actually--we've gotten calls from
three--about five agencies. We've spoken to them. We've
actually spoken to the specific working group for GSA and some
of the things we've done.
I mean, just from a history perspective, some of the things
we've done before previously, like the data center
consolidation. We got rid of our data center NRB in 2011. We
just didn't get credit for it as we move along, because we
started really early in that. And from our perspective is that
we just wanted to make sure that the data itself and the
information and the reason behind the specific intent of each
one of these scores.
And so we looked at that--because I thought we did really
well. We continue to do well, and I wanted to make sure that,
you know, our progress, our performance reflects the scoring.
That's where we actually found out there were some errors in
how we were reporting. And so we--we basically worked with GAO
and figure out what those areas are, corrected it, and
basically provide the evidence that, you know, we are where we
are with those scores. And that's why you saw from a D to an A.
Mr. Warren. If I could just add a thought. Our approach and
attitude about IT risk, I think, is part of a broader agency
perspective on risk. And we work in some dangerous, risky
places around the world. And so we try as an agency to be very
aware of and forthright about the risk that we're facing. And
Reggie and I actually lead an agencywide risk assessment
process every year that looks at IT risks, financial risks,
physical security risks. And so the sort of transparency that
we bring to the IT risk, I think, is part of a broader culture
in the agency about confronting risk.
Ms. Kelly. I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. The gentleman from Montana is recognized.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Warren, I understand from your testimony that you've
moved 100 percent to the cloud. Is that correct?
Mr. Mahanand. I would say, again, maybe 99.9 percent.
Mr. Gianforte. Let me congratulate you on your
aggressiveness adoption of these newer technologies.
I'm curious, in that transition, how much work was done to
move from, let's say, more custom software to more commercial
off-the-shelf software, and where would you be in that
transition?
Mr. Mahanand. So as far as moving to the cloud, there's
specific things that we have in terms of infrastructure as a
service, platform as a service, or software as a service. Every
application we look at we basically make a determination. We go
back to the cloud first policy. Any new application that comes
up, we look at it, we basically said whether or not there is a
surface--a service offering out there that we can actually use.
So, for instance, we--when we were modernizing our internet
on our internet, we basically look at the--look at the specific
services, and we actually went with cloud services instead of
going with, you know, commercial off-the-shelf software. So
those are the types of decisions we make when we actually look
at software or look at renewed software.
Mr. Gianforte. And, Mr. Powner, is there, in your
observations--I mean, we know that when we send a committee off
to design a piece of software and we tell them we want a horse,
we often get a camel as a result, because there's so many
requirements that are included. And this--when we build custom
software, it just drives up the cost and increases brittleness
of integrations and these sorts of things.
In your observations from working with the agencies, how do
you--where are we in this transition from custom designing
everything to the bias that Mr. Mahanand has expressed towards
commercial off-the-shelf software?
Mr. Powner. Collectively as a government, we still custom
design way too much than we need to. And the problem there is
in the government changing your business process to adapt to
commercial products is, is we're way behind, especially when
you compare that to the private sector. There's such an
unwillingness to adapt those business processes and adopt to
commercial software. So we need more and more of that going
forward.
Mr. Gianforte. But you believe that a bias towards
commercial off-the-shelf would be a best practice and it would
reduce cost?
Mr. Powner. Absolutely. Absolutely. And change our business
processes. Look at these financial management systems that we
try to put in place. Why do some folks implement them right out
of the box and others we try to modify 3 years to implement a
commercial financial management system?
Mr. Gianforte. Yeah. Mr. Mitchell, in this transition, how
much money has been saved moving to the cloud?
Mr. Mitchell. I would have to defer to our chief
information officer.
Mr. Mahanand. I think we'd have to look at each specific
offering. For example, our data centers, we--from 2013 to 2016,
we saved about $8 million, but each--we haven't--I don't think
we have accumulated the number of our savings. I think it's
about for the last--if we calculated, about maybe 60--I don't
know, $50 to $60 million for the last 3 or 4 years.
Mr. Gianforte. Just to put that in perspective, what
percentage is that of your total budget?
Mr. Mahanand. So our budget is about $100 million in OE and
about $25 in DME, so that would actually be about 60 percent.
Mr. Gianforte. Sixty percent savings from moving to the
cloud?
Mr. Mahanand. Yeah.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. And what have you experienced from a
system reliability and security perspective? Has system
reliability and security gotten better or is it harder in the
cloud?
Mr. Mahanand. I think its gotten better. I mean, I think,
as Mr. Warren said, when we first moved emails to the cloud, I
think we had outages daily. We moved to a cloud email system, I
think we were the second in the Federal Government to do that.
And I can't remember being down for more than an hour till now.
And this happened in 2011, I think we started.
Mr. Gianforte. And from a security perspective?
Mr. Mahanand. You know, they go through the same controls
as far as testing is concerned. So, you know, we look at their
CNA packages; you know, we give it an ATO. So, you know, we
have a part to play in of basically looking at the security
profile of each one of these cloud vendors. So we are pretty
confident the security is actually--I would say much better
than, you know, having a system administrator in all these
different places, not necessarily looking at what they're
doing.
So within the cloud, there's a single administrator. We
control that administrator. So I think security is enhanced as
well.
Mr. Gianforte. Just to play back what I've heard, a 60
percent reduction in costs, increase--dramatic increase in
reliability, better security; sounds like it's a win.
Mr. Mahanand. We think so.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
Now the gentleman from the Commonwealth of Virginia, you're
on the clock.
Mr. Connolly. Thank you.
And congratulations to USAID. And I take a little bit of
special interest. In my previous incarnation here on the Hill,
before my 20 years in private sector, I spent 10 years on the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. And my job was to write the
foreign aid bill. And I helped write the very last one to
become law in 1986. That's how ancient I am. And it was so
good, apparently, that we haven't passed one since.
In any event, congratulations. And I think--well, let me
ask you, Mr. Warren. What happened? You were getting a D and
you moved it up to an A. I'm talking process and political
decisions here, not we moved the grommet to the widget and the
widget to the--what happened inside A that changed it--changed
the will to want to do it differently?
Mr. Warren. So two points to make, I think. The jump from
the D to the A was largely from working with GAO to better
report what we had been accomplishing over a longer period of
time. So if you look at the scorecard, it looks like we had
this quantum leap in 1 year. I think the quantum leap was
really in better reporting. The changes to get from a D to an A
took place over a longer period of time than that.
But to answer the other part of your question, I think we
were driven by the fact that we were having failures daily in
the system as we were trying to manage it. And the fact that we
have a worldwide workforce, and the only way we can communicate
with our staff around the world and get our work done is
through our IT systems. And if they are not working, we just
can't do our job. And so it was kind of out of necessity that
we realized we needed to make big changes. And then as I said,
the political and the career----
Mr. Connolly. Well, I would just say you say that as if, of
course, we had to, we had no choice. I'm looking at a really
big neighbor of yours in the Federal family, maybe the biggest,
and it hasn't concluded that and it's got a worldwide
enterprise too. And they're getting an F instead of an A.
So something happened in A that galvanized you to do it
differently, to make different decisions, to set goals for
yourself, that, unfortunately, our Defense Department has yet
to do. And it could bat you person for person and then some in
terms of overseas bases, operations, personnel and the like.
Bigger, much bigger, and maybe you could argue more difficult,
but it's as far up along as you are, and it has yet to make the
decisions or show the political will you've shown.
And that's what I'm trying to get it, what--because I think
that's how we all learn. You know, go talk to USAID in terms of
how they did it, and I'm trying to get you on the record to get
some of the elements of how did you do it.
And, Mr. Powner, feel free to jump in here, because I know
you had something to do with this as well.
Mr. Powner. Yeah. I think it's a combination of both. I
mean, clearly the data cleanup was a part, but also there was a
focus on some of these areas, you know, going small and
reporting more risk and that type of thing. We saw big
improvements there.
It was interesting, because a lot of this data's been
reported to OMB for quite a while. And honestly, most agencies
don't really focus on that adequately enough. This scorecard
really helped. And this is important--this is important
reporting because it's savings. It's things that we can use to
reinvest in the Working Capital Funds. So this isn't just for
the sake of reporting. It's real stuff that we need to actually
get more efficient with our operational side of the house so
that we can invest and modernize the government more.
Mr. Connolly. Yep. And by the way, Mr. Mitchell, I hope
your answer to Mr. Gianforte about savings was only on that
one, because it's critical that the CFO understand what savings
are being effectuated here because that's how we incentivize
other agencies to do it too, right? Here's the--here's the
carrot, here's the reward at the end of this process, and
that's reliability, savings, freeing up capital, really
worthwhile investment, and a happier, more productive
workforce. But some of that we can measure in actual dollars.
And I commend to you that the CFO, as well as the CIO, has to
be monitoring those savings. I assume you are.
Mr. Mitchell. Yes, I am.
Mr. Connolly. Okay. Okay. Let me just say--end by saying
this, and maybe, Mr. Warren, you take the lead working with Mr.
Powner at GAO, but all of you, I really think it's important
that this be written up electronically, but how did you do it?
What were the key decision points? How low did you have to go
before somebody said enough already? And show others that it's
doable and replicable. Because when we don't really want to do
something, we're going to isolate you as saying USAID's unique,
no one else is like them, sure they can do it, but no one else
can really--and we don't want--that doesn't serve our purpose
at all and it's not true.
And Dave--Mr. Powner, I would urge that in your spare time
we help do this. And hopefully, Mr. Hurd and Ms. Kelly would
agree, there's real value hearing your story, and we want to
spread that good news to other agencies that it can be done in
a reasonable timeframe and there's a reward at the end of the
rainbow. So again, thank you, and congratulations.
Mr. Hurd. I'd just like the record to reflect that that is
the least grumpy line of questioning I've ever seen from the
gentleman from the Commonwealth of Virginia, which is a pretty
significant feat.
So, Mr. Warren, Mr. Mitchell, Mr. Mahanand, these don't
always go this way, and thank you for what you do and thank you
for the support that you're showing our men and women that are
putting themselves in some very difficult and extraordinary
circumstances. Thank you for being here.
And again, the subcommittees will now briefly recess for a
few minutes for a third panel.
The subcommittee stands in recess, subject to the call of
the chair.
[Recess.]
Mr. Hurd. The subcommittees will come to order.
I'm pleased to introduce our third panel. Mr. Powner, for
the third time today, thank you for being here. Ms. Maria Roat,
CIO for SBA; Mr. Tim Gribben, CFO for SBA; and Ms. Althea
Coetzee Leslie, the deputy administrator at the Small Business
Administration. Thank you all for being here. Welcome to you
all.
And pursuant to committee rules, all witnesses will be
sworn in before they testify. Please rise and raise your right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear or affirm the testimony you're about
to give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God?
Thank you.
Please let the record reflect that all witnesses answered
in the affirmative.
Again, to allow time for discussion--and we're racing
against the clock, the votes are likely to be called soon--
please limit your testimony to 5 minutes. The yellow light
means you have 30 seconds; red, time is up. And please turn on
the microphone.
Mr. Powner, you're recognized for an abbreviated time for
your opening remarks on this panel.

PANEL III:

STATEMENT OF DAVE POWNER

Mr. Powner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
SBA spends about $98 million on IT this year. About 80
percent of this is used for operational systems, leaving just
over 20 million for new development. This new development
includes important efforts, like its Disaster Credit Management
Modernization, which automates processing and approval for
disaster loan assistance. SBA reports having spent over $100
million--$150 million on this modernization in prior years.
SBA's grades have consistently been in the D range, but
their current grade is a C-minus. They're one of only three
agencies whose grade went up.
SBA scores best in incremental development, receiving an A
in this area. Also, despite receiving a C in the data center
area, SBA has plans to eventually close all but one of its 43
nontiered or smaller centers, and plans to install a necessary
metering equipment by 2018. SBA also plans to exceed OMB's key
server utilization metric of 65 percent.
Turning to areas where SBA needs to improve, let's start
with CIO tenure. Since 2004, there have been 10 CIOs at SBA,
and the average tenure has been only 1.4 years. This is a major
issue in why IT has not been effectively managed. Their
software license inventory is not complete. They have a plan to
complete this in early 2018.
Finally, I'd like to note that our work for this committee
on IT budgeting, contracting, and CIO authority shows
additional areas where SBA CIO has challenges is in budget
formulation and strengthening their IT workforce. However,
regarding FITARA's requirement for CIOs to review and improve
IT contracts, SBA's processes here are quite good.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my comments on the Small
Business Administration.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, sir.
And I believe Ms. Althea Coetzee Leslie will do the opening
remarks for the SBA panel.
You're now recognized for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ALTHEA COETZEE LESLIE

Ms. Coetzee Leslie. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, ranking members, and committee members, thank
you for the opportunity to discuss the SBA's implementation of
FITARA.
From July 2005 to October 2016, the SBA's OCIO leadership
team experienced significant disruption with high turnover:
eight different CIOs during that period. Further, prior to the
current CIOs arrival in October 2016, the CIO position was
vacant for over a year, from July 2015 to October 2016.
Consequently, key programs like the Data Center Consolidation
Initiative did not receive OCIO leadership attention.
Immediately upon her arrival, the SBA CIO engaged in frank
and honest conversations about the state of IT at the agency.
The CFO responded in kind, and with the administrators and
CFO's support, the CIO embarked on a fast-paced journey to
change how the SBA builds, buys, and manages information
technology to support small business entrepreneurs.
Over the last 12 months, actions taken by the CIO, in close
partnership with the CFO, are transforming SBA from an agency
impeded by outdated technology and unstable infrastructure,
stovepipes, duplication and significant gaps, no cybersecurity
strategy or operational control, to a proactive and innovative
provider of critical business technology services to the SBA
program offices and small business entrepreneurs.
SBA's governance model is maturing with a focus on creating
and expanding strong enterprise-shared services. Program
governance requires that all stakeholders are represented,
engaged, and aligned to achieve program success. For example,
the CIO and CFO co-chair the SBA Investment Review Board that
met six times in fiscal year 2017. The IRB reviewed every major
investment at least once, and the board recommendations
resulted in tangible program improvements.
Additionally, the CIO conducted four major investment deep
dives to review milestones, technology capabilities, funding,
and risks. During one of these deep dives, the CIO identified
and provided direction to correct specific contractual and
roadmap-related issues in time to prevent further
complications. The SBA recognizes that transparency is critical
for value creation, and the CIO promotes transparency in our IT
procurements to prevent duplication, cybersecurity threats, and
stovepiping.
Last year, the CIO reviewed and approved all new IT
contracts above $150,000. And this year, the threshold has been
reduced to $50,000 to ensure we achieve our short and long-term
modernization objectives.
It is our responsibility to communicate our IT goals,
vision, and strategy with acquisition professionals to ensure
that the entire organization understands the technical
ramifications of individual purchases. I am proud to report the
SBA is leading innovation as the first agency to deploy DHS's
CDM system in the cloud. This has resulted in a significant
cost avoided by not investing in hardware that would require
future recapitalization. Further, it sets the stage and puts
SBA ahead of other agencies for future DHS cloud-based CDM
solutions that will further strengthen SBA's cybersecurity
posture.
Along with our modernization efforts in technology, we are
building our IT workforce and working to attract new IT staff
to critical positions. We launched an IT strategic workforce
plan to be able to support future technology initiatives. And
thanks to congressional approval, we realigned our digital
services team under the CIO to deliver improved mission-focused
services and capabilities.
Through the implementation of the authorities contained in
FITARA, our CIO is leading the charge in the achievement of
agencywide IT goals. The SBA's actions taken over the last 13
months are laying the foundation for the agency's
transformation into future enterprise objectives.
As we proceed in executing our enterprise IT plan, we will
continue to strengthen information technology to ensure a
reliable, secure, and high-performing computing environment
necessary to enable the SBA to efficiently and effectively
perform its mission.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share SBA's progress
on FITARA implementation, and we are ready to answer any
questions you may have.
[Prepared statement of Ms. Coetzee Leslie follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Hurd. Thank you.
And because votes have been called, we're going to limit
our questioning time to about 2\1/2\ minutes. So, Mr.
Gianforte, you're up first.
Mr. Gianforte. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Ms. Roat, sounds like you walked into a mess. And I'm
just curious, what advice would you have for other Federal
CIOs, given the experience you've had in trying to get your
arms around it?
Ms. Roat. Don't plan to plan, execute. Walking into a
failing data center, our primary data center, we move very
quickly. We had failing HVAC systems. Last November, I said
very clearly to the team, no new hardware, period. And that's
what embarked us moving forward on our data center, shutting
down our primary data center, moving into the cloud very
quickly, very fast. I brought in the right talent to do that,
to be able to do that, and we executed. And it was driven by
failing data centers, the gaps in technology, all of those
things, and we executed.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. Just for my edification, where are you
in the transformation to the cloud at this point, if you had to
put a percentage on it?
Ms. Roat. So for our primary data center, we've moved about
40 systems already. We are not doing a lift and shift. We
modernized everything first. So we did a migration, an actual
architecture. We did a migration planning session, and we
started execution of the migration in July of this year. So the
200 systems that are in our primary data center, we've done
about 40 right now.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. So what percentage would you say is in
the cloud?
Ms. Roat. That's roughly about 25 to 30 percent.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. And what success have you had in
moving departments off of custom software compared onto
commercial off-the-shelf software?
Ms. Roat. To the extent that we're not building our own
code, not doing our own coding, take advantage of commercial
off-the-shelf software is a service, platform is a service, we
are doing it. For one of our program offices, you know, they
needed some investigation software. We're using a particular
product, which is a software solution right in our cloud
environment. So we are driving in that direction and getting
away from actual hands-on coding.
Mr. Gianforte. Okay. With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Robin Kelly, you're on the clock.
Ms. Kelly. Mr. Powner, in GAO's assessment, I am assuming
that you gave recommendations to SBA to improve their grades
and software licensing. Is that correct?
Mr. Powner. Yes. We've been working closely with SBA.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. So, Ms. Roat and Mr. Gribben, do you
believe you can implement these recommendations within the next
year? And what do you think you can do? What do you think you
can accomplish?
Ms. Roat. For the software licensing, specifically there's
three pieces to that we're taking into account. One is reducing
the footprint of duplicative software. So that's the very first
piece. We're reducing the number of licenses and providing the
right level of software licenses to the users that need it.
When you look at particular software platforms, you know
there's different levels. We're making sure they're assigned.
So we've already embarked on getting our arms around our
licensing. In particular is we're moving into the cloud,
getting our arms around that. We've put the monitoring tools in
place.
So we started a couple of months ago with this process in
getting our arms around all of our software. And a year ago, I
didn't have visibility into the entire enterprise; I do now. So
that way that gives me the capability to be able to see what
licenses are out there, what's deployed, not just on the cloud,
but also on the desktop and the systems.
Ms. Kelly. I don't know if you have any comment.
Mr. Gribben. The only thing I would add to that is that as
part of the budget execution process, the CIO has visibility
into all of the IT requests of the program offices. And this
year, we identified some offices that had some software
licenses that would be better incorporated into an enterprise
agreement that the CIO had already embarked on. So from that,
we're reducing the software licenses, the one offsetter in the
program offices.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. It sounds like you're committed to making
improvements, so we look forward to seeing your grades improve.
I yield back.
Mr. Hurd. Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair.
I just--gosh, at risk of destroying my reputation with the
chairman, I think there's a lot of good news here. And a lot of
it has to do, though, with having a CIO who, A, has the
political will herself, but also a direct tie to the heavy
agency so that she is empowered. And I assume you concur with
that?
Ms. Coetzee Leslie. Yes, we do. Our CIO has direct access
to the administrator and myself as the deputy, and has also the
authority to--or has control over authority to operate. And we
have empowered her to do whatever is necessary to protect the
agency and make sure that we are delivering the products as
best we can.
Mr. Connolly. Sounds like you were--before this CIO, Ms.
Roat, it sounds like you were handing out glasses of hemlock of
something, given the turnover that was occurring. So I don't
know what you've done to make it a more pleasant and attractive
place, but keep doing it.
Ms. Roat, did you want to comment on that, not the hemlock
so much?
Ms. Roat. It's not the hemlock?
Mr. Connolly. But the turnover and----
Ms. Roat. While I can't speak to my predecessors, there
were some very good people there. But I will say that I've got
an incredible relationship with the CFO and then with access to
the administrator and the deputy administrator. Myself and my
deputy make the rounds informally about once a day in the front
office. And we do have actual formal standard meetings and
participate in many of the boards.
Mr. Connolly. Just a final point. You actually met the
metrics set by OMB on data center consolidation in terms of
savings, as I understand it. Keep doing it, double down on it.
I think that's really important, and that's how we reinvest in
ourselves once the MGT legislation becomes law. Thank you, and
congratulations on the progress you've achieved. Keep doing it.
Ms. Roat. Thank you.
Mr. Hurd. Thank you, Mr. Connolly.
Mr. Powner, what do they need to do in order to get that N
to a Y in the CIO reporting directly to the Secretary----
Mr. Powner. It's just a lot of formal reporting. There's
access, from what we understand, but in terms of the reporting,
I don't see the direct reporting there to the dep secretary, to
the assistant----
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Coetzee Leslie, do you have any opinion on
making that a more formal structure to ensure the CIO reports
directly to you or Administrator McMahon?
Ms. Coetzee Leslie. We have several changes that we're
looking at with agency reform, and this is certainly one that
we are considering.
Mr. Hurd. That's great.
Mr. Powner. And, Mr. Chairman, I would add, you know, I
think what's really important here is we've got this history of
1.4 years. Hopefully, Ms. Roat sticks around more than 1.4, but
I think that change is important because, clearly, this is an
executive team that we hear that is working well together and
things are happening and there's great plans. But I think
that's why that formality is important, the 1.4 history.
Mr. Hurd. Ms. Roat, I'm sure you are expecting my question
on your ability to answer whether you have 100 percent
visibility of what's on your network.
Ms. Roat. I do today. I did not a year ago.
Mr. Hurd. And how are you deploying the CDM?
Ms. Roat. We deployed CDM in the cloud. Last November when
I said no new hardware on our data center, my team went back
and they said but, but, but. And I said, but I want to put it
on the cloud. And I said, why not? And I ask them that
frequently, why not? And they went back to DHS and proposed it.
DHS said let's go ahead and do it. And so we started small.
Instead of buying 96 cores, spending all that money and all
that hardware, we started small in the cloud, spinning up the
virtual servers, adding on as we needed. So phase one we
completed this summer. So, again, we're the first Federal
agency to do it.
Mr. Hurd. Awesome. Mr. Gribben, I'm sure you can expect
what my question is going to be. How are you going to help Ms.
Roat create the Working Capital Fund that MGT is going to give
her, hopefully as early as tomorrow?
Mr. Gribben. That is actually something that I'm going to
have to work with the Office of Management and Budget and our
appropriations committee. And how that would be implemented,
currently what we do is any savings that are----
Mr. Hurd. Let me stop you there. What conversations do you
need to have with OPM--I mean OMB. Excuse me.
Mr. Gribben. Most of the money we spend on information
technology is 1-year money. And even with the reprogramming
request into a Working Capital Fund, we'd still remain as 1-
year money.
Mr. Hurd. But that's what the legislation is changing where
the Working Capital Fund gives the ability to, once you program
that money into a working capital fund, you have 3 years to
gain access. So what you're going to ultimately need is
guidance from OMB on the steps to making that happen.
Mr. Gribben. Exactly.
Mr. Hurd. I would welcome your suggestions on those kinds
of guidance. We should be going to OPM in this--OMB, excuse me.
And, Ms. Roat, your suggestions on how to do that would be very
helpful as well to ensure that you have one more tool in your
toolkit.
Ms. Coetzee Leslie, do you have any final comments on
creating a culture within the organization to ensure you have
Ms. Roat staying there for more than 1.4 years?
Ms. Coetzee Leslie. Well, I've been telling everybody on my
road trips and every forum that I attend and where I speak
that, other than Disneyland, the SBA is the happiest place on
Earth, and we intend to keep it that way. With the current
administrator and the leadership team that's there now, we have
a very, very functional team, and look forward to continuing
that relationship and keeping Ms. Roat happy.
Mr. Hurd. Excellent.
Mr. Powner, you're a prince. Your team is amazing. Thanks
for all the effort and work that you do on the scorecard, the
minority and majority staffs' work on this. I really do think
it is a tool that we are starting to see real changes across
the Federal IT infrastructure.
And for all of our witnesses, thank you for appearing here
today.
The hearing record will remain open for 2 weeks for any
member to submit a written opening statement or questions for
the record.
If there's no further business, without objection, the
subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:29 p.m., the subcommittees adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
