- FEDERAL EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION: AN UPDATE

[House Hearing, 115 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

FEDERAL EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION: AN UPDATE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT
AND GOVERNMENT REFORM
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED FIFTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 18, 2017

__________

Serial No. 115-25

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.fdsys.gov
http://oversight.house.gov
______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

26-558 PDF                     WASHINGTON : 2017
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Publishing
Office Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov Phone: toll free (866) 512-1800;
DC area (202) 512-1800 Fax: (202) 512-2104 Mail: Stop IDCC,
Washington, DC 20402-0001

Committee on Oversight and Government Reform

Jason Chaffetz, Utah, Chairman
John J. Duncan, Jr., Tennessee       Elijah E. Cummings, Maryland,
Darrell E. Issa, California              Ranking Minority Member
Jim Jordan, Ohio                     Carolyn B. Maloney, New York
Mark Sanford, South Carolina         Eleanor Holmes Norton, District of
Justin Amash, Michigan                   Columbia
Paul A. Gosar, Arizona               Wm. Lacy Clay, Missouri
Scott DesJarlais, Tennessee          Stephen F. Lynch, Massachusetts
Trey Gowdy, South Carolina           Jim Cooper, Tennessee
Blake Farenthold, Texas              Gerald E. Connolly, Virginia
Virginia Foxx, North Carolina        Robin L. Kelly, Illinois
Thomas Massie, Kentucky              Brenda L. Lawrence, Michigan
Mark Meadows, North Carolina         Bonnie Watson Coleman, New Jersey
Ron DeSantis, Florida                Stacey E. Plaskett, Virgin Islands
Dennis A. Ross, Florida              Val Butler Demings, Florida
Mark Walker, North Carolina          Raja Krishnamoorthi, Illinois
Rod Blum, Iowa                       Jamie Raskin, Maryland
Jody B. Hice, Georgia                Peter Welch, Vermont
Steve Russell, Oklahoma              Matthew Cartwright, Pennsylvania
Glenn Grothman, Wisconsin            Mark DeSaulnier, California
Will Hurd, Texas                     John Sarbanes, Maryland
Gary J. Palmer, Alabama
James Comer, Kentucky
Paul Mitchell, Michigan

Jonathan Skladany, Majority Staff Director
William McKenna General Counsel
Kevin Ortiz, Professional Staff Member
Sharon Casey, Deputy Chief Clerk
David Rapallo, Minority Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page
Hearing held on May 18, 2017.....................................     1

WITNESSES

Mr. Joseph Kile, Assistant Director for Microeconomic Studies,
Congressional Budget Office
Oral Statement...............................................     7
Written Statement............................................     9
Mr. Andrew Biggs, Resident Scholar, American Enterprise Institute
Oral Statement...............................................    32
Written Statement............................................    34
Ms. Rachel Greszler, Research Fellow in Economics, Budget and
Entitlements, The Heritage Foundation
Oral Statement...............................................    40
Written Statement............................................    42
Mr. Robert Goldenkoff, Director of Strategic Issues, U.S.
Government Accountability Office
Oral Statement...............................................    52
Written Statement............................................    54
Ms. Jacqueline Simon, Public Policy Director, American Federation
of Government Employees
Oral Statement...............................................    72
Written Statement............................................    74

APPENDIX

Senior Executives Association Statement submitted by Mr. Connolly   132
The National Treasury Employees Union Statement submitted by Mr.
Connolly.......................................................   134
National Association of Active and Retired Federal Employees
Statement submitted by Mr. Connolly............................   141
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities Report submitted by Mr.
Sarbanes.......................................................   146
Response from Mr. Kile, CBO, to Questions for the Record.........   151
Response from Mr. Biggs, AEI, to Questions for the Record........   154
Response from Ms. Greszler, Heritage Foundation, to Questions for
the Record.....................................................   160
Response from Mr. Goldenkoff, GAO, to Questions for the Record...   166

FEDERAL EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION: AN UPDATE

----------

Thursday, May 18, 2017

House of Representatives,
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform,
Washington, D.C.
The committee met, pursuant to call, at 9:00 a.m., in Room
2154, Rayburn House Office Building, Hon. Mark Meadows
presiding.
Present: Representatives Meadows, Duncan, Issa, Jordan,
Amash, Gosar, Farenthold, DeSantis, Ross, Walker, Blum, Hice,
Russell, Grothman, Hurd, Palmer, Mitchell, Cummings, Maloney,
Norton, Clay, Lynch, Connolly, Kelly, Lawrence, Watson Coleman,
Plaskett, Demings, Krishnamoorthi, Raskin, Welch, Cartwright,
DeSaulnier, and Sarbanes.
Mr. Meadows. The Committee on Oversight and Government
Reform will come to order. And without objection, the chair is
authorized to declare a recess at any time.
The United States Federal Government plays an important
role in the lives of its citizens, and it needs a world-class
workforce for maximum effectiveness. The government must
acquire and retain top talent, especially in mission-critical
occupations such as cybersecurity experts and economists.
However, the current Federal pay and benefits structure is
really not conducive in my opinion to this goal. The general
schedule, the pay schedule for the white-collar workers rewards
tenure rather than performance, and the problem with this
system is that it creates a two-fold problem: One, taxpayers
are stuck paying for overly generous compensation packages in
comparison to private sector salaries for a comparable job; and
two, the Federal Government is unable to adequately recruit and
compensate top talent in other fields.
Additionally, we need a Federal retirement system that is
responsive to the needs of a transient millennial workforce.
And in an era when employees are highly mobile and can
frequently change jobs, it makes no sense to have an archaic
pension system that is designed for a workforce that stays in
place for decades.
Simply put, the current system is expensive and does not
incentivize the best and brightest to join and stay in the
Federal workforce. According to the Office of Management and
Budget, in fiscal year 2015 more than two million full-time-
equivalent non-postal individuals were employed in the
executive branch, and the cost to the Federal Government for
these employees was nearly $256 billion in direct compensation
and benefits.
According to the Congressional Budget Office's recently
updated Private Sector Compensation Comparison Report, Federal
employees earn 17 percent more in total compensation than a
comparable private sector employee. The CBO analysis might not
tell the entire story either. Other analyses conducted by the
Heritage Foundation, which we will hear from today; the
American Enterprise Institute additionally who we will hear
from found that Federal employees are compensated at even
greater rates than private sector workers. Interestingly, the
CBO report found that compensation differs higher among higher
workforce than with lower levels of education and lesser among
those workers with advanced degrees.
So we need to have a fiscally sustainable pay and benefits
system that allows the Federal Government to reward performance
and compensate others based on the importance of their position
and not simply on tenure.
And I will want to make one other further comment. These
hearings can many times be construed as taking one direction or
another, and I have committed not only to my colleagues to my
right to make sure that we get it right for the Federal
workforce. One of the most illuminating aspects that I have had
is I have gone from workforce place to workforce place, some
very large and some very small that I was the first Member of
Congress to ever visit them. I have found that we have an
incredibly dedicated Federal workforce.
So today, I would like to use this hearing to not only get
at the facts but also get an action plan where we can work in a
bipartisan way to make sure that people are fairly compensated,
but also to make sure that there is an incentive there to not
only attract new Federal workers but also to make sure that the
very thing that we are working for does not become a
disincentive. What I have heard over and over and over again is
that you have people who work very hard and you have those who
don't, and yet the compensation doesn't seem to be commensurate
with that. And it has a chilling effect on those hard workers
that I know Mr. Connolly and I and certainly Mr. Cummings both
agree that we need to recognize great performance because we
have some great Federal workers.
Mr. Meadows. And with that, I would now like to recognize
the distinguished ranking member and my good friend, Mr.
Cummings, for his opening remarks.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
As I listen to you, I cannot help but think about the many
Federal employees who work so hard and have been committed,
many of them since they were children, to make things better
for a wide range of people. I have often said that the people
that I meet, the ones, many of them we see in the halls, the
guard when we came in the garage; the researchers at NIH; the
people that have given their blood, sweat, and tears at EPA to
keep our water and our air clean, and I could go on and on and
on, the ones that do the dirty jobs that nobody else will do.
And at every instant that I have to speak to our employees, I
tell them thank you.
Today's hearing, we will review the compensation of Federal
workers compared to the compensations of workers in the private
sector. The Congressional Budget Office recently issued a
report on this topic, and it provides a lot of detailed
information. Not surprisingly, the CBO report shows that some
Federal workers make more than their private sector colleagues
while others make less. Unfortunately, I fear that my
Republican colleagues will try to use this report to argue that
we are paying Federal employees too much. Please. And then they
may try to use this hearing as a basis to continue attacking
the pay and benefits of Federal workers.
Since I have been in the Congress, one of the things that
hurt me more than anything else is when the Congress was trying
to deal with unemployment benefits, they said they had to be
taken out of the purses of Federal employees. I will never
forget that. Hello? Unemployment benefits taken out of the
purse of the Federal employee.
And this is exactly the wrong lesson to draw from this
report. The real lesson for today's hearing is not that middle
class Federal workers are making too much. It is that private
sector workers, especially those with the lowest incomes and
educations are making too little.
Over the past several decades, the productivity of American
workers has grown higher than ever before. At the same time,
corporations, shareholders, CEOs have been exploiting these
workers and hoarding more and more of the wealth that these
workers produce. And they do produce. From 1979 to 2013, the
total income for the top 1 percent of households grew by an
astonishing 188 percent. But over the exact same time frame,
total income for the bottom 80 percent of households grew by a
paltry 18 percent. Let's stick that in the DNA of every cell of
our brains.
It is not just wages that are stagnating. The Bureau of
Labor Statistics reports that inequality in total compensation
is worsening even more rapidly than wages alone. In other
words, inequality is getting even worse when we take into
account health insurance, retirement and savings plans, paid
leave, and disability and life insurance.
The other day I had breakfast with one of my constituents,
and one of the things she said that whenever you all are
talking about health care, remember this. She said when you are
sick, you can't work. And if you can't work, you can't earn.
And if you can't earn, you can't pay a policy. A lady suffering
from stage 4 colon cancer, 26 years old, just married, wanted
to have a baby, young lawyer, just passed the bar.
So when we examine the lowest-quarter wage earners, nearly
60 percent had no access to sick leave. Nearly 70 percent had
no access to employer-provided medical care as of March 2016.
Yet our friends on the other side of the aisle refuse to help
these workers.
And you are right, Mr. Chairman; we ought to applaud those
who give their blood, their sweat, their tears, but no matter
what office we go in, no matter where we go, there are going to
be people that work real, real, real, real hard, and then there
are going to be some that are going to work maybe just to get
by. For years, they have refused to allow Congress to vote on
democratic legislation to raise the minimum wage. The minimum
wage is only $7.25 per hour, and it has not been raised in
eight years. Try it. Try living on $7.25 an hour. At the same
time, our Republican friends keep attacking Federal workers.
And I am so glad that you, Mr. Meadows, Mr. Chairman, have
been a constant--you kept a balance with regard to this trying
to look at both sides of it. And it is so important. It is so
important because when I talk to Federal workers, they watch
these hearings and they say, well, why are we so demonized? We
are just trying to do our job. And so they force new Federal
employees to pay more for their retirement benefits in 2012 and
2013, and now, they are threatening to take away their
pensions.
They want to follow the lead of private sector corporations
in eliminating traditional defined benefit plans in exchange
for less generous 401(k)-style plans. And they cloak these cuts
in the language of, quote, ``reform,'' unquote. The truth is
that this will hurt their own constituents. This will hurt
nearly 8,000 Federal workers with only high school diplomas who
live in Kentucky, 18,000 Federal workers with high school
diplomas in Georgia, and 31,000 Federal workers with high
school diplomas in Texas.
We should be trying to lift up all workers, including both
middle class Federal workers and low-income private sector
workers. I hope that our witnesses today will shed some light
on this.
As I close with that, I would like to offer a special
thanks to Jacqueline Simon, the public policy director of the
American Federation of Government Employees, and all of our
witnesses. She agreed to testify at our request under extremely
short notice, and we thank her tremendously for being here.
Related to that, Mr. Chairman, I want to note my very
strong objection to this committee's refusal to allow Senator
Bernie Sanders to testify here today. I submitted my request
for Senator Sanders to testify last week, and my request was
denied for no reason other than certain Republicans on our
committee claiming that Senator Sanders is not qualified to
testify about challenges facing workers in our nation. Of
course, that is ridiculous. Senator Sanders is a champion of
workers' rights, and he is a nationally renowned expert on
these matters.
This is not the first time the committee has refused to
invite a witness we requested. Chairman Issa refused a request
when we wanted to invite Sandra Fluke because he claimed she
was not qualified to speak about the issues affecting women
such as birth control.
However, this is the first time I can remember in being on
this committee 21 years that the committee tried to silence a
United States Senator, who is also a former member of this
esteemed committee. As a matter of fact, he used to sit right
beside me. He certainly deserved more respect than he was
given, and I extended my apologies to him. He had made
arrangements to try to be here, and he said perhaps he will
have another invitation at another time.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the good morning.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Chairman, point of personal privilege.
Mr. Meadows. Well, hold on just a minute.
The ranking member knows very well my personal feelings
towards him. The ranking member also knows very well my
personal feelings towards the Federal workforce. And I
expressed in no uncertain terms that this hearing would not be
political. And Senator Sanders in my opinion representing less
than 3,000 Federal workers in his State, was not the best
person to address this in a nonpolitical way. And I shared that
with you personally.
I also wanted to, for the record, make it known that I
offered other potential avenues for you to have people here.
You were given 17 days' notice about this, and Senator Sanders
brings a different element to a very important topic that we
must fix on behalf of the Federal workers. I don't believe you
nor I want to sacrifice that for a political statement that
potentially could be made based on a Senator who represents
less than 1 percent--in fact not even that, .15 of a percent of
the Federal workforce in his State.
And so my good friend needs to understand that when it
comes to this, if we want to make a political statement, we can
do that. And I am doing my very best to make sure that what we
do is we protect the Federal workers. I know you and I agree on
that.
Mr. Cummings. Yes, Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I know Gerry Connolly and I agree on that. So
let's make sure that we keep it where it is. And you know that
I offered to have Steny Hoyer to come in because he represents
a whole lot of other Federal workers. And Gerry Connolly comes
to me each and every day on behalf of the Federal workers. This
is a Republican complimenting a Democrat on his advocacy for
the Federal workforce. You do the same. And here is what I want
to say. Let's not make this political. And the denial for
Bernie Sanders to come in here was one that was done in private
between you and I, and so let's make sure that we keep the main
thing the main thing.
Mr. Cummings. Chairman, I just need one minute.
Mr. Meadows. Sure.
Mr. Cummings. You know, all of this is political. We are in
a political climate. And ----
Mr. Meadows. But it doesn't have to be.
Mr. Cummings. No, I am not finished.
Mr. Meadows. It doesn't have to be.
Mr. Cummings. Thank you. Thank you for yielding.
No, it does not have to be, but I think we set a dangerous
precedent when we say to a United States Senator for the first
time since I have been here, 21 years, that what he has to say
he can't say in this forum. Normally, I mean, we have had
Senators come and speak from both sides of the aisle. They
come, they speak, we don't ask them questions, and they move
on. But I understand, and I appreciate--I want to make it
clear, and I tried to say it, that you have been fair. And I
tried to say it. Now, maybe I didn't say it as clear as you
wanted me to say it, but all I was saying is I think sometimes
we can set a precedent that is dangerous. And I don't know if I
will ever get on the other side to get over to the Senate, but
I would hope you all will welcome me back to talk about
anything I want to talk about.
I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. We will welcome you back. I don't know about
talking on anything that you would like to talk about. How
about that?
Mr. Issa. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Meadows. Yes.
Mr. Issa. Point of privilege simply to correct what I think
was an omission of some of the characteristics of a previous
hearing because I, too, like you, Chairman, could not always
allow every possible witness but did make an effort to make
sure that we never had a panel that was inappropriate to the
balance.
In the case of the particular hearing that the ranking
member is referring to, they offered two witnesses. We had two
panels. I had no problem with one witness, and I selected
between the two they offered, an ordained minister to be on a
panel with other ordained ministers, priests, and rabbis. The
ranking member refused that and demanded that a college student
not in any way a religious leader testify on the first panel. I
offered that she could testify on the second panel, which
included other if you will laypeople who were specialists. He
refused.
So it was always about who was appropriate for panel one,
which was priests, ministers, and rabbis, versus panel two,
which were other people knowledgeable on the area. And I think
that it is important, just as you are doing here today, that
each panel represent a common thread of knowledge, experience,
and testimony. And so I applaud you for appropriately balancing
your panel.
It is interesting that when the shoe was on the other foot
and I was in the minority, I was often denied even one witness,
and I never made quite the claim that is being made here today.
But I was unhappy but I never denied an appropriate panel to
the ranking member, and I hope in the full discussion he
appreciates that.
Mr. Meadows. Well, I thank the gentleman. I also want to
say this. We are going to keep the main thing the main thing,
and this is about the Federal workforce and proper
compensation. There are good and valuable inputs that can come
from both sides of the aisle, and I hope the ranking member
realizes that there is no one willing to listen more intently
than me on this particular issue. It is important. As a
businessperson, the best and most valuable asset you have is
not a building, it is not a vehicle, it is not even a computer.
It is the asset of your workforce and their contribution.
And certainly our Federal workforce, if you hear nothing
else if you are watching this, the asset of our Federal
workforce is one that should be applauded, rewarded
appropriately based on merits and performance, and certainly
hopefully this hearing will get here.
So with that, I will hold the record open for five
legislative days for any members who would like to submit a
written statement. We will now ----
Mr. Connolly. Mr. Chairman?
Mr. Meadows. We will now recognize ----
Mr. Connolly. A unanimous consent request simply before you
swear them in.
Mr. Meadows. Go ahead.
Mr. Connolly. Yes, I ask unanimous consent that the
statements from the Senior Executive Association, National
Treasury Employees Union, and the National Association of
Active and Retired Federal Employees be entered into the
record.
Mr. Meadows. Without objection.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chairman.
Mr. Meadows. We will now recognize our panel of witnesses.
I am pleased to welcome Mr. Joseph Kile, assistant director of
microeconomic studies of the Congressional Budget Office.
Welcome.
Mr. Andrew Biggs, resident scholar of the American
Enterprise Institute, welcome.
Ms. Rachel Greszler, research fellow in economics and
budget and entitlements at the Heritage Foundation, welcome.
Mr. Robert Goldenkoff, director of strategic issues at the
Government Accountability Office, welcome.
And Ms. Jacqueline Simon, policy director of the American
Federation of Government Employees of the AFL-CIO, welcome.
Welcome to you all. And pursuant to committee rules, all
witnesses will be sworn in before they testify, so if you will
please rise and raise your right hand. And I apologize; it is
Ms. Simon.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Meadows. Thank you. Please be seated. Let the record
reflect that all witnesses answered in the affirmative.
In order to allow time for discussion, we would ask that
you limit your oral testimony to five minutes, but your entire
written statement will be made part of the record.
So, Mr. Kile, you are recognized for five minutes.

WITNESS STATEMENTS

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH KILE

Mr. Kile. Thank you. And good morning, Chairman Meadows,
Ranking Member Cummings, and members of the committee. Thank
you for inviting me to testify about CBO's recent report that
compares the compensation with Federal employees with those in
the private sector.
To provide some context for that comparison, my testimony
focuses on the 2.2 million civilians who work for the Federal
Government. Last year, the Federal Government spent $215
billion to compensate those people.
CBO analyzed how the Federal Government's compensation
costs would change if the average cost of employing Federal
workers was the same as that of the private sector. That's
important because the government competes with the private
sector for people who possess the mix of attributes needed to
do its work. But a complete evaluation of the Federal
Government's compensation system would require more information
on recruitment and retention.
Comparing compensation between the sectors is complicated
because the workforces differ in characteristics that affect
compensation, for instance, experience, education, and
occupation. On the whole, Federal workers tend to be older,
more educated, and more concentrated in professional
occupations than workers in the private sector. For instance,
about 60 percent of Federal employees have a bachelor's degree
or more. By contrast, about 35 percent of private sectors
worker--private sector workers have that much education.
CBO's analysis accounts for those differences and for other
factors that we could observe, but compensation for individuals
in both sectors also depends on factors that we could not
observe. For instance, other traits such as motivation or
effort are not easy to measure, but they can matter a great
deal for compensation at an individual level. So our results
are best interpreted as average differences between the sectors
rather than an assessment of whether any individual would be
paid more or less in the other sector.
Turning to the results of our work, I want to focus on
total compensation. That is the sum of wages and benefits.
Between 2011 and 2015, the differences in total compensation of
Federal civilian employees with those of similar workers in the
private sector vary widely depending on employees' educational
attainment. Among workers with a high school diploma or less,
total compensation costs were 53 percent more on average for
Federal employees than for their private sector counterparts.
Among workers whose education culminated in a bachelor's
degree, which is the most common level of education in the
Federal workforce, total compensation costs were 21 percent
more for the Federal workers than for workers in the private
sector. By contrast, total compensation costs among workers
with a professional degree or a doctorate were 18 percent less
for Federal employees than for workers in the private sector.
Let me make a brief observation on both components of
compensation. Focusing for a minute on wages, the ranges of
wages between high- and low-paid employees was narrower in the
Federal Government than in the private sector. That narrower
range of wages among Federal employees might reflect
constraints of the Federal pay systems, which make it harder
for managers to reward the best performers or to limit the pay
of poor performers.
Turning briefly to benefits, the most important factor in
contributing to the difference between the two sectors is the
defined benefit plan that is available to most Federal
employees. Such plans have become less common in the private
sector.
I'd like to close by touching briefly on the effects of two
significant policy changes in recent years. First, lawmakers
eliminated across-the-board salary increases for Federal
employees in--from 2011 to 2013. That limited the total
increase during the period of our analysis to 2 percent.
Because salaries in the private sector increased by more during
that period, that change reduced the average wage of Federal
employees relative to the private sector. However, at the same
time, the Federal Government also reduce hiring and there was a
temporary reduction in the number of hours worked by Federal
employees. Both of those factors had the effect of increasing
the average compensation of Federal workers relative to the
private sector.
The second policy change involved increasing the share of
wages that Federal employees who were hired after 2012 must
contribute to Federal defined benefit retirement plans. That
change will gradually reduce the cost to the Federal Government
of the program beginning this year.
Thank you again for your time, and I'd be happy to answer
any questions that you might have.
[The statement of Mr. Kile follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Kile.
Mr. Biggs, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW BIGGS

Mr. Biggs. Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member Cummings,
members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity today
to discuss how Federal pay and benefits compare with what
similar workers will be likely to receive in the private
sector.
The Congressional Budget Office has conducted a highly
professional state-of-the-art analysis which produces the
headline figure that on average Federal salaries and benefits
are 17 percent above private sector levels. And that is the
figure that deserves headlines. Total compensation for full-
time equivalent Federal employee in 2015 was about $123,000. A
17 percent Federal pay premium implies that similar private
sector workers would receive total pay and benefits of around
$105,000, an annual difference of about $18,000.
When averaged over 2.2 million Federal employees, the
Federal compensation premium adds up to about $38 billion per
year, equal to what the Federal Government spends on energy and
the environment and substantially exceeding Federal spending on
transportation.
One could have technical quibbles with the CBO's approach.
My own view again for technical reasons is that the CBO
somewhat underestimates the salary premium paid to Federal
employees, as well as underestimating the compensation paid to
Federal employees through their defined benefit pensions. My
written testimony provides details on these technical
disagreements. But to be clear, I doubt that any analyst would
find the CBO's methods or results to be unreasonable.
At this point we should consider the technical debate over
Federal pay to be basically settled. Some Federal workers may
be underpaid relative to the private sector, but the vast
majority are not. Some Federal employees, particularly those
with less education, receive far more in Federal employment
than they would likely receive outside of government.
My own view is that across-the-board changes like wage
freezes aren't the best approach. Instead, Congress and the
administration should work to make Federal agency pay-setting
more flexible to the needs of the labor market. If an agency
finds that it cannot hire, it should be able to increase
salaries. But the fact that the Federal Government receives so
many applicants for each job opening that it has to cap the
number of applicants it even considers is evidence that most
Federal jobs are considered attractive relative to
opportunities outside of government.
The Federal Government should look to move away from the
one-size-fits-all general schedule which tries to equate
dramatically different jobs onto a single pay scale. Other
developed countries use more decentralized pay-setting
approaches in which individual agencies are given more
discretion to set pay for different jobs. Given the diverse
range of occupations in the Federal Government, that seems an
appropriate next step in ensuring that Federal employees are
paid fairly and efficiently.
Thank you for your time and attention, and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
[The statement of Mr. Biggs follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you, Mr. Biggs. And you have got a good
namesake here in Congress from Arizona that shares your name.
So, Ms. Greszler, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF RACHEL GRESZLER

Ms. Greszler. Thank you for the opportunity--sorry. Thank
you for the opportunity to be here today. I'd like to focus my
testimony on three different points. The first is differences
in compensation that are not included in the CBO study or
either of our studies here. The second is the government's
faulty business model. And the third is some recommendations I
have to bring Federal compensation more in line with the
private sector.
So, first, there are a lot of benefits that cannot be
measured very easily or for which there's not significant data
available or that might not be available to all workers equally
across the board. So some of those benefits that are available
to Federal employees include significant student loan
repayments, up to $10,000 per year, or $60,000 in total, as
well as student loan forgiveness after 10 years of on-time
payments.
Then, there's up to $3,000 per year in Federal
transportation subsidies, as well as another $3,500 per year
value of employees' retirement health benefits. Federal
employees also have greater access to things like on-site
childcare, and some can receive as much as $35,000 per year in
childcare subsidies. And lastly, Federal workers enjoy
preferable work schedules and significantly greater job
security.
My second point is that the Federal Government's bad
business structure hurts productivity and it unnecessarily
drives up taxpayer costs. The government provides a big
compensation premium. That should help the government function
like a well-oiled machine. Instead, it's rusty and sluggish.
One reason is that the government has a skewed compensation
structure. It provides the biggest premium to the workers that
it faces the least competition to attract, and it provides the
smallest premium to those that it needs to entice the most.
Compared to the private sector, the Federal Government employs
almost three times as many workers with a master's degree or
more but only about a third as many with a high school diploma
or less.
Another one of the government's bad business practices is
that it over-weights an undervalued benefit. Federal employees
receive about three times as much in retirement benefits. Most
of that comes from the government's defined benefit
contribution plan. But workers don't fully value this pension
plan because they don't know how much it will ultimately
provide them in retirement, and oftentimes, they need money in
their paycheck more than they need a future promise for
benefit. A study of Illinois public teachers found that they
valued additional pension benefits at only 19 cents on the
dollar. It makes no sense for the Federal Government to provide
a benefit that is worth only a fraction of the cost to its
employees.
And lastly, the government stifles productivity by failing
to reward high performers and also failing to penalize low
performers. Federal workers receive two effectively automatic
pay increases. The first is an annual cost-of-living
adjustment, and then second, 99.9 percent of all Federal
employees receive a so-called performance-based pay increase.
While virtually all Federal employees receive these
performance-based pay increases, almost none are penalized or
fired.
According to a study by the OPM, 80 percent of all Federal
managers have managed a poorly performing employee, yet fewer
than 15 percent have rated those poor performing employees
anything less than fully successful, and fewer than 8 percent
of them attempted to do anything about it. Among those who did
attempt to take action, 78 percent that their efforts--said
that their efforts had no effect. This is a recipe for driving
out the most productive employees and retaining the least
productive ones. That is the opposite of what business schools
teach and what private and successful businesses practice.
So finally, I'd like to propose a few changes to bring
Federal employee compensation more in line with that of the
private sector. This should help improve productivity,
accountability, and efficiency. First, Congress should make
dismissing Federal employees less difficult by extending the
probationary period from one year to three years, by limiting
dismissal appeals, by lowering the burden of proof necessary to
fire Federal workers, and by expediting the dismissal process
for certain employees.
Next, Congress should reduce the level of within-grade pay
increases that cause Federal employees to climb the pay scale
more quickly than those in the private sector. Some of those
savings should go towards truly performance-based pay
increases. Employees who don't receive performance-based pay
increases should have limited options for appeal, and Federal
managers should not have to institute a performance improvement
plan for employees that it rates anything less than fully
successful.
Finally, the biggest change that can be made is in the
defined benefit contributions for the pensions. This could
actually be a win-win for taxpayers and for Federal employees.
As I propose it, workers would have options as to the type of
plan. They would not be kicked out of their defined benefit
pensions. They wouldn't lose anything that they've already
accrued, and less of their total compensation could be tied up
in future benefits. This would give workers actual dollar
contributions that they own and control, and it would force the
Federal Government to recognize the costs that it promises
immediately instead of passing them on to future taxpayers.
Other changes would include reducing the amount of paid
leave from roughly 43 days to 35, as well as limiting the
retiree health benefit to current employees.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Greszler follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you so much for your testimony.
Mr. Goldenkoff, you're recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT GOLDENKOFF

Mr. Goldenkoff. Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member Cummings,
and members of the committee, I am pleased to be here today to
discuss the Federal employee compensation system and ways to
modernize it.
Currently, Federal employees are compensated through an
outmoded system that, one, rewards length of service rather
than individual performance and contributions; and two,
automatically provides across-the-board annual pay increases
even to poor performers. At the same time, skills gaps in
mission-critical occupations across government are putting
agencies and programs at risk while high levels of employees
eligible for retirement create both challenges and
opportunities for agencies to transform their organizations to
better meet mission requirements and also address budgetary
pressures.
These trends point to the fact that a careful consideration
of Federal pay is necessary for both sound fiscal stewardship,
as well as to support the cost-effective recruitment and
retention of a high-performing and agile Federal workforce.
In my remarks today, I will discuss key lessons learned in
creating a more market-driven results-oriented approach to
Federal pay and opportunities in addition to Federal pay that
OPM and agencies could leverage to be more competitive in the
labor market. The bottom line is that, while the Federal
compensation may need to be re-examined, agencies must also
make better use of the tools and flexibilities already
available to them.
Congressional policy calls for Federal workers' pay under
the general schedule to be aligned with comparable non-Federal
workers' pay, but while implementing a more market-based and
performance-oriented pay system is both doable and desirable,
it certainly won't be easy. The experiences of public, private,
and nonprofit organizations in rolling out their own results-
oriented pay systems provide useful lessons learned for the
Federal Government.
Among other things, they told us that it was important to
examine the value of employees' total compensation to remain
competitive in the labor market; provide training on
leadership, management, coaching, and feedback to facilitate
effective communication and to link individual performance to
organizational results; and third, build meaningful stakeholder
consensus to gain ownership and acceptance for any pay reforms.
In addition to competitive compensation, high-performing
organizations have found that the full lifecycle of personnel
management activities, including workforce planning,
recruitment, onboarding, engagement, and training need to be
fully aligned and focused on the cost-effective achievement of
an organization's mission. In many instances, improvements in
these areas are within the control of Federal agencies.
Among other things, our work has shown that the tone starts
from the top. Agency leaders and managers should set an example
that human capital management is directly linked to
performance, and it is not simply a transactional function.
Moreover, time and again, our work has shown how a breakdown in
one or more personnel functions can erode the performance of
Federal agencies and threaten their ability to cost-effectively
carry out their missions.
Going forward, key focus areas for OPM and agencies include
improving the hiring process by, among other actions, refining,
consolidating, or eliminating less-effective hiring
authorities; modernizing the classification system so that it
keeps pace with the government's evolving requirements; and
strengthening performance management and agencies' ability to
deal with poor performers through such steps as lengthening the
probationary period. Opportunities also exist to improve the
capacity of agency human resource offices to better support an
agency's requirements.
In conclusion, Federal compensation should enable agencies
to cost-effectively attract, motivate, and retain a high-
performing and agile workforce necessary to meet their
missions. At the same time, our work has also shown that
agencies already have a number of tools and flexibilities
available to them that can significantly improve executive
branch personnel management. Going forward, it will be
important to hold agencies accountable for fully leveraging
those resources.
Chairman Meadows, Ranking Member Cummings, this completes
my prepared statement, and I'll be pleased to respond to any
questions that you may have.
[The statement of Mr. Goldenkoff follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. Thank you.
Ms. Simon, you are recognized for five minutes.

STATEMENT OF JACQUELINE SIMON

Ms. Simon. Thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
The CBO's study answers a very peculiar question: How much
could the government save if it paid its workforce the average
of what private employers pay broken down by demographic
criteria? It's a strange question. It's more the kind of thing
that might be asked on a graduate school midterm in labor
economics but only to find out whether the students get the
idea behind human capital theory.
The human capital approach CBO takes is basically a capital
asset pricing model that applies the logic of finance to human
beings. Wages, salaries, and benefits are the price, and
workers are the asset. The asset's attributes are the race,
sex, education, industry, and whatever else might be a source
of value.
When you compare the compensation the government provides
to averages in the private sector measured through a human
capital lens, you find the government both overpays and
underpays depending on demographics, not surprising because the
government employs people to work in an enormous range of jobs.
The human capital approach has been used successfully to
show how jobs that mainly employ women and racial minorities
pay less than jobs that mainly employ white men even though the
jobs require similar levels of education. But here we are using
the human capital approach to complain about pay and benefit
systems that do not discriminate.
When CBO assessed the accuracy of the capital asset pricing
of the conglomeration of human capital known as the Federal
workforce, it was clear they'd find the price too high. This is
because on average the private sector pays men more than women,
whites more than blacks, old more than young. The Federal
Government does not reproduce all these inequities because in
its pay systems demographic traits are irrelevant. Federal pay
is an attribute of the job, not the traits of the individual
holding the job. As a result, men and women with the same
Federal job are paid roughly the same amount.
The demographic traits that comprise a human capital
model's independent variables are completely irrelevant to the
salary and benefit package the Federal Government applies to
any given Federal job. Had CBO used the proper method for
making the comparison, the one used by the Federal Salary
Council, its conclusions would have lined up with the Council's
findings: that Federal employees are underpaid, whether they're
top professionals like doctors and lawyers, technical experts
like engineers and scientists, healthcare providers like VA
nursing assistants and dietitians, or administrative workers
who handle claims for Social Security or veterans' benefits.
My written statement describes the inappropriateness of the
human capital approach for comparison of non-cash compensation.
Here, I will focus on the failures of the CBO study with regard
to retirement costs.
The Federal Government finances its employees' retirement
benefits by setting aside funds in the Civil Service Retirement
and Disability Fund, CSRDF. All agency and employee
contributions are assigned to this trust fund, and its assets
are invested exclusively in U.S. Treasury bonds. These bonds
are budget authority and thus can be redeemed to pay earned
annuities to Federal retirees. The rate of return on these
assets--on the assets of the fund is just like the Social
Security trust fund, a combination of all the interest rates of
the treasury bonds held by the fund.
Historically, the rate of return on treasury bonds has been
lower than the rate of return on private equities. Private
sector and some state and local governments are free to invest
the assets of their pension plans in a mix of public and
private equities. Because the law prohibits the government from
investing the trust fund's assets in any form of equity other
than treasuries, it costs more to produce each dollar of
Federal retirement benefit. The Federal Government must spend
more for each employee's benefit regardless of the employee's
salary, education, race, age, or occupation.
CBO's updated report makes no useful contribution to the
discussion on Federal pay and benefits. Frankly, it's
implications are horrid. If the government were to compensate
its employees so that its cost reflected average private sector
costs by demographics, it would reproduce all the inequities we
deplore in the private sector. Compensation for women and
racial minorities would decline immensely.
Regardless of the relative complexity, difficulty, and
responsibilities of different jobs, what would matter would
simply be the educational attainment of the person doing the
job. A bachelor's degree from Trump University would merit the
same rate of return as a bachelor's degree from Duke or Chapel
Hill. The salary of a Border Patrol agent whose job requires
only a high school diploma would have to match the abysmal pay
of retail workers whose jobs also only require a high school
diploma.
The Federal Government should be proud of its pay system.
Few in the private sector can match its fairness and internal
equity. Its principle of market comparability and its authority
for managers to reward high performers and punish poor
performance are more than adequate. All that's missing is
funding. The government should never adopt any kind of pay
system that allows discrimination on the basis of demographics.
Market comparability, adherence to the merit system principles
for--of equal pay for substantially equal work and fairness
must continue to be the principles on which Federal pay is
based.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ms. Simon follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Meadows. I thank you for your testimony.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Ohio for five
minutes.
Mr. Jordan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Goldenkoff, I am looking at a chart, and I have some
graphs from your 2016 Federal Employees Performance Rating
Report, and it is a pie chart, pie graph I should say. It says
38.8 percent of Federal employees were fully successful, 27.4
percent exceeded fully successful, and 33.1 percent were
outstanding. It said only .1 percent of all Federal employees
were unacceptable performance. Are you familiar with this
chart, this pie chart?
Mr. Goldenkoff. Sure. The--so the Lake Wobegon approach to
performance management where everybody is strong and above
average ----
Mr. Jordan. Not everybody--well, yes, you are right,
everybody. Ninety-nine-point-nine percent of all Federal
employees got--I mean, if you think about back in school, it
looks like, you know, got an A-, an A or an A+. I mean, I have
never seen a classroom like that ever.
Mr. Goldenkoff. Exactly. And we have so that that is
problematic and certainly inconsistent with some leading
practices on performance management that we have developed. One
of them is making meaningful distinctions in performance. And I
think, you know, the root cause of this and what's so important
is that, you know, you could make it easier to fire poor
performers, and obviously, there needs to be some improvements
there. But on the front end, the performance management process
need to be improved. Supervisors need to do their jobs for one
thing. They need to be able to realistically rate employees --
--
Mr. Jordan. Well, I ----
Mr. Goldenkoff.--based on their performance.
Mr. Jordan. Yes, and I am just looking from the practical
constituent kind of perspective that I would think the good
folks in the Fourth District of Ohio would look at it. If you
have got 99.9 percent of the workforce getting an A, I think
our constituents want to know why they have to wade eight weeks
to get their passport or why when they call the IRS only 30
percent ever got to talk to an actual person when they called
into the call center. I mean, if we have got the greatest
workforce in history, you would think the taxpayers would get a
little better treatment than they do.
Let me turn to Ms. ----
Mr. Goldenkoff. Sure.
Mr. Jordan.--Greszler. Ms. Greszler, is it true that--so if
I got the gist of what you guys said, overall pay for Federal
employees is higher than that in the private sector. Is that
accurate?
Ms. Greszler. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. Significantly higher, like 17 percent? Wasn't
that what someone said, one of the studies, one of your
studies?
Ms. Greszler. The CBO compensation was 17 percent total.
Mr. Jordan. Seventeen percent. All right.
Ms. Greszler. I believe we found about 22 percent just for
the pay component. We found about 30 to 40 percent for total
compensation.
Mr. Jordan. So they get paid better. Are their benefits
better for the folks that work in the Federal Government?
Ms. Greszler. The benefits are the significant part of the
compensation bonus, yes.
Mr. Jordan. Right. So ----
Ms. Greszler. A lot of that is the healthcare and the
pensions.
Mr. Jordan. Yes, so they get cheaper health insurance than
the average American gets?
Ms. Greszler. Yes, and significantly greater pension
benefits.
Mr. Jordan. They get paid better, better pension, cheaper
healthcare, better overall benefit package, sick leave, all
those kind of things, right? And you can't fire them, right?
Ms. Greszler. Yes.
Mr. Jordan. And 99.1 percent of them get an A-, an A, or an
A+ ----
Ms. Greszler. Yes.
Mr. Jordan.--in their performance? Wow. That is amazing.
And yet ----
Ms. Greszler. And that's one of the reasons that you see
the quit rate among Federal employees is one-fifth that from
the private sector.
Mr. Jordan. Yes.
Ms. Greszler. Once they're in there, they're not going to
leave.
Mr. Jordan. Well, yes. You can't blame them for that I
guess, but this is just phenomenal for me to think--and then it
to add insult to injury, all that, better pay, better benefits,
better and cheaper health insurance, they can't get fired. My
guess is the reason you got 99.9 percent getting these
successful, you know, more than fully successful and these
ratings is because that allows them to jump up in pay quicker,
right? You have got to ----
Ms. Greszler. That's the biggest thing we found is that
moving up those with those effectively ----
Mr. Jordan. You need that ----
Ms. Greszler.--automatic pay increases, they move up more
quickly.
Mr. Jordan. Exactly. And all that is going on and at the
same time you had an agency I would like to cite from time to
time, the IRS, which, again, targeted people. I mean, so the
folks like Lois Lerner were getting all this and targeting
Americans exercising their First Amendment liberties. And just
on a practical side, people calling in trying to get customer
service trying to get answers to their questions during tax
season, only a third of them could even talk to a real person.
Yes.
Ms. Greszler. And I would just add that for Federal
employees, yes, they have a big compensation premium but
they're not all just sitting there happy and taking in this
premium. I think a lot of them are really frustrated with the
structure because ----
Mr. Jordan. Sure.
Ms. Greszler.--it's not rewarding those good performers.
And because it's so difficult for Federal managers to get rid
of a poor performer or to even demote them or do anything to
improve their performance, those people sit there, and it's the
high performers that are having to do their job. You know,
they're doing the work of two people to make up for that fact,
and they're not rewarded for it.
Mr. Jordan. Yes. Yes. All right. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr.
Lynch.
Mr. Lynch. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This committee has a long and strong history of really
delving into some of the most important issues facing the
American people, and it just mystifies me that we have chosen
this topic. You know, we could be investigating, you know, the
Russian interference in the democratic elections. We could be
investigating whether the FBI Director was fired because he
actively was investigating that Russian connection. We could be
investigating whether the President asked the former FBI
Director for a pledge of loyalty a few weeks back. We could
have looked at whether the President specifically asked the
former FBI Director to quash the investigation of the former
NSA advisor Mr. Flynn.
So rather than keeping the politics out of this committee,
I think the leadership of this committee is actually
suppressing a lot of the important issues that really should
and in history have been grappled with by this committee.
Instead, we are trying to figure out why the Federal employees,
the ones with the bachelor's degree, are getting paid less than
their counterparts in the private sector and why the lowest-
paid Federal employees are being paid a little bit more than
their counterparts in the private sector.
I think we have got misplaced priorities, we really do, on
this committee, and I think there is a hell of a lot more we
could be doing about issues that are real.
Now, I know this hearing comes up once every year basically
or once every two years to look at the wages of Federal
employees, but what I have got from the testimony so far is
that Federal employees are treated better because they get
tuition reimbursement. But as far as the Federal Government as
an employer, we should be doing that. We should be encouraging
private sector to provide tuition reimbursement so we can
educate our workers. That is a good thing.
They get childcare. You know, that is an advantage that
some Federal employees have. They have a childcare facility
right in the building, and that is a good thing. But we are
being told you should take that away so that they would be more
like the private sector or you should take the tuition
reimbursement away because that would make them more like the
private sector and close that gap. Or they have flexible hours,
and we can't have people have flexible hours, so take those
flexible hours and make those Federal employees more like the
private sector.
Or take away their pensions. So let me get this straight.
We have got a pension crisis. We have a retirement crisis in
this country because everyone is on a 401(k). And after working
for 30 years or 35 years, at the end of their working lives
they don't have enough money in their retirement to have a
decent living, so they go on Federal benefits, and they have
the taxpayer have to support them because they have to have
Meals on Wheels. They have to have all kinds of subsidies
because they weren't allowed to accrue enough benefits in their
retirement plan during their working lives that they have to
rely on government. They qualify for government benefits.
So we are supposed to make Federal employees more like
that, take away their pensions, take away their pensions and
just give them 401(k)'s so at the end of their lives they won't
have enough money to retire with dignity and they can go on
government benefits and we will pay them that way. That is
ridiculous. That is ridiculous.
And the COLAs that we give people have been pitiful. Wages
are flat in this country. So with all we have got going on,
with everything we have got going on at the White House, we are
focusing on this. You have got to be kidding me.
So I have got docs at the VA that are making about 75
percent what they could be making in the private sector. I got
nurses at the VA that have way too many patients, and they are
making about 60 percent what they could be making at a private
hospital. I have got therapists at the VA that have way too
many patients, and they are making about half of what they
would be making if they went over to the Mass General or Tufts
or one of the private hospitals in my district. And so we are
going after these people.
I think our priorities are misplaced, Mr. Chairman, and I
thank him for his indulgence, and I yield back the balance of
my time.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman. I would remind the
gentleman on some of those issues he and I are not apart. And
----
Mr. Lynch. No. Let me just make that clear. I have worked
with the chairman on many, many issues, and we are in harmony
with much of what I just said.
I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Alabama, Mr.
Palmer.
Mr. Palmer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to make a
couple points about wage stagnation since our colleagues have
brought that up.
Wage stagnation has--there are many causes for that, and I
would like to point out the National Small Business
Association's annual survey of their members, employers
reported the average cost of their monthly health insurance
premiums per employee increased from $590 in 2009 prior to the
Affordable Care Act to $1,121 in 2014. And I would like to
point out that is before the major increase in premiums that we
have seen in the last year or so. And in addition to that, they
paid out another $458 a month just in other healthcare-related
costs per employee. So when you are spending that kind of money
on increases in health insurance premiums and healthcare costs,
it will necessarily reduce the amount that you have to pay in
wages. And it still is compensation.
The other thing I want to point out is the American Action
Forum, which tracks the cost of regulation, reported that the
Obama administration levied $181.5 billion in regulatory costs
just in 2014. That is $692 per capita for each American, which
drives down people's spending power. And that is a hidden cost.
Ms. Greszler, get back to the topic--and by the way, if we
want to have a discussion about stolen elections, I think it
would be appropriate to bring Senator Sanders in. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
What would shifting to a defined contribution retirement
system look like for Federal Government workers, Ms. Greszler?
Ms. Greszler. So the way that I've envisioned it is anybody
with 25 years or more service would be grandfathered into the
current system. Nothing's going to change for them. For all new
hires or anybody that has fewer than five years of service,
those people who have not yet become vested in their pensions,
they'd be shifted to defined contribution system just playing
on the existing Thrift Savings Plan that Federal employees
already have. And so the contribution to that for the
government currently is between 1 percent and 5 percent. That
would increase to between 4 percent and 8 percent.
Existing Federal employees with between 5 and 25 years of
service would have three different choices. They can do the
same thing that the new hires are doing and they can shift
entirely to that defined contribution system with a much higher
match and overall contribution, and they can choose to take
essentially a lump sum benefit. Everything that they've accrued
in their pension, they take that value and it goes into their
Thrift Savings Plan.
Alternatively, they could choose to basically freeze their
defined benefit pension as it is. They keep everything that is
accrued. They'll still have a defined benefit pension in
retirement, but going forward, they're in that new system and
they have the higher contribution to their Thrift Savings Plan.
Or they can stay in the existing system, you know, can keep the
same level of defined benefit but there will be some changes
going forward only, nothing taken away because this was part of
their compensation, and I would never argue that we should take
away something that was really a past--it was essentially in
their paychecks. So we don't take that away, but going forward,
they would probably pay a little bit higher percentage of their
overall contribution, the retirement age may increase, and some
other small changes along those lines.
Mr. Palmer. Can you give me a fairly brief answer on what
kind of cost savings we could expect for making those changes?
Ms. Greszler. Well, the pensions is the biggest component.
Adding in everything altogether, we've estimated $330 billion
over 10 years.
Mr. Palmer. Mr. Kile or Mr. Biggs, one of you, if you could
answer this. Do you have any way to measure productivity in the
Federal workforce as you would, say, in the private sector? I
mean, when you have 99-point-something percent of people who
are excellent, wouldn't that indicate that productivity is off
the charts?
Mr. Biggs. It is difficult--when I was at the Social
Security Administration, we made efforts to measure
productivity but it tended to be a measure of outputs, the
number of cases handled. A true measure of productivity
measures the cost of inputs, the labor costs, the compensation
costs, in order to then figure out the improvement of the
outputs. I don't think the Federal Government does a
particularly good job of measuring productivity, although I
will say it is not an easy thing.
Mr. Palmer. Can you answer it in the context of the point
Mr. Jordan made about they were only responding to 30 percent
of the calls? I think that was the number he gave. Wouldn't
that indicate a productivity problem?
Mr. Biggs. What you want to know is how productivity grows
over time and how many calls they're getting in. It's not a
straightforward thing to answer. And I'll admit I don't know
the IRS very well so I don't want to act as if I know more than
I do.
Mr. Palmer. All right. Mr. Kile, last question. What effect
does the outdated nature of the current GS schedule have on
hiring?
Mr. Kile. So that's actually one of the things that we
would like to know more about. We don't have a very good sense
of the data on hiring and retention and recruitment, and I
think that in understanding the--both the current compensation
system and others that might take its place, we would need to
look further into that.
Mr. Palmer. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes Mrs. Watson Coleman.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think I
want to concentrate a little bit on the issue of benefits,
particularly healthcare benefits.
An article published in New York Times last year found, and
I quote, ``The first full year of the Affordable Care Act
brought historic increases in coverage for low-wage workers and
others who have long been left out of the healthcare system.''
The New York Times also found, and I quote, ``Part-time workers
gained insurance at a higher rate than full-time workers, and
people with high school degrees gained it at double the rate of
college graduates.'' Unfortunately, Republicans now want to
take away health care from the most vulnerable citizens,
including working Americans who gained health care thanks to
the Affordable Care Act. And the latest Trumpcare bill would do
just that.
Mr. Kile, House Republicans forced the revised Trumpcare
bill through the House before the CBO could even come up with
the score. However, CBO's score of Trumpcare as it was first
introduced found that under that bill, and I quote, ``In 2018
by CBO and JCT estimates, about 14 million more people would be
uninsured relative to the number under current law. That
increase would consist of about 6 million fewer people with
coverage obtained in the nongroup market, roughly 5 million
fewer people with coverage under Medicaid, and 2 million fewer
people with employer-based coverage.''
I know you didn't work on the score, but am I understanding
this correctly? In addition to ripping away health care from
the millions of people who buy coverage in their individual
market and rely on Medicaid, that the Trumpcare bill, as
originally proposed, would also reduce the number of working
Americans who get their health care through their employers by
2 million by 2018? Yes or no?
Mr. Kile. Congresswoman, I'm afraid that you've left my
area of expertise. I'd have to refer you back to both CBO's
cost estimate of that bill and my colleagues back in the
office.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Good. Good thing we have a record of
it.
CBO also found that the number of people obtaining health
care through their employers would fall by, and I quote,
``roughly $7 million by 2026.'' And some of this reduction in
employer-based health coverage in the U.S. would occur because
employers would simply stop offering healthcare insurance.
Trumpcare also reduces the amount of tax credits people receive
to help them pay for insurance, so in addition to losing their
employer-provided health care, these workers may be left with
less financial support to purchase insurance on their own.
Finally, I think it is important to keep in mind that
repealing the ACA would harm all Americans, including those who
get insurance through their employers, by doing away with
important consumer protections like no annual and lifetime
limits on benefits, free preventive care, and out-of-pocket
spending limits.
Ms. Simon, is it true that all workers have benefited from
the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. Simon. I believe the answer is yes, but I can really
only talk about Federal employees and the Federal Employees
Health Benefits Program. Immediately, the Federal Employee
Health Benefits Program adopted all the benefits of Obamacare
that you've just listed and others, including coverage of
dependent--or not dependent children, children up to age 26,
the essential benefits package, and lifetime maximums and the
requirement that ultimately limited the profits that insurance
companies can take from premium payments.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Well, I ----
Ms. Simon. So Federal employees ----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you.
Ms. Simon.--certainly benefited.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. And certainly, Federal
employees seem to be the target of this discussion today, and I
believe that this proposal that we are under right now is both
harmful to them, as well as to employees in the private sector.
I think it is also important to note that we should be
creating good jobs. We should be encouraging better
distribution of all of the sort of revenue that streams through
private sector. We should be concerned that lower-wage workers
who are working out in the private sector are getting a livable
wage. We should be concerned in this country that we have a
minimum wage that is a living workable wage. We should not be
looking to dummy down. We should be looking to elevate.
And we should also look to the fact that those who
represent the very wealthiest and the smallest percentage of
people in this country have had no problem with their revenue
streams increasing exponentially. And the difference between
what a worker gets paid, a good educated worker, an uneducated
worker, and a CEO is just un-American.
Thank you, and I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman.
Ms. Simon, I want to make sure that you can hopefully
clarify. You didn't mean to say that everybody benefited from
the Affordable Care Act. I think that is what you told her, but
I wouldn't think that you actually meant that, did you?
Ms. Simon. I believe--I did mean that, and that's how I
understood her question.
Mr. Meadows. So your recommendation ----
Ms. Simon. She asked if ----
Mr. Meadows.--then would be that we ought to move all
Federal workers into the Affordable Care Act?
Ms. Simon. That was not my recommendation. I answered the
broad question ----
Mr. Meadows. But if everybody benefits, wouldn't it be best
that everybody is on it?
Ms. Simon. Obamacare--the law that established what we now
call Obamacare ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, I am going to recognize the gentleman
from Georgia, Mr. Hice ----
Ms. Simon. Okay.
Mr. Meadows.--because he is next, but I will come back to
that.
Ms. Simon. Sure.
Mr. Meadows. I will give you some time to think about it.
Mr. Hice. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it. And
yes, I would say the previous questioning was totally
misguided, realizing that Federal workers are not on Obamacare
while the rest of Americans have been forced on that. The
Federal Employees Health Benefit Program is quite a bit
different, and we can't compare that at all.
I want to shift gears. Mr. Kile, I want to come over to
you. I am sure you are familiar with official time, which
enables Federal employee union members to be hired by whatever
agency they may be hired for, but instead of doing the work
they were hired to do, they work for the union in multiple
ranges, some 100 percent and some quite a bit less. My question
to begin with is did the CBO analysis take official time into
consideration?
Mr. Kile. So we didn't measure that specifically. We--our
data was from what's known as the current population survey and
----
Mr. Hice. Okay. Why not? Why was official time not
considered?
Mr. Kile. In those--data on those types of activities are
not available in that data set.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So not available because of reporting
problems or what?
Mr. Kile. It's a measurement issue, yes.
Mr. Hice. Okay. So bringing that up, our friend Mr. Ross is
not here, but he has a bill that would--that in fact hopefully
we are going to be voting on this relatively soon, perhaps even
next week, H.R. 1293, that would require some reporting of
official time. Are you familiar with that legislation?
Mr. Kile. I'm not, Congressman.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Twelve ninety-three would be worth getting
familiar with that. If we have proper reporting requirements
for those on official time, if that were available, would that
change the CBO's analysis in looking at it?
Mr. Kile. I don't know. We'd have to do that analysis in
order to get an answer to that question.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, according to CBO's own described
definition of official time, it is, quote, ``paid time off from
assigned government duties to represent a labor union.'' Now,
that is CBO's definition. So how can paid time off not be
considered compensation?
Mr. Kile. That--our--the time off is a measure of the
benefits that we provide in our analysis.
Mr. Hice. The paid time off is but not when it relates to
official time, which many Federal employees are using 100
percent of the time.
Mr. Kile. And what we're measuring is--what we're taking is
what's in the data, hours worked, and in that data they don't
report the activities that they were doing when they were
working.
Mr. Hice. Okay. Well, I am not worried about the
activities. The fact is, though, if they are using official
time--if official time is not considered compensation, what is
it considered?
Mr. Kile. Official time would be considered compensation.
Mr. Hice. Okay. But it is not analyzed because of reporting
issues.
Mr. Kile. Well, what we don't have is the breakdown of--the
employees report the hours that they work, the number of hours
that they work. They don't report what they were ----
Mr. Hice. That is official time. Okay. Well, hopefully, we
are going to be able to get that corrected, and I look forward
to--I have a bill myself, H.R. 1364, that would prohibit
Federal employees who are using 80 percent or more of their
time on official time in any given year, that they would not--
that year would not be counted as creditable service for
retirement benefits at 80 percent or more. I would appreciate
you looking at that. And I look forward to CBO including
official time, future compensation studies, as part of the
analysis. I think all of this is skewed if we are not taking
this into consideration.
Mr. Biggs, let me come to you real quickly. It has come up
multiple times already, the problem with firing Federal
employees, bad actors in this thing. They have multiple avenues
of appeal all through the process. There is no way this cannot
be considered a job security benefit, is that correct?
Mr. Biggs. That's correct. If you look at surveys of
employees done by human resources consultants, pay benefits and
job security are the three most important things ----
Mr. Hice. And if you can't fire someone, that is pretty
good job security, or if you make it so difficult that it
literally is an act of Congress to fire someone, that is pretty
significant job security.
Mr. Biggs. Sure. And it's--there's two components to it.
One is it's very unusual for a Federal employee to be fired for
cause. The second is it's very unusual for there to be layoffs.
So you can look at unemployment rates for Federal Government
employees. They are probably half those of similarly educated
and experienced private sector workers.
Mr. Hice. Okay.
Mr. Biggs. So that's a benefit that's not included in this
sort of analysis.
Mr. Hice. Besides lengthening the probationary period, what
else can be done to address this problem?
Mr. Biggs. Well, there--I mean, there's a variety of
things. One is, as Mr. Goldenkoff said, of encouraging Federal
managers to use the powers that they already have, to not be
afraid to use what rights they do have. I think it's also in
terms of--I mean, employees deserve due process, but due
process should not be so lengthy and costly that it is cheaper
to keep on an employee who is not performing than it is to try
to fire them. And this is a problem you find throughout the
public sector. It is not worth the time and the money and the
effort to fire an underperformer. Rather, you simply move them
aside so that they don't--or they're not an impediment to the
vast majority of workers who are doing a good job.
But, you know, it is--the private sector manages to do
this--private sector firms don't want to fire good performers.
They don't want to scare their workforce. So I think there's
reason the Federal Government can do this, and it's really a
question of putting in the effort and really being dedicated to
it.
Mr. Hice. Thank you. I wish we had time to hear from each
of you on this, but I appreciate your indulgence.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman, I have a--
I seek a right of personal privilege.
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you very much. I just want to
sort of acknowledge my colleague's comments regarding my line
of questioning that I have to question his ability to question
my line of questioning because he cannot determine for me what
is or is not relevant but to discuss the issues of ----
Mr. Meadows. The gentlewoman will state ----
Mrs. Watson Coleman.--salaries ----
Mr. Meadows. The gentlewoman will state her point of
personal privilege.
Mrs. Watson Coleman. This is my point of personal
privilege. My point of personal privilege is that the
discussion of this ill-advised Trumpcare healthcare initiative
as it represents a component of benefits to both employees in
Federal Government and outside Federal Government is a line of
questioning that is worthy of pursuing and that if my
colleagues just feel a need to be able to run away from that
whole issue of that ill-conceived Trumpcare bill, I can
certainly understand it.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. The ----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. But I shan't accept anyone's
characterization ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. The chair will ----
Mrs. Watson Coleman.--of the appropriateness of my
questions.
Mr. Meadows. The ----
Mrs. Watson Coleman. Thank you. With that, I yield back.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. The chair will remind all members on both
sides that they are to keep personalities out of their line of
questioning. They are to direct their questions to the
witnesses without personalities involved.
Ms. Plaskett from the Virgin Islands is recognized.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I think it is interesting, Mr. Biggs, the notion
that job stability is a benefit. It seems to be a very anti-
American notion that you are counting as a benefit of a job the
fact that someone has the job and is assured of a job when we
as Americans are trying to keep our economy stable so that all
people can be assured of work. That seems to me a very unusual
position for you to be equating and wrapping into data analysis
of job benefits.
Mr. Biggs. If you--you can literally go back to Adam Smith
who is the--you know, the first ----
Ms. Plaskett. Yes, I know who he is.
Mr. Biggs.--the founder ----
Ms. Plaskett. Economics.
Mr. Biggs.--of economics, and what he noted is that certain
jobs will have more stability than other jobs. And what he
noted then is that jobs that have less stability to them will
pay a premium to the worker to compensate them for that risk.
You find the same thing, jobs that are more dangerous or more
unpleasant pay a compensating differential for that risk. So--
and there is research showing that jobs that are in the private
sector that are more secure, that have less risk of being fired
or laid off will pay slightly less than jobs that have more of
that risk. It's a compensating payment for that risk.
Ms. Plaskett. I don't know if steelworkers would
necessarily agree with that, with the amount of pay that
they've received, or cotton pickers would agree that that was
baked into the analysis of the job ----
Mr. Biggs. What I--the way ----
Ms. Plaskett.--skills that they were getting.
Mr. Biggs.--I'd respond to you is if you were to go looking
----
Ms. Plaskett. I don't need you to respond ----
Mr. Biggs. Okay. Then ----
Ms. Plaskett.--but thank you.
Mr. Kile, CBO recently found that on average Federal
employees receive more generous benefits than private sector
workers. Your analysis showed that the cost of benefits
provided to Federal workers was 47 percent higher than the cost
of benefits provided to private sector workers, and benefits
for Federal employees with no more than a high school education
were 93 percent higher than for similarly educated workers in
the private sector. Is that correct?
Mr. Kile. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. And CBO also found that the higher cost of
the benefits Federal workers receive compared to the benefits
private sector workers receive can be attributed mostly to the
differences in retirement benefits. Was that how the analysis
went?
Mr. Kile. Yes, that's correct.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. Your report states that Federal
Government provides both defined benefits and defined
contribution plans to its employees. And it is my understanding
that a defined benefit plan is like a traditional benefit plan,
and a defined contribution plan is more similar to a 401(k) or
in the case of Federal employees, the Thrift Savings Plan. Do I
have that right?
Mr. Kile. Yes.
Ms. Plaskett. All right. In contrast to the Federal
Government, in the private sector employers no longer offer
defined benefit plans or pensions. They've been replaced
primarily with 401(k) plans?
Mr. Kile. Primarily. There are still some places that offer
defined benefit plans, but they're ----
Ms. Plaskett. Is that percentage ----
Mr. Kile. I don't ----
Ms. Plaskett.--significant?
Mr. Kile. It's--it--I don't have that number in front of
me.
Ms. Plaskett. Okay. It is my concern and fear of many of us
that many of my colleagues, my Republican colleagues will be
using CBO's report in this hearing to justify eliminating
pensions for Federal employees. I know that our Chairman
Chaffetz has said in the past that he wants to get rid of
Federal pensions by shifting to a 401(k)-type plan for new
employees in the Federal Government. We have information that
retirement experts have warned that the vast majority of
Americans are not saving enough for such a savings plan.
Ms. Simon, do you agree that the Economic Policy
Institute's findings, which state that the shift from pensions
to account-type savings plans have been a disaster for lower-
income, black, Hispanic, non-college-educated, and single
workers who together add up to the majority of American
population, but even among upper-income, white, college-
educated married couples, many do not have adequate retirement
savings. What are your feelings about that conclusion?
Ms. Simon. I think it's entirely accurate, and it's
warranted. The most recent data I've seen is that less than
half of all private sector workers are covered by any kind of
employer-sponsored pension plan or retirement plan at all. And
among those who have some kind of a 401(k)-type savings plan as
part of their employment get no employer match or no employer
contribution at all to their 401(k).
So of course this is a horrible retirement crisis in the
making, as Representative Lynch was describing earlier. At the
same time that private employers have abandoned providing any
kind of financial subsidy for their employees' retirement,
wages and salaries have stagnated for the vast majority of
workers, bottom 80 percent ----
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you.
Ms. Simon.--of the income stream. So absolutely, the EPI's
findings are accurate and ----
Ms. Plaskett. And concerning to you as an organization ----
Ms. Simon. Absolutely.
Ms. Plaskett.--representing Federal employees?
Ms. Simon. Absolutely.
Ms. Plaskett. Thank you. And with that, I yield back. Thank
you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Tennessee, Mr.
Duncan.
Mr. Duncan. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I did get to
hear your opening statement and the opening statement of the
ranking member, but I had some other meetings I had to go to so
I apologize if I get into an area that has already been
covered.
But I will say this. I agree with the chairman and the
ranking member and others that we have many good, dedicated,
wonderful Federal employees. I will say, though, that I saw a
statistic not long ago that said 58 percent of the people in
this world have to get by on $4 or less a day. We have got
hundreds of millions who would like to come here and get
minimum wage jobs, so all of us are very blessed to live in
this country.
And I was asked by a school group last year one time, did I
like my job? And I said yes, I have always felt very lucky to
have my job. And I said I had read a brief Bible study the day
before that said if you don't feel very lucky to have your job,
just think how you would feel if you were fired that day.
And so what I see as sort of unfortunate, almost everybody
wants to make themselves to be some kind of victim today. And
so I have heard and seen articles about the low morale of
Federal employees and so forth and how tough they have it, yet
compared to the great majority of the people, they are pretty
well off.
So let me ask you this. So we have some stuff in the
briefing material that says there are too many appeal options.
And I noticed that Mr. Hice had just I think gotten into that
maybe it being too difficult to get rid of a bad employee, says
``too many appeal options lead to unearned pay increases and
poor performer retention.'' Is that accurate, do you think?
Does anybody have a comment about that? Do you think we have
too many appeal options and that that does lead to some
unfairness?
Ms. Simon. I'd like to answer that question.
Mr. Duncan. Yes, ma'am. Go ahead.
Ms. Simon. I think that there are numerous ways that
Federal managers can get rid of poor performers or employees
who engage in misconduct. The GAO, OPM, the MSPB have all done
very comprehensive studies of those questions and found that it
is not legal authority that's lacking; it's willingness to take
on the responsibility that Federal managers have to their
agencies, to taxpayers to document evidence to make sure that
people who are--that the allegations of poor performance or
misconduct are valid. That's all that's required.
If we don't have the protections as taxpayers to know that
our Federal agencies are being staffed by people who have their
jobs on the basis of their objective qualifications rather than
their political affiliation or any other kind of non-merit
factor are, then we'll have a corrupt government. These
protections that Federal managers whine and complain about
actually protect the public from corrupt government, from
agencies hiring people ----
Mr. Duncan. Well, before I ----
Ms. Simon.--for non-merit reasons.
Mr. Duncan. Before I run out of time, let me ask you this.
Does anybody know what--can anybody tell me what percentage of
Federal employees are fired or removed in any one year? Ms.
Greszler?
Ms. Greszler. Yes, I believe it's .3 percent ----
Mr. Duncan. Point three percent.
Ms. Greszler.--are dismissed or fired.
Mr. Duncan. What percentage of Federal employees leave each
year to go into the private sector? Do we know that figure?
Ms. Greszler. I don't know that one. I would add, though,
on here that a big impediment here is the performance
improvement plan process. And yes, I recognize that managers
are choosing not to follow a lot of these procedures that they
would need to do in order to fire or even to demote or write an
employee less than fully successful. They're choosing out of
experience. I've had Federal managers call me and say, yes,
there are some avenues we can do here, but the legal hurdles
are so high, such a high burden of proof.
On average, it takes a year-and-a-half to fire a Federal
employee. Now, if you're running a private business, that's
absurd to have an employee there that is a poor performer or
actually sometimes impeding the mission of the organization or
harming it, and yet you can't get rid of them for a year-and-a-
half? I mean, that's ridiculous.
Mr. Duncan. Let me go in one more direction ----
Ms. Simon. That is not true.
Mr. Duncan. My time is up, but just let me ask this. I have
heard for years that Federal agencies spend 60 percent of their
money in the first 11 months, and then they scramble around and
try to spend the rest of it so that their budgets will be cut.
Do you think that--in fact, I have introduced a bill to give
bonuses to Federal employees if their department or their
agency saves money, we would split half the money for bonuses
and half the money would go back towards the deficit. Does
anybody have an opinion as to that type of--a bill similar to
that? Do you think that would be feasible or would work?
Ms. Greszler. I think that you definitely need greater
ability and greater performance-based budgets to factor in
there. The one thing you just want to be careful of is, is
there going to be a push for those managers to get a higher
budget next year so that he can ----
Mr. Duncan. Right.
Ms. Greszler.--then use some of that towards the
performance-based bonuses.
Mr. Duncan. Well, the problem ----
Ms. Greszler. But certainly, they do need more ----
Mr. Duncan. The problem is that people get paid the same
whether they work hard or whether they work easy, so you need
to have some incentives or pressures that--they don't have the
same pressures that are out there in the private sector.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Virginia for a very
generous five minutes.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair. And I do want to say--I
want to compliment the chairman. I hope this doesn't hurt him,
but he has gone way beyond ideology on Federal employee issues.
And we have worked together. He has made it his business to
visit places of employment and listen to employees, to listen
to what is happening in the workplace. And I think he would say
it has informed him and given him some perspective. I wish more
of our colleagues would take--I have done the same, and I
really salute him. He has taken his job here seriously. I have
got to get to know the territory, you know, the old line from
The Music Man. You have got to know the territory. And I salute
Mr. Meadows for that effort.
Ms. Greszler, I take your point that sometimes we have got
a troubled employee, may be ethically challenged, behaviorally
disruptive, whatever it may be, and it takes a year-and-a-half,
a process that seems never-ending, an appeal may restore them,
drives all of us crazy, but isn't there another side to the
coin and the balance is what we are trying to get at? We want
to streamline that, but we also want to be fair. There is
something called due process. Courts have upheld it, that
Federal employees are entitled to due process even though
sometimes that may aggravate us in terms of how long it takes
or even the end result. And we need to respect that, too, do we
not?
Ms. Greszler. No, we do, and they need due process. But I
think what we have now is an overly burdensome hurdle. The
proof required for firing Federal employees exceeds that of the
private sector, and I think there are things that we can do to
streamline and make that possible. I mean ----
Mr. Connolly. Yes, I understand, and I am not
unsympathetic, but I will tell you as someone who represents a
lot of Federal employees and Federal contract employees, there
is still a lot of discrimination, favoritism, nepotism,
outright outrageous discriminatory behavior, sexual harassing
behavior, racially hateful behavior that goes on in a workforce
as large as the Federal Government.
And trying to make sure there are some protections for the
victims of that and trying to hold people to account are really
important because sometimes the perpetrators make the victims,
you know, the employees who get discharged or demoted or exiled
to, you know, Nome, Alaska, or someplace where they are sort of
out of sight and out of line. I don't mean to pick on Alaska;
it is a beautiful State.
So I just want to suggest to you that it is a complicated
picture, and some of the protections, though they have become
may be more brittle than we would like over time and very
juridical on the other hand are there for a reason.
Ms. Simon, I wondered if you wanted to comment on that?
Because I see both sides of this in the job I have got.
Ms. Simon. First of all, it doesn't take a year-and-a-half
to fire a Federal employee. In most cases, certainly in cases
of misconduct, an employee is off the payroll in 30 days or,
you know, an even shorter period of time depending on the
circumstances. If it takes a year-and-a-half and if the agency
fails in its efforts to remove a poor performer or someone who
has been proven to have engaged in misconduct, that is not a
problem with the process. That is not a problem with the
evidentiary burden. That is a problem with the agency and its
managers and their own abilities to document what they allege.
They make procedural errors. They do all kinds of things that
are wrong. They propose a penalty that does--is not
commensurate with the alleged offense.
Mr. Connolly. And if I may interrupt because I have
experienced this. And sometimes people who are sort of a
problem are in positions of power and they just stonewall ----
Ms. Simon. Well ----
Mr. Connolly.--which takes time.
Ms. Simon. As--we had a Senate hearing yesterday in the VA
Committee, and our national president asked rhetorically if
anyone thought that the firing that's been in the news this
last week was an unusual occurrence, if they thought it never
happened in other Federal agencies where people were fired in
order to--an executive fired a subordinate in order to cover up
that executive's own misdeeds. There are all kinds of
miscarriages of justice that would occur in the absence of
high--the current evidentiary standards for allegations of
misconduct. And it is very, very foolish to consider lowering
those standards so that people can just be fired willy-nilly.
We'll get a very, very bad and corrupt Federal Government if we
do so.
Mr. Connolly. I thank you. Is the Chairman going to give me
one more minute? I thank the chair. See, if you compliment the
chair, you get extra time, a wonderful chair, have you all
noticed?
So I just have one more. Thank you both.
Mr. Goldenkoff, you stated the Federal compensation system
should allow the government to cost-effectively attract,
motivate, and retain high-performing agile workforce necessary
to meet these missions. You know, my impression from years of
working in and with the Federal Government and representing so
many Federal employees is that we are nowhere near that
standard. We have got a long way to go in streamlining hiring
process, making it easier, less bureaucratic, less paper-
dominated, and frankly figuring out how do we attract that new
generation that is going to replace a third of the Federal
workforce that is eligible for retirement in the next three or
four years? How do we appeal to millennials? I mean, how do I
say to Ms. Greszler I see a 30-year Federal career in your
future, you know? And we are part of the problem up here.
And I just wonder if you could expand on that a little bit.
What we need to do to be more flexible and to attract and
retain the talent of the future, which is the immediate future
I might add, not far away.
Mr. Goldenkoff. It's--well, as you mentioned, I think
flexibility is the key. It's not a one-size-fits-all approach
so, you know, I know the focus of this hearing is pay, but pay
is not the only thing. You know, even if we could assume for
the moment that we could come up with the ideal pay system, it
still does no good if your onboarding processes are inadequate,
if you don't make effective use of their talents, if you don't
aggressively recruit them, if once they do come on board if you
don't develop them, if they're not given effective supervision,
and it's also a matter of work-life balance programs. And it
needs to be tailored to individual labor markets. It needs to
be tailored to individual occupations. So--and we're just not
doing that effectively right now.
Mr. Connolly. I thank the chair for his indulgence. Thank
you all so much for being here today.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman for his kind remarks,
and I would let the record reflect that his additional time was
really in the spirit of fairness because Mr. Duncan went over
and not because of any wonderful embellished remarks to my
benefit.
Mr. Connolly. Well, yes, and for the sake of the media back
home in North Carolina, I wish we could work with Mr. Meadows.
He is just too conservative for all of us.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
The chair recognizes Mr. Grothman for five minutes.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. First of all, I would like to thank Mr.
Connolly for the comments. I don't have a lot of Federal
employees in my district. I haven't heard complaints from him,
but if he says Federal Government is a hotbed of racism and
sexual harassment, I will take him at his word. I mean, it is
something you have got to look out for.
Mr. Connolly. Would my friend yield just for a second?
Mr. Grothman. Sure.
Mr. Connolly. I know my friend knew I was simply pointing
out that in a big workforce, you know, there are some bad
apples. I in no way was characterizing or meant to characterize
that as the Federal workforce. My experience is the opposite.
The Federal workforce is a dedicated group of workers, as the
chairman said at the beginning of the hearing.
I thank my friend for yielding.
Mr. Grothman. Okay. Okay. I just wanted to clarify that.
Okay. I went a little bit overboard.
Okay. Now, I have got a question for you guys to lead off,
and I don't really see it in here, but one thing that I always
find when I deal with government employees, obviously, many of
them are regulatory and many of them seem to just be--I assume
they are nice people in their own lives, but they seem to be
completely out of touch with dealing with the public, be it
individuals or businesses, you know, putting burdens on them
that they would never think to put on themselves. And I always
wish more of them had spent some time in the private sector so
they would realize how they look when they come across to the
public.
Does anybody have any information, say, on the number of--
particularly on the regulatory agencies the number of
government employees who spend, say, at least five years in the
public sector before being hired or how many just came straight
out of college, which would lead to the lack of common sense
that you sometimes see in the Federal Government?
Mr. Biggs. I don't have data on that directly, but I
completely agree with you that there is not very much flow from
the private sector to government and back. And I think that
leads to some of the bigger misperceptions that we sometimes
see here. Ms. Simon cited some statistics claiming that Federal
employees are underpaid by 34 percent. If you were to ask most
Federal employees, most believe they can make more money in the
private sector than they do in government.
I have done some work where we tracked the--you know, the
relatively small number of people who shift from Federal
employment to private sector jobs. Rather than getting a big
pay increase, most of them actually got a pay reduction. We
also tracked people who went from Federal--from private sector
jobs to the Federal Government. Most of them got pay increases.
I think the lack of shifting between the two, though, leads
to an insularity where you're not aware of what's going on in
jobs outside the private sector but also the concentration of
Federal employees within the Washington, D.C., area may lead
to, you know, lack of understanding or knowledge of what's
going on outside of Washington, D.C. The--five of the 10
richest counties in the United States are in the Washington,
D.C., suburbs, and that's not to say anything bad about people
who live in Washington, D.C., but you may not understand
exactly what's going on in the rest of the country.
Mr. Grothman. Yes.
Mr. Biggs. But most of the Federal workforce is outside of
D.C.
Mr. Grothman. Right, right. Maybe I will ask Ms. Simon. You
see what I am getting at. Okay. If you work for a company and
somebody from the EPA comes in and says, oh, here, you know, I
know you just put in this new equipment four years ago, but the
rules have changed, times have changed, you know, spend another
$10 million or whatever, you know, and that is maybe an
exaggeration. But that is the sort of thing you hear. And you
wonder, my goodness, do you know what it feels like to be on
the other end of the phone?
Is there any effort made to say before we hire a new person
in a regulatory agency to see if they spent, you know, five or
10 years on the other end of the phone? I think particularly
older people, people in their 50s, sometimes it's harder to
find a job but they have a lot of experience, they get
downsized, is an effort being made to hire those people above
somebody who just came out of college and may have no point of
reference as to how the real world works?
Ms. Simon. I don't have any data that would indicate one
way or another how--the percentage of the current Federal
workforce that has spent time working in the private sector or
for employees in a regulatory agency that have worked in the
same industry that their agency regulates.
I would tell you that it is always expected that Federal
employees act in a courteous manner with any member of the
public that they are dealing with. Obviously, in--when you're
in a law-enforcement context and the law enforcement may be--
the laws that people in the Environmental Protection Agency are
paid to enforce, businesses might not like the, you know,
restrictions on their ability to use ----
Mr. Grothman. Yes.
Ms. Simon.--certain chemicals or ----
Mr. Grothman. Yes, I don't mean to cut you off, but they
limit us on time ----
Ms. Simon.--equipment ----
Mr. Grothman.--so may I just make one comment for my good
buddies in the think tank world? You know, I think in the
future when they hire people, I am sure they have a scale and
there might be a test that people take and blah, blah, blah. I
would hope time spent in the private sector is a big part of
that scale, and that is something you guys could work towards
because I think you would get a lot better quality out of the
regulatory agencies if you had people that dealt on the other
side of things.
Can I ask one more question ----
Mr. Meadows. I beg your pardon?
Mr. Grothman.--since I'm the only guy--the only Republican
down here?
Mr. Meadows. Okay. The gentleman is recognized for 30 more
seconds, and we will do the same for the other side.
Mr. Grothman. Super. We have numbers here that were given
us. I mean, I just find them hard to believe. We have 108,000
Federal employees making more than $150 grand a year, and where
I come from, that is like, you know, the upper crust. And it
just keeps skyrocketing up more and more and more. And I don't
begrudge anybody making $150 grand a year, but holy cow. I
mean, wow.
Ms. Simon. The vast majority of Federal employees who make
salaries like that are physicians and scientists.
Mr. Goldenkoff. And you have to understand, too, that the
jobs that the Federal Government avails himself--for example,
they're doctors, they're engineers. They are higher skilled
because the nature of the work is higher skilled than in the
private sector, and so that needs to be considered, too. You
cannot just look at the salaries alone.
Mr. Grothman. Well, I wonder if we can get for us--I mean,
we have got $400,000, $150 and other--over $150, that's $500. I
mean, that is just--I wouldn't know if I would have guessed
that many people made that much in the country as a whole, but
maybe I come from an area that doesn't make as much money. If
we could someday get a breakdown by agency and find out, you
know, from somebody ----
Mr. Meadows. Yes, the gentleman time is expired. If you
will try to respond to the gentleman's request to the
committee, that would be greatly appreciated.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Raskin, is recognized for
a very generous five minutes.
Mr. Raskin. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for your
flexibility. And I do want to associate myself briefly with the
remarks of the gentleman from Massachusetts, Mr. Lynch, who did
observe that a time when we just experienced the firing of the
FBI Director by the President for apparently refusing to quash
the investigation of a paid Russian asset Michael Flynn, the
timing of this hearing is at least a bit unusual. But as the
Representative of the Eighth Congressional District in Maryland
where I have 88,000 Federal employees, this is an issue of
great interest and concern to me.
Now, I take the general point to be that high-ranking
public employees like doctors at NIH or the Center for Disease
Control or lawyers at the Department of Justice or maybe on
Capitol Hill or engineers or IT people in the Pentagon are
underpaid compared to what they could be making in the private
sector. And certainly we know that anecdotally to be true. You
talk to people all the time in government who are either
leaving to go make double or triple their salaries in the
private sector that they could be making or are tempted to do
it and complain about the pay and benefits being too low.
And then the suggestion that there are, quote, ``lower-
ranking employees'' who are overpaid compared to their private
sector counterparts, and I want to focus on that for a second
to figure out who we are really talking about because I don't
know to what extent you can really equate particular public
sector positions with private sector positions. I think of some
people who are lower paid, for example, as soldiers, but, you
know, you think back to the Iraq War, there were soldiers
leaving the Army when they could and then making double or
triple what they could as military contractors in Iraq or in
Afghanistan.
Maybe climate scientists, researchers could be making a lot
more working in the private sector or maybe they are making
more than--but I can't visualize who we are talking about as
being overpaid within the government workforce, and I am just
wondering if anybody can help me out on that.
Ms. Simon. I'd like to take a stab at that. I think your
comments point to why the CBO study is particularly
inappropriate as the basis for a conversation about whether
Federal employees are overpaid or underpaid. In my testimony I
talked about Border Patrol agents who have a very complex,
difficult, and dangerous job. Their job requires only a high
school diploma. They receive additional training from the
Federal Government before they start their jobs, but their
formal education, their educational attainment is ----
Mr. Raskin. Got you. So basically, when they say ----
Ms. Simon. All they need is a high school diploma.
Mr. Raskin.--they are overpaid, we are equating a Border
Patrol agent who just has a high school degree to that person
taking their high school degree and getting a job at the
McDonald's across the street ----
Ms. Simon. Well, we're ----
Mr. Raskin.--from the border or something like that.
Ms. Simon. In the CBO study, we're comparing it with all
private sector workers with a--high school education is their
highest educational attainment who might work in security
services, broadly defined, which could include all kinds of
security guards, mall cops, you know ----
Mr. Raskin. Okay.
Ms. Simon.--anything in that ----
Mr. Raskin. Let me ask this. So if that public-private
juxtaposition isn't exactly useful to us in terms of thinking
about the pay, what about--does anybody have any information on
either an international perspective on what workers make in
national governments abroad or historically? And the historical
context I think is important because I do know that the Federal
Government historically has been a place that has been open to
people facing serious discrimination in the private sector like
women, like African Americans who were able to get jobs their
first when they were experiencing rampant discrimination. And
so the fact that, you know, a woman or an African American
could get hired in the 1920s or '30s at the Post Office or at
the Department of Labor but not get hired in the private sector
without facing extreme discrimination, that doesn't surprise me
that they might be making a little bit more, and that might be
something we would celebrate.
But I wonder if anybody has got either any historical
perspective or international perspective on it. Mr. Biggs?
Mr. Biggs. From the international context, the OECD, which
is a group of developed countries, has done surveys of
government pay for different positions in those developed
countries, so the, you know, U.S., UK, Canada, France,
whatever. And for a variety of positions they look at the U.S.
Federal Government pays more. Just as an example, economists
are paid an average of about $150,000 a year in the U.S.
Federal Government, about $87,000 per year in other OECD
countries. Somebody who's a secretary in the U.S. earns an
average about $69,000 in the Federal Government, about $47-
48,000 in other OECD countries. So this is not--this is
government-to-government among other developed countries.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. I would love to get that information from
you. You are telling me that a secretary in the Federal
Government makes an average $69,000 a year?
Mr. Biggs. For secretaries, it's listed as an average of
$69,476. For executive secretaries, it's listed as $98,786.
Mr. Raskin. Okay. Did anybody have any historical data to
see--because of course one of the things we have seen is a
decline in unionization for people who would be in high school
graduate jobs in a lot of places in the private sector, but an
improvement in unionization in the public sector. So that might
account for some of the disparity. And I wonder to what extent
unionization does help explain it. And, Ms. Simon ----
Ms. Simon. One of the places you see the impact of the
decline in unionization is in the data that are used for the
Federal Government's pay system for its hourly workforce,
people who work in the skilled trades. They're mostly employed
by the Department of Defense in depos and arsenals, and they--
on paper anyway we have a prevailing rate system that collects
data from all over the country, private sector data on what
people are paying--what private employers are paying for
similar jobs. And you can see month to month when an auto plant
closes in a community, wages in that community go down by 35,
40 percent because the wages paid in a union manufacturing
plant are so much higher than the nonunion ----
Mr. Raskin. So on that theory we would not want to allow --
--
Ms. Simon.--wages.
Mr. Raskin.--extreme inequality in the private sector to
become the justification for driving wages down further in the
public sector, which I take it is ----
Ms. Simon. No, but I would say that that is a nice way to
describe the subject of this hearing.
Mr. Raskin. Yes. All right. I think my time is up, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you for your indulgence.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman. And in light of the
number to my right of potential questioners, instead of
recognizing myself, I am going to go to Ms. Kelly and recognize
her for a strict five minutes. I am just kidding.
Ms. Kelly. That is all I will need. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
and thank you to the witnesses.
When I saw what this topic was, I was really surprised
because I have worked on every level of government and outside
of government, and when I became a Member of Congress, so many
of the people that came to work for me had to take pay cuts.
And also their health care wasn't as good as what they had
otherwise, so I find that very interesting.
The other thing is--and you don't have to answer the
question--but it always seems like people think that if you do
government work or you are a public servant or social service
that you should make less even though you go to college, you
may have your undergrad degree, your master's degree, in some
cases your Ph.D., but people think that you should not make
more because you are just a government worker or in social
service.
Also the other thing is--and I know we talked about
Washington versus outside, but how many of our staffers have
two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, yes, nine
roommates so they can live off the salaries that we pay them.
And they don't work just straight nine-to-five jobs. So to the
very staffers in this room, it is shameful that some people
make $25,000 and $30,000 despite whatever, you know, the school
loans you are saying that they get paid back, but it is still
horrific in my opinion.
Ms. Simon, your testimony states that the Federal pay
system promotes internal pay equity and prevents
discrimination. You state in your testimony that this is
because a system, and I quote, ``assigns salaries to the
position, not the individual.'' Can you explain how you believe
the Federal pay system advances gender and race equity?
Ms. Simon. Yes. I also in the testimony cite a 2014 study
by the Office of Personnel Management that really does focus
exclusively on the question you asked, pay equity in the
Federal Government. The best number in that study is that well
over 90 percent of--or women who are part of the Senior
Executive Service on average make almost exactly the same
salaries as men in similar jobs, but that's true throughout the
Federal Government.
And Representative Raskin was asking about--or asking about
historically the Federal Government was the place that was open
to hiring women and members of racial minority groups when the
private sector refused. Not only did it hire people based
solely on skills, but it pays based solely on the job. So if
the holder of the job is female or male, black or white, old or
young, it doesn't matter. It matters only what the job is. And
that's the way that the Federal Salary Council compares private
and Federal pay and measures its pay gap, and that's the proper
way to take a look at comparisons between Federal and private
pay because the attributes of the individual, which is what the
CBO study focused on, should always be irrelevant.
Ms. Kelly. Thank you. You also wrote, ``One appalling
result of Heritage's approach is the interpretation of the fact
that the Federal Government is less likely to discriminate
against women and minorities in terms of pay than the private
sector. It is viewed as evidence that the government overpays
relative to the private sector rather than the other way
around.'' Are you saying that the Heritage study found a
compensation premium for Federal workers because the private
sector is more likely to discriminate against workers than the
Federal Government?
Ms. Simon. If you look at data on, say, African American
women with bachelor's degrees in the private sector and what
they make on average, an African American woman who hold jobs
in the Federal sector that require bachelor's degrees, on
average, the Federal Government pays more because it doesn't
reproduce the discriminatory pay practices that we find in the
nonunion private sector.
Ms. Kelly. And actually, there was a study done in Chicago
that reports for African American women in the private sector
that the more education you have, the bigger the pay gap grows
so ----
Ms. Simon. In the private sector.
Ms. Kelly. Right, in the private sector. Right. Can you
just talk about--I want you to describe the most harmful
proposals and explain how they would affect Federal workers
when you look at what may be in President Trump's budget.
Ms. Simon. Well, we have not been privy to what's in
President's--President Trump's budget except for one phone call
I got earlier this week that described the many, many proposed
cuts we can expect to see to Federal retirement. They want to
change the basis in which annuities would be calculated. They
want to eliminate COLAs altogether for people on FERS and just
a quarter of a percent for people in CSRS. They want to
eliminate the FERS supplement that would affect law enforcement
agents who are--have mandatory early retirement. And--but the
biggest and worst and most consequential would be to charge
Federal employees who participate in FERS anywhere from 7 to 9
percent of their salaries for their defined benefit. This is a
massive pay cut.
It's important to note, although we've been discussing here
today that too few private sector employees have access to a
defined benefit pension anymore, for those who do in the
private sector, about 97 percent of private sector employees
with a defined benefit plan don't pay anything toward their
pension. The employer pays the entire cost. Federal employees
already pay far, far more for their pension benefit than
comparable private sector employees.
Ms. Kelly. Okay. Thank you. And I know I went over, but I
did want to make a comment that as the ranking member of the IT
Subcommittee, and you have been very involved with us, that we
can't keep Federal employees in that division and with
cybersecurity because we don't pay enough. So thank you for
your indulgence.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Michigan, Mrs.
Lawrence, for five minutes.
Mrs. Lawrence. Thank you so much.
This discussion to me is very troubling on a lot of levels.
The arrogance of individuals to target Federal employees where
the criticism of Federal employees is, one, that you are a
public servant, I am paying your salary; therefore, you should
make less, but you have to uphold to so many restrictions when
you take that oath of office. And Federal employees are
required to take an oath of office for ethics, for the Hatch
Act, for so many things that are different from the private
sector that you don't even have an expectation or requirement.
There are some plusses that I wanted to go through. When we
talk about career employees and why they stay there, most
people go into the Federal Government, unlike the millennials
of today, thinking that it is a career because there is upward
mobility built into Federal employment, so therefore, you can
actually grow and get promotions based on education and
experience within the agency and it is rewarded.
The highest enforcement of civil rights, employment rights
are in the Federal Government. Ladies and gentlemen, the
diversity that has historically been demonstrated in Federal
Government--and I will say from those who despise the fact that
minorities are advancing in salary and the Federal Government
is the catalyst to that is some of this displaced minimalism
that we see happening with Federal employees. I remember
hearing my older relatives saying that when you got a job at
the post office, you were considered elite in the community
because it was a paid job that you were going to be paid the
same amount of money as your white counterparts, that you would
be able to have a career, your job was protected, and guess
what, they would enforce civil rights laws. So I am a little
sensitive when I hear this blanket conversation about Federal
employees.
The fact that--why would we not have an appeal system in
the Federal Government for employees? You expect that if you
are arrested or if you are accused of something, that you would
have appeal rights. And instead of saying this is a model that
private industry should use, we want to dummy down the Federal
Government who are the keeper of our Constitution and our laws
and we want to say pay them less, make them be the lowest-paid
employee.
And for the life of me I am going to try to find a
secretary in the Federal Government that is making $67,000 or
$90,000 that you have. As an employee who has been employed for
30 years, moved up in the ranks, but I am sorry, the starting
pay--and I want to give you an example. The starting pay of a
registered nurse--and this is according to VA. A practical
nurse or a medical technician in VA makes about $45,000 a year.
Nursing assistants make $35,000 a year.
Now, many of you know I worked for one of the Federal
agencies and I was in H.R., and the biggest problems we had
were hiring professionals. We needed doctors, and we could not
get an active doctor in the system. It was always a retired
doctor that would come in because the pay was so low. It was
not one that was reflective of the industry but a retired
doctor could come and make this lower pay. And we struggled
with that.
We struggle with engineers, we struggle with those, and it
is nowhere that you can say that a skilled professional makes
more money in the Federal Government. They may have career
status protection and they may have opportunities within this
agency.
The last thing I want to say, and then I am going to get a
question in, is this issue about official time. It comes up
consistently. And we are dealing with this right now in the
military where we have women who are being subjected to sexual
harassment in the military. So you are telling me in order for
a person who is being discriminated against--and I was an EEO
investigator--you are being discriminated against, you are
being harassed in the workplace, guess what, take your own
personal time, take time off the clock because you are being
abused in the workforce to address your complaint.
When we say official time, you cannot go in there and have
a cup of coffee and sit there for the whole day. You have to
have a complaint. And to protect the rights of individuals in
the workforce with official time so that if I feel aggrieved, I
have a process to go through. It is something that is--we keep
talking about this as we are trying to find a problem.
One thing that you all are saying and I hope we all agree
on this, I want every Federal employee to earn their salary. I
want efficiencies. I cannot stand fraud. I take the work of a
Federal employee--I do place them at a higher level. And I do
want to compensate them with a wage that is reflective of their
skills, but I don't want, I don't want our employees to be able
to disregard the responsibilities that they take an oath to do.
Thank you.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman.
The chair recognizes the gentlewoman from Florida, Mrs.
Demings, for five minutes.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman.
You know, a few minutes ago I heard a comment that too many
Federal employees, particularly those coming in, don't have a
point of reference of how the real world works. well, I would
venture to say many times Congress acts as if it does not have
a point of reference of how the real world works.
As we all know, there have been growing inequality in wages
with the highest earners keeping more of the total wages that
are paid in this nation. This is likely why the CBO has found a
disparity in wages between the public and private sectors,
particularly for the least educated workers.
Mr. Kile, workers in the Federal Government, including by
our calculations, about 31,700 people in Texas and more than
36,000 people in California with no more than a high school
education were paid just about 34 percent more than similarly
educated workers in the private sector. Is that correct?
Mr. Kile. We did not look at the breakdowns by State, but
we do find on average the differences in compensation by
education that we have been talking about today.
Mrs. Demings. So is the percentage based on--the
percentage, would you say generally that percentage is correct?
Mr. Kile. I'm--so the percentage difference in total comp
for people with a high school diploma or less was 53, and
that's a national average.
Mrs. Demings. The Bureau of Labor Statistics and other
experts have observed that in some cases benefits inequality
between the highest and lowest earners has been even starker
than wage inequality. According to the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, only 33 percent of private sector workers whose
earnings put them in the lowest 25 percent of wage earners had
access to employer-provided health care. However, Ms. Simon,
every full-time Federal employee has access to the Federal
Employee Health Benefits Plan, even the lowest-paid, least-
educated employee in the Federal Government. Is that correct?
Ms. Simon. That's correct, but it also--I just want to add
to what was just said. It's not--the problem with the CBO study
is not that the employer provides the benefit; it's the
differences in the cost of the benefit provided. It costs the
Federal Government more to provide the benefit, the same
retirement benefit, than it costs a private employer. And that
is a necessary piece of information that--to be included in any
financial comparison of the cost of benefits. It's not the
benefits but the cost of benefits, the employer ----
Mrs. Demings. So the retirement ----
Ms. Simon.--cost of providing the benefit ----
Mrs. Demings.--health insurance, paid leave ----
Ms. Simon. The Federal Employee Health Benefits Program
also costs the government more than it should, given the
benefits it provides. There are structural flaws in FEHBP that
make it more expensive than it should be. The actuarial cost of
the benefit versus what the premiums are, there is--there's a
big--there are flaws in the structure of FEHBP that make it
much more expensive than it should be. And I wouldn't call the
restriction on the investment of the assets in the Civil
Service Retirement Trust Fund a flaw, but it makes it more
expensive than a similar private pension plan that would
provide the exact same benefit.
Mrs. Demings. CBO found that benefits for Federal employees
with no more than a high school education costs about 93
percent more than benefits for private sector employees with no
more than a high school education. In other words, the
difference between public and private sector benefits for
employees with only a high school education were larger, as you
have just said, Mr. Kile, than the difference in the wages paid
by the public and private sector to these employees. Is that
correct, Mr. Kile?
Mr. Kile. Yes, that's correct.
Mrs. Demings. If Republicans cut benefits for Federal
workers with no more than a high school education so that they
are comparable to benefits paid by the private sector with
comparable levels of education, according to your findings, the
Federal workers would get to keep about 7 percent of their
benefits.
Mr. Kile, has the CBO examined what medical benefits,
retirement benefits, and leave Federal workers with no more
than a high school education would actually have if they
receive only 7 percent of the benefits that they currently
receive? Have you examined that?
Mr. Kile. No, that's something we have not examined.
Mrs. Demings. Ms. Simon, would you like to comment on
whether the benefits earned by Federal workers with no more
than a high school education are 93 percent too generous?
Ms. Simon. The benefits are not too generous ----
Mr. Meadows. Ms. Simon ----
Ms. Simon.--they're too expensive.
Mr. Meadows.--her--Ms. Simon, her time has expired but
please answer the question.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, Mr. Chairman. Don't treat
me differently.
Mr. Meadows. No, I would never treat you differently. Go
ahead.
Mrs. Demings. Ms. Simon?
Mr. Meadows. No, please answer.
Ms. Simon. I said I--the benefits are hardly too generous.
They are--I think the health insurance benefits are too
expensive. I think that we would benefit from self-insured
program in FEHBP.
As far as the cost to the employer and cost to the
government of providing the retirement benefit, it's--there's
very, very good reason for that, as I described in my
testimony, because of the rate of return on treasury bonds
compared to private equities. And so the provision of benefits
can't--has to take into consideration the cost of providing the
benefits, not the benefits themselves.
Mrs. Demings. Thank you so much, and thank you so much, Mr.
Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentlewoman.
Ms. Simon, let me make sure I can clarify one thing in
following up on her testimony there--or your testimony, her
questions. Are you saying that the benefits that Federal
workers get are not better; they are just more poorly
administered on behalf of the Federal Government? Because you
said the Federal Government was not efficient I guess in doing
that? I am trying to understand where she was going with and
you said it is not better benefits; it is just they are not--it
is more costly to administer it in the Federal Government?
Ms. Simon. Yes. I didn't say because--and it's structural
issues. The FEHBP has problems with risk segmentation. It
doesn't have one benefits package. It squanders the purchasing
power of what is the largest employer-provided plan ----
Mr. Meadows. So you are saying the Federal Government is
not administering their retirement program as well as the
private sector?
Ms. Simon. No, I was just talking about the Federal
Employee Health ----
Mr. Meadows. Well, that is what it sounded like.
Ms. Simon. I was talking about the Federal Employee Health
Benefits Program.
Mr. Meadows. So they are not ----
Ms. Simon. I think there are structural ----
Mr. Meadows.--implementing it ----
Ms. Simon.--flaws in that plan. I'm not saying that OPM --
--
Mr. Meadows. So this gets back to the ----
Ms. Simon.--implements it poorly.
Mr. Meadows.--previous question. You think they ought to go
all on Obamacare?
Ms. Simon. No, sir.
Mr. Meadows. Okay. Well, we will follow up on that.
Mr. Sarbanes, you are recognized for five minutes.
Mr. Meadows. Oh, I am sorry.
Mr. DeSaulnier. It is close enough, Mr. Chairman. We are
both physically close to one another here. And I do want to say
the chairman and I share something in common. It is my
understanding you started off in the restaurant business, Aunt
D's?
Mr. Meadows. Boy, you know, you Googled me pretty well
there, yes.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Well, we have something in common. I always
admire somebody who has owned restaurants, having managed and
owned them for 35 years. My mistake was, as opposed to you, I
stayed in it. I wished I had gone into real estate because
there is more money in real estate than there is in the
restaurant business.
But I really think this is too bad. I think it is a
reasonable question to ask from my perspective, having been in
the private sector in a very competitive field where I needed
to compensate and treat my employees well, owning restaurants
in the San Francisco Bay area, which was very competitive, low
profit margin. If I didn't treat my employees well, I was out
of business in no time. And I saw lots of people who invested
in lots of businesses who were out of time, particularly the
retail business.
So I think the question should be how do we as Americans
clearly in this day and age get wages and benefits up for all
working Americans? I perceived the last election as being
argument about that, that both parties had left that behind.
Today, according to Forbes magazine, the 20 wealthiest
Americans possessed as much wealth as 152 million Americans. We
have never had that concentration of wealth in this country.
There is plenty of good arguments as to why we need to fix
that. And I have never understood as a manager of people how
blaming rank-and-file people for operational problems is going
to solve your management problems. My experience in the public
sector, having served at every level of government, usually our
problems were cultural or management level. And I have heard
that in this committee over and over again.
So forgive me for indulging in that little editorial
comment, but I really do think it would serve this committee--
and I know a lot of us on this side of the aisle would like to
talk about how we get greater efficiencies in government. For
those of us who believe in government, we want excellence in
government. So the Heritage Foundation, I heard you earlier
talk about the good employee who feels trapped. I think that
happens in public and private organizations, and I am sure you
understand that as well.
So how do we change that? And I really think this committee
would be better served trying to figure out what is it we could
do based on peer-reviewed, analytical analysis to improve
customer service. I think it is really difficult when Members
complain about the IRS customer service at the same time when
you cut your revenues by almost a third. And I am sure the GAO
has done studies on what the appropriate level in each
workforce in terms of what wages and compensation should be and
what the revenues should be and what that would equate to in
terms of customer service. And maybe the GAO can respond to
that.
But first, I would like Ms. Simon to respond to that from
your experience. How do you get Federal employees from your
experience to get compensated well in a competitive market? In
the bay area, it is hard to keep Federal employees. I know my
district office, I am losing a great person who worked for
Google and is going to go back to work for them because he can
get paid three times the amount of money in an area of the
country that if you make $105,000, you are considered poor vis-
?-vis the housing market.
So maybe you could respond to that. What is the right
compensation in your view, understanding that you argue as
appropriately for your members?
Ms. Simon. Well, I'm also a member of the Federal Salary
Council, and we are given the opportunity to look at large
quantities of data that show disparities between Federal pay
and non-Federal pay on a locality-by-locality basis. And we see
these disparities. We see it by occupation; we see it by
location.
My colleagues here today are talking about low quit rates.
One of the things that we're--I've seen in my long career
representing Federal employees is that salaries--you know,
people who go into Federal service expect to have fair
compensation but they don't do it to get rich. It's because
they are very, very committed to the mission of their agencies.
You've got people working in health care in the Department of
Veterans Affairs, over a third of whom are veterans themselves,
and they have devoted their careers to that kind of work.
You've got people working in EPA who care deeply about the
future of this planet and care about public health and clean
air and clean water. And they have committed their lives to
working in those kinds of agencies. Border Patrol agents who
put their lives on the line, Federal corrections officers who
put their lives on the line every day, but they're very
committed to public safety, they also have to raise their
families.
And we in the last 10 years or so but really the last nine
years have suffered horrendous cuts in compensation, big
retirement cuts, three years of pay freeze followed by
minuscule pay adjustments, and no other group of Americans has
had to bear such a huge burden for the politics of budget
austerity. About $189 billion and counting have come out of the
pockets of Federal employees partly because they're demonized
routinely, partly because of these ridiculous studies that turn
into misleading headlines about Federal employees being
overpaid. We had reference earlier today to Federal employees
who make over $100,000 as if that were some kind of scandal
when most of those professionals who are earning that kind of
salary, as you point out, could make much, much more in the
private sector.
So it's really a matter of funding and changing the
conversation in this country away from the idea that only the
very, very wealthy deserve to live a decent life.
Mr. DeSaulnier. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank you.
The chair recognizes the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Cartwright, for five minutes.
Mr. Cartwright. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Kile, thank you for being here. I want to drill down on
some of the figures noted in the CBO report comparing the pay
of Federal and private sector workers if I may. Your report
finds that Federal workers with a bachelor's degree or less
receive more total compensation than their private sector
counterparts ranging from 21 percent more for employees with a
bachelor's degree to as high as 53 percent more for employees
with no more than a high school diploma. Am I correct in that?
Mr. Kile. Yes, that's correct.
Mr. Cartwright. So according to data from OPM, more than a
million Federal employees have no more than a bachelor's
degree. That is about half of all executive branch employees.
And I know that CBO analyzed data from the current population
survey. However, assuming CBO's study is correct, we would have
to conclude that the compensation of more than one million
Federal employees is higher than compensation provided to their
private sector counterparts with similar education levels. If
our Republican colleagues insist that Federal compensation be
realigned with private sector compensation, that would mean
that the compensation of more than one million Federal
employees would need to be cut. Many employees would see their
total compensation cut in half.
But OPM data show also that veterans comprise about 30
percent of the Federal workforce. So if you take those numbers
together, it appears that of the one million Federal employees
who make more than their private sector counterparts, as many
as 300,000 of them may be veterans of the United States
military.
Ms. Simon, nice to see you again. What do you think? Do you
think veterans in the Federal Government are overpaid?
Ms. Simon. I think for the most part veterans who serve in
the Federal Government are underpaid. And I think that it's--
some of the discussion that has occurred in this hearing
earlier talking about taking away appeal rights from Federal
employees for adverse actions will fall most heavily on
veterans and veterans with service-connected illnesses and
disabilities because that really has been the focus of attempts
to punish Federal employees. They want to punish by taking away
their ability to defend themselves when they're--when--against
allegations that they haven't performed well enough at their
job in spite of their disabilities, and now they want to take
away some of their pay.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, I want to stay on the veterans theme.
Unlike the vast majority of the private sector, the Federal
Government has made it a priority to hire veterans by giving
them a statutory preference in hiring. As a result, nearly one-
third of new hires in the Federal Government are United States
military veterans. Let's take a look at the VA, for example.
About one-third of its employees are veterans. Psychiatric
practical nurses and medical technicians in the VA make about
$45 grand a year, and nursing assistants make about $35,000 a
year.
Ms. Simon, do you believe that these individuals are
overpaid by 52 percent or even 21 percent?
Ms. Simon. They're definitely not overpaid. They're
underpaid. And as we talked about before, what seems to raise
the ire of some people who look at these data is that in the
nonunion sector people who are performing similar jobs or have
similar educational attainment receive no health insurance
benefits from their employer, receive no retirement benefits
from their employer, and they think the Federal Government
ought to follow that race to the bottom. And of course that is
not something that AFGE supports.
Mr. Cartwright. Well, now some Members of Congress intend
to use CBO's report to justify slashing Federal employee pay
and benefits, but I just want to caution that we proceed
cautiously in this area because we are all good little
capitalists here, and we know that in a free market economy and
also wherever you hire people, you get what you pay for.
And if you continue to do, as you mentioned, Ms. Simon,
beating up on Federal employees, beat up on your employees,
beat them up, beat them up, cut their pay, make them feel bad
about themselves, the best ones are going to wander off, and
you are going to be left with what is left. And do we really
want to do that when we run the Federal Government?
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your indulgence ----
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman.
Mr. Cartwright.--and I yield back.
Mr. Meadows. The gentleman's closing sentence would
indicate that you don't always get what you pay for.
I will recognize Mr. Cummings, the ranking member, for a
line of questioning.
Mr. Cummings. Let me--first of all, to all the Federal
employees who may be watching today, I want to take a moment to
thank you for what you do. I want to thank you for giving your
blood, your sweat, and your tears to all of us to make our
lives better. I have talked to many of you many times and asked
why, why is it that you got into Federal employment. And over
and over and over again I hear words like I wanted to do
something that would last forever. At the end of my day they
would say--many of you said it is not the pay I get; it is the
deeds I do for other people.
And, you know, every time I hear those words--and then we
have people that have come to us many times and I will say, you
know, where are you working? Well, I am working at this law
firm. They tell me how much they are making, and I will say,
well, this job doesn't even pay near that. And this happens to
me almost every other month. What are you doing here? You are
not going to make that kind of money. And you know what they
say? They say, you know what, I have been doing this other job
for 15 years, 20 years. I will take a pay cut. I will take a
pay cut because I want at the end of my day and at the end of
my life to be able to say I gave.
And so I take my moment to thank all of you who may be
watching here today.
The other thing that I would say to our Federal employees
is something that somebody said to me a long time ago. I know
many times you get your paychecks and then you listen to this
hearing and you listen to the people who have spoken here
today, and you get your paychecks and you go to the
supermarket, and you are the ones who have to get the subtotal.
You are the ones who are sitting there with your calculator.
You are the ones that leave those groceries behind because you
don't have enough money.
You are the ones who get up at 4:00 and 5:00 in the
morning, dress the baby, and then try to race to work. And then
you are worried all day. And then you hear people talking about
it is a big bonus because you got some babysitting services.
Please.
You are the ones that worry. You are the ones at NIH that
when we had the government shutdown, you are the ones who were
worried. The nurses I talked to at NIH, she said I am so upset
when we had the government shutdown. And I said why are you so
upset? She said, because when they did the shutdown, what that
does is it stops us from being able to continue some
experiments or some research that could have saved lives. It is
not about the money. It is bigger than that.
And so I can spend all my time asking a lot of questions,
but I am not going to do that. I want to just thank you because
you don't get thanked enough. You don't get thanked enough.
Over and over again you hear criticism, over and over again you
hear people talk about what you are not doing, and I thank you
for what you are doing.
Now, before Mr. Meadows--he may think I am talking about
him because I am not--Meadows is a good guy. I mean, really. I
really believe that he wants balance, and I understand that. He
and I have talked many times about whatever we are doing being
effective and efficient, period. And in order to be effective
and efficient, you have got to have good people. I was telling
him a few minutes ago it is very rare that I fire anybody
because I try to hire the right people.
And so, you know, I just wanted to take that moment
because, you know, this program that they do every year--I
forget the name of it--where they honor Federal employees, and
every time I go to that program, I have got to tell you, it
gets very emotional because usually it is somebody who is
unseen, unnoticed, unappreciated, and unapplauded. And somebody
took time to recognize what they did or do.
And, you know, I just want Federal employees to know that I
think it was Mrs. Lawrence that said all of us want the best.
All of us want employees that go the extra mile. All of us want
to be--by the way, we are Federal employees. We need to go the
extra mile, too. And I think when you look at Members of
Congress and the time that we put in, I don't know a Member of
Congress that has a nine-to-five job. I don't know any of them.
If they do, they are not in office, that is for sure. Or even
a--it is usually seven days a week. And so we are all here to
serve.
But you know what, your name may never appear on the front
page of the Washington Post. Federal employees, your name may
never appear in WTOP or even your local gazette. But I want to
thank you on behalf of a Congress, a grateful Congress for what
you do every day to make our lives better. Thank you for
teaching us, by the way, the power of sacrifice. Thank you for
giving us examples of people who are not selfish but are about
the business of making people's lives better.
And with that, I will yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the gentleman for his kind comments
and for his diligence in trying to make sure that our Federal
workforce is indeed efficient and effective, to use your words.
The chair recognizes himself for five minutes for a
series--all right.
Mr. Sarbanes, we are going to go ahead and let you pop in
for a very strict five minutes if you would.
Mr. Cummings. Sarbanes from Maryland.
Mr. Meadows. From Maryland.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Before I move to my comments, I just wanted to ask
unanimous consent to enter a document into the record. This is
a report from the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities on
wage stagnation faced by middle- and lower-wage workers in
recent decades.
Mr. Meadows. Without objection.
Mr. Sarbanes. Thank you. I thank the panel for your
testimony today. I want to associate myself with the comments
of Ranking Member Cummings, and I also want to salute the
chairman because I know that he has brought close attention to
the situation faced by our Federal employees. We are all trying
to get to the right place in terms of providing the support and
resources that are needed. This comparison I think we do on an
annual basis between the kind of private sector workforce and
the compensation and benefits and so forth that are available
in the private sector and how that compares to what is offered
to the Federal workforce.
It seems the frame is always reversed from the position
that I think makes most sense. We look at the comparison. We
get this testimony, which obviously is subject to debate about
the fact that the Federal employees have access to a broader
set of benefits and compensation and overall have higher
compensation in certain categories than what is in the private
sector. And oftentimes, the conclusion that people want to draw
from that is that we should take something away from the
Federal employees, that we should in a sense degrade the
package of benefits and compensation that is available to them.
But I think that in fact what we offer our Federal
employees is a model and a standard that we ought to be
thinking about how we can get the private sector to raise its
standards up to that level. I think, Ms. Greszler, you talked
about the fact that Federal employees have access to some
daycare benefits and some assistance with student loan
repayment. Well, okay. If I am somebody working in the private
sector and I am listening to this hearing and I am hearing that
there is some benefits available to the Federal workforce that
help with daycare, the answer to the fact that there is a
discrepancy there between the Federal workforce and the private
sector shouldn't be to invite the private sector person to say,
well, the way to solve the discrepancy is to take it away from
the Federal employee. The way to address the discrepancy is for
that private sector person to say, well, I would like to have
that benefit, too. That is a valuable benefit. How can I add
that to the compensation package? And we ought to be trying to
promote with private sector employers that that is a legitimate
benefit that ought to be offered to people.
When you look at the pensions, and Representative Lynch
talked about this at the outset, we ought to be trying to find
ways to strengthen and lift up and really in some ways
completely overhaul the private pension system in this country
so it reflects more of the characteristics of what we have been
able to achieve with respect to the Federal workforce. We need
to bring up the standards that are out there in the private
sector, not knock down the standards of what is a model in
terms of the Federal workforce.
A decent wage not subject to bias, as you pointed out, Ms.
Simon, is something we ought to be reaching for in the private
sector. That is why many of us argue for a national minimum
wage. Let's bring up what is happening out there for all of the
workers in America, not degrade what is available to the
Federal workforce.
And then the last comment I just wanted to make is there is
this suggestion that is made that because the phones aren't
being answered in a timely way in this agency or there is a
casework backup in some other agency, that that reflects a
substandard Federal employee. But the fact of the matter is
that hiring freezes or the threatening of that or other cuts to
resources that should support our Federal workers are often the
reason that that is happening. So we have got to be very
careful about putting that kind of narrative out.
So as I close, I just want to thank our Federal workforce
for the great work that they do, and let's see if we can be
enlightened enough to go out and work to get the private sector
to embrace some of these standards and benefits that the
Federal workforce has.
And I yield back.
Mr. Issa. [Presiding] I thank the gentleman for yielding
back.
I now recognize the chairman, the good morning from North
Carolina, Mr. Meadows.
Mr. Meadows. I thank the chairman. I thank him for his
willingness to fill in in his old seat that is certainly one
that has seen a lot of great work from his perspective and the
perspective of many others.
So let me go ahead and follow up. I apologize. I have got
somebody--actually, I have got someone from the continent of
Africa that is here who came for surgery here in America
because as much as we are dealing with problems here, it is
still the greatest country on the face of this globe. And as we
look at this, it is critically important. So I have got to run
right after that, but let me go ahead and follow up on a few
things.
Mr. Biggs, we are going to have civil service reform. And
so the testimony that all of you have here today will play a
factor in that. And yet I am at a point of where I have got Ms.
Simon saying one thing. I have got the CBO, Mr. Kile, saying
another. I have got you and Ms. Greszler saying different
things. So I need you to help me understand why, from your
perspective, Ms. Simon is wrong. And all I am wanting to get at
are the facts.
Mr. Biggs. If you need to know one thing about the figures
that come out of the Federal Salary Council, they claim that
Federal employees are--on average receive salaries 34 percent
below those of non-Federal employees. Non-Federal doesn't just
mean private sector. Non-Federal means state and local
government workers. If you look at the BLS data they use, those
data show that state and local government workers receive about
the same salaries as private sector workers with similar
skills, similar job demands.
So what the Federal Salary Council is telling you is that
Federal employees on average receive salaries that are 34
percent below those of state and local government workers. Go
to anybody in state and local government; they will laugh if
you say that. I mean, I've been in similar hearings. We've had
people who worked in state government. They say we can't keep
employees in state government because they'll go to the Federal
Government if they have the chance.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So you say ----
Mr. Biggs. It's just a wrong ----
Mr. Meadows.--that you will go to anybody and laugh. I
appreciate that. She can come up and go to anybody and laugh
with your testimony as well. So here is what I need. I need
some facts. Why is it wrong in terms of the comparison? I need
data points ----
Mr. Biggs. Okay.
Mr. Meadows.--as we look at this.
Mr. Biggs. The technical reason that is wrong is a problem
we call over-grading in the Federal Government, which both the
CBO and the GAO have documented, which means that you have a
position that has the skill demands of, say, a GS-8, but you'll
be assigned, say, a GS-9 or a GS-10. That's a way of raising
pay for the employee. When--the data they use from the BLS to
compare to private sector state and local government workers,
the BLS itself looks at the job and says by our judgment we
think this job is equal to a GS-8 on the Federal Government
scale. The BLS does not look at Federal Government jobs and do
their own assessment of what the skill demands the job is. They
take it for granted that the Federal pay scale is correct, that
the job is correctly assigned ----
Mr. Meadows. So they come from an assumption that the scale
is the benchmark, not the duties that are performed ----
Mr. Biggs. Yes.
Mr. Meadows.--is that correct?
Mr. Biggs. So what you need to do is have the BLS go look
at Federal positions, do their own assessment of the skill
demands of the jobs, just like they do with private sector
positions, just like they do with state and local government
positions. I guarantee you that 34 percent figure will be--
shrink considerably.
Mr. Meadows. All right. So would AEI and Heritage, would
you be willing to look at both the CBO score and Ms. Simon as
she has put forth from a Federal workforce and point out both
the valid--from your perspectives valid and nonvalid
assumptions so that we can hopefully make a more informed
decision. Are both of you willing to do that?
Mr. Biggs. I'd be happy to.
Mr. Meadows. All right.
Ms. Greszler. I would like to point out one place that I
have agreement with Ms. Simon here and that's in the pensions
and the fact that the Federal Government is not effectively
managing them because that's going into treasuries. Treasuries
do not earn the average rate of return that other things do,
and so I agree wholeheartedly. And by shifting employees taking
that government contribution that's into a defined benefit plan
that's not actually invested anywhere; it's used to pay for
current government spending. Instead of shifting that that
guarantees the lowest possible rate of return into a Thrift
Savings Plan, you can actually get greater returns, greater
pension or retirement benefit with a smaller contribution
there. And so ----
Mr. Meadows. But we need to be careful there because as we
go into that, if you take that scenario out further and you
apply it to other things like Social Security, we run into a
number of things that potentially--her argument doesn't hold
weight because of--the counterargument that is made in the
exact opposite paradigm for Social Security, quote,
``privatization.'' Would you not agree with that?
Ms. Greszler. I don't think that the government should be
investing the money themselves, but that's why you take it out
of a defined benefit plan and you give ownership to the
individual because you can look at the state and local pension
plans and say, yes, they have the ability to invest in whatever
they want. And what they've done with that in large part is
play politics with pensions, promise ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay.
Ms. Greszler.--far more than they can afford to pay.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I am running out of time. So let me
say this. Mr. Kile, I would ask you to do the same and say--you
know, there has been a lot of accusations that CBO is not
accurate on this, which I find really interesting because when
CBO says something that we like, we use it; when they don't, we
really condemn it. Both sides do that. I find that they are
condemning you today, but yet, they use the CBO to justify
their arguments on the Affordable Care Act at the same time. So
I find it a little bit--a little hypocrisy in that. So here is
what I would ask you to do is look at your study as it relates
to the charges that Ms. Simon made in terms of what you didn't
consider. And I heard you loud and clear. And I want you to see
if you can address that. I can probably instruct you a little
bit more to get back to this committee than I can as a request
for the others. What would be a reasonable time period to do
that, in 60 days?
Mr. Biggs. Let me talk to my colleagues and figure out when
we can get back to you on that, but ----
Mr. Meadows. Okay. If you can give us an update with a time
frame within the next 14 days so that way we know what to
respond to, that would be great.
Mr. Biggs. Yes, we can do that.
Mr. Meadows. All right. I want to thank all of you, and Mr.
Chairman, I will yield back to you.
Mr. Issa. I thank the gentleman. Thank you for yielding
back.
I am going to be brief. I don't anticipate a full second
round, but the ranking member may have some additional
questions. But I want to just try to bring this to some
summation of some things that I hope we agree on. Ms. Simon, I
will go to you first. There has been a lot of discussion. If
this committee, which certainly has the jurisdiction, the
capability, did a modernization of the pension and allowed
people, let's say, at their fifth year when they vest under the
current system to opt into a rollover to a TSP, all the funds
including our portion, would that be something that you believe
could be in their best interest if they decide it is in their
best interest?
Ms. Simon. No, absolutely not. The current Federal
retirement system really was created in the era of Ronald
Reagan. It was a bipartisan compromise ----
Mr. Issa. No, I understand ----
Ms. Simon.--and ----
Mr. Issa. I understand how we did away with the 2.5 percent
and no Social Security, went into this ----
Ms. Simon. That's correct.
Mr. Issa.--defined benefits, but I would like you to answer
the question ----
Ms. Simon. But the ----
Mr. Issa.--as to why you would object to essentially people
taking control of the entire amount that would otherwise be
held by the government for decades and putting it into
something that they could borrow against, they could invest
against, and they could use as they please, as they do more
often in the private sector?
Ms. Simon. The reason we would oppose that and we would
advise our members strongly not to do that, God forbid if
Congress did vote to take away people's defined benefit plan is
because ----
Mr. Issa. Ma'am, I don't mind your using a lot of terms,
but let's just agree to one. We are saying if Congress decided
to give them the option at their option and their option only
to opt out so please don't use the word ``take away.''
Ms. Simon. Oh, I ----
Mr. Issa. When we give an option, it is not a taking away
of a right.
Ms. Simon. I was referring to a proposal that would
grandfather in people--the option would only be available to
existing employees and new employees would have no ----
Mr. Issa. Right. No, and I am simply ----
Ms. Simon.--opportunity ----
Mr. Issa.--asking a question that I think Heritage and AEI
were referring to, which is--and I think CBO and GAO would
score it as likely neutral in the long run. It might cost us in
the 10-year window because the money would disappear even
though technically it isn't ours. But leaving all of the
technical stuff, simply the question of, as a representative --
--
Ms. Simon. Yes, I ----
Mr. Issa.--of these employees, do you believe that they
should have that choice, and if not, why?
Ms. Simon. The arguments, as Mr. Meadows said, are the same
arguments against Social Security privatization. These
retirement savings vehicles put all the risk of future
retirement income adequacy onto the worker. If the stock market
happens to decline by a substantial amount at the moment that a
particular worker is--has chosen or is forced to retire, that
will have a huge ----
Mr. Issa. Okay. I ----
Ms. Simon.--impact on their ability ----
Mr. Issa. I have your answer ----
Ms. Simon.--to support themselves in retirement ----
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Simon.--yet if they have a ----
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Simon.--defined benefit ----
Mr. Issa. Thank you.
Ms. Simon.--that won't happen to them.
Mr. Issa. I understand your answer. But I want to ask from
a standpoint of CBO particularly. Is it reasonably easy for you
to--or maybe GAO would study it, and then there is Heritage,
who is so kind to study us. The performance of TSPs on behalf
of the workforce over any given period and the performance of
their pension plan over the same period of time, 5 years, 10
years, 20 years, I am going to suspect that you can come back
to us and show that TSP--which is not an invest in just
anything; it is a broad investment base--has outperformed the
defined benefit plan and every single Federal worker, given
that same amount of dollars moved into the other plan, would
get more money over any period of time we could study going
back to Reagan. Ms. Greszler?
Ms. Greszler. Yes, that's absolutely what you would see.
And by definition, if you're giving workers the choice to have
this money, the exact same amount, there's really not a way
that they would have less. All they have is a choice. As Ms.
Simon pointed out, those funds are ineffectively invested in
the Treasury. They could be ineffectively invested in Treasury
by that worker's own option, and that's the lowest return they
would get. If they make other choices, they would have higher
returns.
Mr. Issa. Mr. Kile, I am not going to ask you the same
question; I am going to add to it for a moment. And I am not
asking you to shoot completely from the hip, but as you know,
the Federal workforce has a disincentive to stay past their
pension vesting. When you reach--depending upon the scale,
let's just say 55 and you have got 25 years, you are really
working for a fraction of your pay. And if you leave and go to
another job, you can immediately collect both pay and
healthcare benefits for life with escalations. If you stay, you
essentially have a de minimis accrual. Is that correct?
Mr. Kile. That sounds correct, yes.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So if--although ----
Mr. Kile. Actually, Congressman, the accrual stays the
same, but I understand your point about what is being foregone
with the other job.
Mr. Issa. Right, but--yes. Okay. So the question is if
there is a disincentive for the Federal workforce to stay and
if we were to go to a system that essentially in perpetuity we
say, look, we are going to continue allowing you to roll your
money into your own defined benefits plan, we are in a sense--
no matter how long you work, your money continues to accrue and
compound and outperform, as we have been told--and I think it
will be documented--outperform the government's defined benefit
plan, would we in your estimation be able to hold onto the
Federal workforce longer and as a result have a lower cost that
comes with the turnover of experienced Federal employees?
Mr. Kile. That's something that we would have to look into.
We haven't studied the--that effect on turnover and--or
retirement. There are a fair number of employees who continue
on beyond their retirement eligibility and forego some of those
retirement benefits that you alluded to.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Well, to the extent that you have the
ability to study it, I would appreciate knowing about it.
Ultimately, this hearing today really is about what is in
the best interest of the Federal employment base.
I am going to go to the ranking member in just a moment,
but I just want to--I don't expect to do an additional follow-
up. I think a lot of areas were dealt with here today. The one
that I heard both here and when I was listening in the other
room was that we do not currently have a system that determines
what the fair compensation is in a region for essentially a
like job, meaning what we tell our contractors is they must pay
a prevailing wage, and they go out and they advertise and
people come in and that establishes a prevailing wage. At least
with some regularity that wage would be much less. And when it
is more, generally, we are asked to pay when it is more but we
don't get the benefit when the prevailing wage is less. And I
think I heard that fairly broadly. And it is the inherent
nature of a one-size-fits-all step system. Would most or all of
you agree to that? Okay.
Ms. Simon, I will note that you shook your head no, that
you believe every employee being paid in Mississippi and in
Silicon Valley the exact same wage is okay.
Ms. Simon. Well, in the Federal Government, they aren't.
Mr. Issa. Exactly. In the Federal Government, in
Mississippi if it is too low, there is no process to take it
away, but in Silicon Valley, we do pay a COLA premium, right?
Ms. Simon. Are you asking me if the Federal Government
lowers wages ever?
Mr. Issa. Yes. Is there a negative COLA?
Ms. Simon. Not that I am familiar with.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. I go to the ranking member for his
comments.
Mr. Cummings. I am going to be very brief. I want to again
thank all of you for being here today. And I want to associate
myself with what Mr. Sarbanes said, my colleague from Maryland.
You know, we can race to the bottom and cut, cut, cut, or we
can have a high standard for our employees. So, I mean, if we
want to do these comparisons and look to see what we should be
cutting, looking at private sector we ought to reverse it
because it is not only what we are doing for the employees.
We are also concerned about what the employees are doing
for our constituents. And we want employees that want to be
around, we want high morale, and I know the lady from the
District of Columbia talks about this all the time, that we
should have high expectations of our employees, and I have
talked about that. And we talk about it because it is so
important.
You know, before you got here, Ms. Norton, they were
talking about the fact that, you know, some of the employees
are able to get maybe discounted babysitting services or the
bus fare, being able to get--I mean, those are things that are
incentives for people to work for us. Am I right, Ms. Simon?
Ms. Simon. Yes.
Mr. Cummings. Yes. And so I think we need to be racing to
the top as opposed to trying to go the opposite direction of
racing in that direction. And again, I am concerned about our
customers. I am concerned about the people who sent us here
because I want them to have good services.
I remember when I first came to the Congress, I told my
office--I still do this--I wanted to run my office like a law
firm because I had practiced law for many years. And I wanted
to run it like a law firm because I wanted the people that came
into the office to feel like they were being treated as if, you
know, they were paying us millions of dollars because I wanted
them to have high expectations of the staff. And then the staff
felt good about what they were doing. We were able to put out a
good product.
And again, I talked earlier about how, you know, people
come into Federal service, the ones I have talked to, because
they really, really want to make a contribution to society.
And so, again, I want to thank you all for being here, and
I will yield back.
Mr. Issa. Thank you. And I would like to close with just a
question, which is completely not going to be difficult for
three out of the five of you. From CBO, GAO and--are you on
FEHBP? Are you a Federal worker? You are not?
Ms. Simon. No.
Mr. Issa. You are on the union side. So for two of you,
what do you think about the Federal Employee Healthcare Benefit
Plan? Do you feel that in this era of everyone--this
consternation about health care, do you feel that you are in
the quiet of the storm by having hundreds of choices and
programs that you can choose from for your health care as a
Federal worker?
Mr. Kile. So I think I'd rather go back to the--to what we
say in the report where we talk about the cost of benefits by
type rather than, you know, providing a personal opinion.
Mr. Issa. Okay. So you are good with the report. I will
ask. Health care as a Federal employee receiving FEHBP with an
80 percent match from the Federal Government, are you pretty
happy?
Mr. Goldenkoff. I am happy, but I have nothing to compare
it to either and, you know, I have no private sector experience
on this outside of my area of expertise.
Mr. Issa. Okay. Well, I am going to close by saying I miss
it. I have been in Obamacare now for a number of years, and I
truly miss the Federal Employee Health Benefit Plan, which I am
proud to say, for all the discussions that may go on, continues
to be a program that is able to bid all over the country and
try to meet the needs of the Federal workforce. So I say that
because this hearing is important.
The ranking member is right about one thing. We do need to
motivate the Federal workforce. We do need to remind people
that they do serve, and although we get to determine what the
fair price is when we employ them, at the same time, it is not
their problem if they are, if you will, compensated at a rate
that statistics show might not be the same. They came to work,
they took the schedule, and they performed the jobs.
And so I want to thank you all for your testimony today.
The record will stay open for three legislative days in order
to have any extensions or questions answered.
And with that, we stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:57 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

APPENDIX

----------

Material Submitted for the Hearing Record

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

[all]
