- PROTECTING THE HOMELAND: AN EXAMINATION OF FEDERAL EFFORTS TO SUPPORT STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING THE HOMELAND: AN EXAMINATION OF FEDERAL EFFORTS TO SUPPORT
STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COUNTERTERRORISM, LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND INTELLIGENCE

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

MAY 16, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-12
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-104 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
Sean Jones, Legislative Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COUNTERTERRORISM, LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND INTELLIGENCE

August Pfluger, Texas, Chairman
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island,
Tony Gonzales, Texas                     Ranking Member
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         J. Luis Correa, California
Elijah Crane, Arizona                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Dina Titus, Nevada
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Michael Koren, Subcommittee Staff Director
Brittany Carr, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Alice Hayes, Subcommittee Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                  Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Daniel S. Goldman, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Luke Jennette, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Seth Magaziner, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Rhode Island, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    23
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    25

Witnesses

Chief Michael Gerke, Chief of Police, Odessa Police Department:
Oral Statement.................................................    28
Prepared Statement.............................................    30
Sheriff Don Barnes, Sheriff, Orange County, California:
Oral Statement.................................................    31
Prepared Statement.............................................    32
Mr. Michael Cox, Commissioner, Boston Police Department:
Oral Statement.................................................    38
Prepared Statement.............................................    40
Mr. Rafael Mangual, Senior Fellow and Head of Research Policing
and Public Safety Initiative, Manhattan Institute for Policy
Research:
Oral Statement.................................................    43
Prepared Statement.............................................    45

For the Record

The Honorable Seth Magaziner, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Rhode Island, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Letter From Brady..............................................     7
Statement of Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.......     9
The Honorable J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California:
Letter From Chicago CRED Founder Arne Duncan...................    57
Article, Trace.................................................    72
The Honorable Daniel S. Goldman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York:
Article, New York Times........................................    62

Appendix

Questions From Honorable Laurel M. Lee for Michael Gerke.........    77
Question From Honorable Laurel M. Lee for Don Barnes.............    77
Questions From Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., for Michael A. Cox    78

PROTECTING THE HOMELAND: AN EXAMINATION OF FEDERAL EFFORTS TO SUPPORT
STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT

----------

Tuesday, May 16, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and
Intelligence, and the
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 9 a.m., at
Room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. August Pfluger
[Chairman of the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law
Enforcement, and Intelligence] presiding.
Present from the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law
Enforcement, and Intelligence: Representatives Pfluger,
D'Esposito, Crane, Brecheen, Magaziner, Carter, Correa, and
Goldman.
Present from the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law
Enforcement, and Intelligence: Representatives D'Esposito,
LaLota, Strong, Brecheen, Carter, and Goldman.
Also present: Representative Thompson, Higgins, Lee, Steel,
Ivey, Titus, and Jackson Lee.
Chairman Pfluger. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement and
Intelligence, and Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology will come to order. The purpose of this hearing is
to examine the state of U.S. law enforcement and how the
Department of Homeland Security is engaged with State and local
authorities across America to fight crime, as well as prepare
for disaster response. Without objection, the gentlewoman from
California, Mrs. Michelle Steel, the gentleman from Louisiana,
Mr. Clay Higgins, and the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Laurel
Lee, are permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions of the
witnesses.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. Good
morning. We are holding an important hearing during National
Police Week, a time when we recognize and honor the sacrifices
and service of our men and women in law enforcement from across
the country. I am pleased to have some of my own constituents
here that are joining us today. I would first like to recognize
Odessa Police Chief Michael Gerke as a witness today. In
addition, I am pleased to have Midland County Sheriff David
Criner and his wife Judy in the audience with us.
I have had the luxury of getting to know both of these
gentlemen as well over the last 2 years, and I know that Chief
Gerke will provide some valuable insight as to what issues
rural police departments are facing throughout the country.
Unfortunately, I think we have forgotten what it means to
support our men and women in law enforcement who serve our
communities every day, many of whom, well, let me strike that.
All of whom are real-life heroes.
Last year, 246 law enforcement officers were tragically
killed in the line of duty. This year, there have already been
41 officers killed in the line of duty serving their
communities. Just this past Thursday, on May 11, Sergeant
Joshua Clouse of the Cameron Police Department in Texas was
shot and killed by a subject who was wanted for shooting his
wife during a domestic violence incident earlier in the night
as he and other officers executed a search warrant. Sergeant
Clouse was an army veteran and had a wife and two children. He
is a hero, and I pray for his family and friends.
We have also forgotten the importance of holding people
accountable for engaging in criminal activities and preying on
law-abiding citizens. From increases in aggravated assaults,
robberies, and retail theft to dealing illicit fentanyl, I
think many Americans no longer feel safe in their communities.
Some cities are even releasing criminals back into their
communities due to zero bail policies and downgrading the
sentencing for felonies, allowing these bad actors to continue
committing crimes. What message is this sending to career
criminals? It is not one of law and order, but instead
encourages lawlessness across the homeland and is unacceptable.
While criminals are not being held accountable for their
actions, our law enforcement officers face extremely low morale
in many places. Unfortunately, in some places that is due to
anti-police sentiment. Extreme budget cuts, rogue legal
reforms, and the media bias against law enforcement have
resulted in significant recruitment and retention challenges
for State and local law enforcement agencies across the
country. These factors are not only preventing law enforcement
from carrying out their duties to protect Americans, but they
are also impeding police agencies across the homeland from
having the resources to further train officers and prevent
other mishaps.
If we continue down the path of cutting law enforcement
budgets, police departments will be left with a difficult
choice between lowering recruitment standards or being unable
to meet their hiring needs. This committee has an important
role to play as we oversee the Department of Homeland Security,
which looks to support, let me say that again, support State
and local, Tribal, territorial law enforcement agencies in
their efforts to keep our communities safe, secure, and
resilient.
From a Homeland Security standpoint, it has been over 20
years since 9/11 happened, yet we still have challenges for the
timely sharing of information between the Federal Government
and State and local agencies. While we have made significant
progress, I worry that there continue to be gaps in how we
share information in a consistent and timely manner. We have to
work together to overcome these barriers, as information
sharing is critical to combat the wide variety of threats that
we face today. In particular, when it comes to fusion centers,
which are primarily State-funded facilities established with
the purpose of information sharing between those levels, there
is a common saying that says if you have seen one fusion
center, you have seen one fusion center.
It is important that we ensure DHS is properly supporting
fusion centers as they serve as focal points in State and urban
areas for the receipt, analysis, gathering, and sharing of
threat-related information. States like Texas have many
different threats impacting their communities. I have seen
first-hand how metropolitan areas like the one I visited in San
Antonio can coordinate seamlessly between Federal, State, and
local levels.
Furthermore, DHS provides various Federal grants to assist
State, local, and territorial partners. We need to ensure that
these grant programs continue and that they are effective in
doing out what their mission says that they should be doing.
Unfortunately, rural areas like my district do not experience
that luxury and must rely on fusion centers that are located in
other areas. There have been numerous times in the last month
where Texas, DPS, or CBP were pursuing human smugglers, drug
traffickers, or other malign actors through small towns in West
Texas along the border that have led to catastrophic loss of
life. Had a fusion center been established that caters to the
unique needs of those rural areas, maybe it could have been
easier for local and State law enforcement agencies to better
coordinate with CBP and DPS. Today, I hope that we can examine
this issue. I hope that we can find ways to highlight the
information sharing and where it can be more readily available
and more effective.
Last, it is important that our Nation must restore a sense
of appreciation for the men and women who wear the uniform, who
protect our communities, and who have been willing to sacrifice
their own lives for the betterment of their communities. We
have a very distinguished panel of witnesses to testify about
the challenges between State and local law enforcement
agencies, both in rural and in urban areas. I would like to
thank all of our witnesses, not just for being here today, but
more importantly, for you and your family's sacrifices in being
willing to serve our Nation.
[The statement of Chairman Pfluger follows:]
Statement of Chairman August Pfluger
May 16, 2023
Good morning, we are holding this important hearing during National
Police Week, a time when we recognize and honor the sacrifices and
service of our men and women in law enforcement from across the
country.
I am pleased to have some of my constituents join us today. First,
I would like to recognize Odessa Police Chief Michael Gerke as a
witness today. In addition, I am pleased to have Midland County Sherrif
David Criner and his wife, Judy, in the audience. I have had the luxury
of getting to know both of these gentlemen well over the last 2 years
and I know that Chief Gerke will provide some valuable insight as to
what issues rural police departments are facing.
Unfortunately, we've forgotten what it means to support our men and
women in law enforcement who serve our communities every day--many of
whom are real-life heroes.
Last year, 246 law enforcement officers were tragically killed in
the line of duty. This year, there have already been 41 officers killed
in the line of duty serving their communities.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Officer Down Memorial Page, https://www.odmp.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Just this past Thursday, on May 11, Sergeant Joshua Clouse of the
Cameron Police Department in Texas, was shot and killed by a subject,
who was wanted for shooting his wife during a domestic violence
incident earlier in the night, as he and other officers executed a
search warrant.\2\ Sergeant Clouse was an Army veteran, had a wife, and
two children.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Officer Down Memorial Page, Sergeant Joshua I. Clouse, https://
www.odmp.org/officer/26723-sergeant-joshua-i-clouse.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Sergeant Clouse is a hero. I sincerely pray for his family and
friends.
We've also forgotten the importance of holding people accountable
for engaging in criminal activities and preying on law-abiding
citizens--from increases in aggravated assaults, robberies, and retail
theft to dealing illicit fentanyl, Americans no longer feel safe in
their communities.
Some cities are even releasing criminals back into their
communities due to zero bail policies and downgrading the sentencing
for felonies, allowing these bad actors to continue committing crimes.
What message is this sending to career criminals?
It is not one of law and order but instead encourages lawlessness
across the homeland--this is unacceptable.
While criminals are not being held accountable for their actions,
our law enforcement officers face extremely low morale due to anti-
police sentiments.
Extreme budget cuts, rogue legal reforms, and the media bias
against law enforcement have resulted in significant recruitment and
retention challenges for State and local law enforcement agencies
across the country.
These factors are not only preventing law enforcement from carrying
out their duties to protect Americans, but they are also impeding
police agencies across the homeland from having the resources to
further train their officers and prevent any police misconduct.
If we continue down the path of cutting law enforcement budgets,
police departments will be left with the difficult choice between
lowering their recruitment standards or being unable to meet their
hiring needs.
This committee has an important role to play as we oversee the
Department of Homeland Security, which looks to support State, local,
Tribal, territorial law enforcement agencies in their efforts to keep
our communities safe, secure, and resilient.
From a homeland security perspective, it has been over 20 years
since 9/11, and we still have challenges for the timely sharing of
information between the Federal Government and State and local law
enforcement agencies.
While we've made some significant progress, I worry that there
continues to be gaps in how we share information in a consistent,
timely, and effective manner.
We must work together to overcome these barriers as information
sharing is critical to combat the wide variety of threats from
criminals and terrorists.
In particular, when it comes to Fusion Centers, which are primarily
State-funded facilities established with the purpose of information
sharing between State, local, Tribal, territorial, and Federal
agencies, there is a common saying, ``If you've seen one Fusion Center,
you've seen one Fusion Center.''
It is important that we ensure DHS is properly supporting Fusion
Centers as they serve as focal points in States and urban areas for the
receipt, analysis, gathering, and sharing of threat-related
information.
States, like Texas, have many different threats impacting their
communities. I have seen first-hand how metropolitan areas, like the
one I visited in San Antonio, can coordinate seamlessly between
Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
Furthermore, DHS provides various Federal grants to assist State,
local, Tribal, and territorial partners. We need to ensure these grant
programs are effectively assisting law enforcement as they work to
carry out their important mission.
Unfortunately, rural areas, like my district, do not experience
that luxury and must rely on Fusion Centers hundreds of miles away.
There have been numerous times in the last month where Texas DPS or CBP
were pursuing human smugglers and drug traffickers through small towns
in west Texas along the border that have led to catastrophic loss of
life. Had a Fusion Center been established that caters to the unique
needs of rural areas, local law enforcement agencies could have better
coordinated with CBP and DPS.
I hope we can examine this issue today and find ways to better
share information to our rural communities.
Last, it is important that our Nation must restore a sense of
appreciation and respect for our men and women in law enforcement who
serve our communities.
We have a distinguished panel of witnesses to testify about the
challenges State and local law enforcement agencies in both rural and
urban areas face in responding to crimes in their communities.
Thank you to all our witnesses for being with us this morning, and
I look forward to our discussion on this critical topic.

Chairman Pfluger. I now recognize the Ranking Minority
Member on this committee, Mr. Magaziner, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. I want to thank all of
our witnesses for being here, and particularly our law
enforcement witnesses. Thank you for your selfless service.
Every day, you and the men and women you serve alongside put
your lives at risk to protect and serve this Nation. While this
is National Police Week, we honor your service every day. We
are grateful for the sacrifices you and your families make, and
we particularly honor those officers who have made the ultimate
sacrifice and have died in the line of duty. I know I speak for
everyone on both of our committees when I express my gratitude
to you in our commitment to supporting the funding, the
staffing, and the technology that you need to do your jobs
safely and effectively.
We also want to highlight the importance of strong
relationships between law enforcement agencies and the
communities they serve. Community policing models based upon
respect and collaboration between law enforcement and civilians
have consistently been shown to be effective in reducing crime
and improving safety of both officers and civilians. Police
officers are often the first responders on the scene of
overdoses, and we must ensure that officers have the support
and the training to respond effectively in the midst of this
epidemic. In order for us to reduce crime and make police work
safer for those who put on the uniform, we must continue to
fight for common-sense gun safety laws so that neighborhoods
are safe from gun violence and police officers are never
outgunned.
In the last several years, 504 police officers were killed
on duty in the United States, and of those, 456 officers were
fatally shot with a gun, meaning that 90 percent of line-of-
duty deaths were perpetrated with a gun. This gun violence
epidemic has only become worse in recent years. From 2020 to
2021, the number of police officers fatally shot rose 35
percent. It should be no surprise that these increasing
occurrences of preventable officer deaths are three times more
likely to occur in States with weak gun laws.
States like mine that have passed common-sense gun safety
laws like background checks, red-flag laws, and ghost gun and
high-capacity magazine bans generally see lower levels of gun
violence and officers killed on duty than States with weaker
gun safety laws.
Another factor in preventing violence is strong
collaboration and information sharing between Federal and local
law enforcement agencies. I share the Chairman's concern and
our focus on this area because it is particularly important in
preventing acts of terrorism, which is a key focus of our
subcommittee. We must build on the lessons learned from the
fusion center model and ensure that collaboration between State
and local law enforcement in anticipating and neutralizing
threats, both foreign and domestic, is as seamless as possible.
Information sharing between Federal and local agencies is vital
in neutralizing terror threats and preventing mass casualty
events.
I find it disturbing that some of our colleagues have taken
to calling for Federal law enforcement agencies like the FBI
and the ATF to be defunded. I know that they do not speak for
all in their party, and they certainly do not speak for all
Americans, but this rhetoric is dangerous for many reasons,
including the fact that these agencies play a vital role in
supporting local law enforcement in preventing and responding
to mass casualty events.
My hope is that this hearing will provide an insight to us
as legislators on the best practices from around the country,
as we work together in our shared goal to improve the safety of
our homeland and all of its citizens. In addition to having an
earnest conversation about gun safety laws and fusion centers,
I hope to hear from today's witnesses about ways that the
Federal Government can support your efforts to keep communities
safe, including through improved information sharing. I want to
thank the Ranking Member--I am sorry--I want to thank the
Chairman for calling this hearing. I ask unanimous consent to
insert into the record two statements from the Brady: United
Against Gun Violence and Gifford Law Center detailing how weak
gun laws endanger law enforcement. I also ask for unanimous
consent that Congresswoman Jackson Lee and Congressman Ivey be
allowed to sit in on today's hearing and question the
witnesses. With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Magaziner follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Seth Magaziner
May 16, 2023
To our law enforcement witnesses, thank you for your selfless
service. Every day, you, and the men and women you serve alongside in
uniform put your lives at risk to protect and serve this Nation. This
may be Police Week, but we honor your service every day, we are
grateful for the sacrifices you and your families make, and we
particularly honor those officers who have made the ultimate sacrifice
and have died in the line of duty.
I speak for all of the Democrats on our subcommittees when I
express my gratitude to you, and our commitment to supporting the
funding, the staffing, and the technology you need to do your jobs
safely and effectively. We also want to highlight the importance of
strong relationships between law enforcement agencies and the
communities they serve. Community policing models based upon respect
and collaboration between law enforcement and civilians have
consistently been shown to be effective in reducing crime and improving
safety for both officers and civilians.
Police officers are often the first responders on the scene of
overdoses, and we must ensure that officers have the support and
training to respond effectively in the midst of this epidemic. And in
order for us to reduce crime and make police work safer for those who
put on the uniform, we must continue to fight for common-sense gun
safety laws so that neighborhoods are safe from gun violence and police
officers are never outgunned.
From 2012 to 2021, 504 police officers were killed in the United
States. Out of those, 456 officers were fatally shot with a gun--
meaning that 90 percent of line-of-duty deaths were perpetrated with a
gun. This gun violence epidemic has only become worse in recent years.
From 2020 to 2021, the number of police officers fatally shot rose 35
percent--and it should be no surprise that these increasing occurrences
of preventable officer deaths are three times more likely to occur in
places with weak gun laws. States like mine that have passed common-
sense gun safety laws like background checks, red flag laws, and ghost
gun and high-capacity magazine bans, generally see lower levels of gun
violence and officers killed on duty than States with weaker gun safety
laws.
Another factor in preventing violence is strong collaboration and
information sharing between Federal and local law enforcement agencies.
This is particularly important in preventing acts of terrorism, a key
focus of our subcommittee. We must build on the strength of the fusion
center model and ensure that collaboration between State and local law
enforcement in anticipating and neutralizing terror threats, both
foreign and domestic, is as seamless as possible. Information sharing
between Federal and local agencies is vital in neutralizing terror
threats and preventing mass casualty events.
I find it disturbing that some of our colleagues on the far right
have taken to calling for Federal law enforcement agencies like the FBI
and ATF to be defunded. I know they do not speak for all in their
party, and they certainly do not speak for all Americans. But this
rhetoric is dangerous for many reasons, including the fact that these
agencies play a vital role in supporting local law enforcement in
preventing and responding to terror events.
My hope is that this hearing will provide insight to us as
legislators, and best practices for those watching around the country,
as we work together in our shared goal to improve the safety of our
homeland and all of its citizens. In addition to having an earnest
conversation about common-sense gun laws, I hope to hear from today's
witnesses about other ways the Federal Government can support your
efforts to keep our communities safe, including through improved
information sharing.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member. So ordered
on the request.
[The information follows:]

Letter From Brady Submitted by Ranking Member Seth Magaziner
The Honorable August Pfluger,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and
Intelligence, House Committee on Homeland Security, 1124
Longworth House Office Building, Washington, DC 20515.

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito,
Chairman, Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology, House
Committee on Homeland Security, 1508 Longworth House Office
Building, Washington, DC 20515.

The Honorable Seth Magaziner,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and
Intelligence, House Committee on Homeland Security, 1218
Longworth House Office Building, Washington, DC 20515.

The Honorable Troy Carter,
Ranking Member, Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology,
House Committee on Homeland Security, 1442 Cannon House Office
Building, Washington, DC 20515.

May 15, 2023.

Dear Chairmen Pfluger and D'Esposito and Ranking Members Magaziner
and Carter: Founded in 1974, Brady works across Congress, courts, and
communities, uniting gun owners and non-gun owners alike, to take
action, not sides, and end America's gun violence epidemic. Our
organization today carries the name of Jim and Sarah Brady. As you
know, Jim was shot and severely injured in the assassination attempt on
President Ronald Reagan. As victims of gun violence and life-long gun
owners, Jim and Sarah dedicated the rest of their lives to passing
Federal legislation requiring background checks for gun sales. Brady
continues to uphold Jim and Sarah's legacy by uniting Americans from
coast to coast, red and blue, young and old, liberal and conservative,
to combat the epidemic of gun violence.
We are grateful to the committee for holding a hearing on the
Federal efforts to support law enforcement throughout the country. We
hope that this hearing will foster important discussions regarding
Federal policies which affect the safety of the public and the law
enforcement officers charged with protecting them.
Such a hearing would be remiss if it did not address perhaps the
greatest danger to law enforcement officers in America: the flow of
firearms to the illegal market. As you likely are aware, firearm
injuries are the leading cause of death among police officers
feloniously killed in the line of duty, responsible for 84 percent of
all such deaths in 2021.\1\ Further, analysis has shown that felonious
officer deaths by firearm have increased by 22 percent in the last
decade.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Federal Bureau of Investigations, Law Enforcement Officers
Killed in the Line of Duty Statistics for 2021, November 9, 2022.
Available at https://leb.fbi.gov/bulletin-highlights/additional-
highlights/crime-data-law-enforcement-officers-killed-in-the-line-of-
duty-statistics-for-2021.
\2\ Grace Hauck, A `disturbing trend': More police are dying from
gun violence today than a decade ago, USA Today, January 11, 2023.
Available at https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2023/01/11/
police-officer-deaths-2022-report/11017969002/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Guns do not simply appear out of thin air into cities like Oakland,
Baltimore, Chicago, and Washington, DC--all cities with strong gun laws
and high gun violence homicide rates year over year. Instead, tens of
thousands of guns are trafficked across State lines every year,\3\
often from States with weak laws to States with much stronger laws.\4\
Most cities impacted the greatest by gun violence have few, if any,
Federal firearms licensees (FFLs) within their city limits; rather,
FFLs that are the sources of crime guns to these places typically sit
outside the communities in less diverse and more affluent suburbs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ G. Aisch and J. Keller, How Gun Traffickers Get Around State
Gun Laws, New York Times: 13 November 2015. Available at https://
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/11/12/us/gun-traffickers-smuggling-
state-gun-laws.html.
\4\ Department of Justice, Data & Statistics: U.S. Firearms Trace
Data by State, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives:
Accessed 12 December 2022. Available at https://www.atf.gov/resource-
center/data-statistics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Crucially, just a small percentage of gun dealers are responsible
for diverting the overwhelming majority of guns to the criminal market.
According to the latest available data, about 90 percent of crime guns
can be traced back to roughly 5 percent of licensed gun dealers.\5\ Gun
tracing--the method for identifying a gun's sequence of ownership from
manufacture to first retail sale \6\--is used to link a suspect with a
firearm in a criminal investigation, to identify potential traffickers,
and to detect in-State and inter-State patterns in the sources and
kinds of crime guns. Trace data used to be publicly accessible, pulling
back the curtain on negligent and unlawful gun dealers, but the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) has interpreted the
Tiahrt Amendments as blocking it from releasing that data, shielding
the industry from scrutiny.\7\ Congress should eliminate this
impediment to the disclosure of trace data, to ensure transparency and
provide lawmakers, researchers, and law enforcement agencies with a
thorough understanding of the flow of illegal guns.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Department of Treasury, Commerce in Firearms in the United
States, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms: February 2000.
Available at http://www.joebrower.com/RKBA/RKBA_FILES/GOV_DOCS/
BATF_report_020400.pdf.
\6\ Department of Justice, National Tracing Center, Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives. Accessed 12 December 2022.
Available at https://www.atf.gov/firearms/national-tracing-center.
\7\ W. Stachelberg, A. Gerney, and C. Parsons, Blindfolded, and
with One Hand Tied Behind the Back, Center for American Progress: 19
March 2013. Available at https://www.americanprogress.org/article/
blindfolded-and-with-one-hand-tied-behind-the-back/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Gun traffickers also obtain firearms through burglary and theft
from FFLs that lack adequate physical security or recordkeeping. Nearly
175,000 firearms were reported ``stolen or lost'' by FFLs between 2004
and 2011,\8\ and burglaries and robberies of FFLs increased 48 percent
and 175 percent, respectively, between 2012 and 2016.\9\ However, there
are virtually no Federal security requirements required of gun dealers
to prevent theft. Congress should impose security requirements for
licensed gun dealers to prevent the theft and loss of firearms that
further supply the criminal market and endanger the lives of law
enforcement officers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Department of Justice, Review of ATF's Federal Firearms
Licensee Inspection Program, Evaluation and Inspections Division,
Office of the Inspector General: April 2013. Available at https://
oig.justice.gov/reports/2013/e1305.pdf.
\9\ C. Parsons and E. Vargas, Stolen Guns in America: A State by
State Analysis, Center for American Progress: 25 July 2017. Available
at https://www.americanprogress.org/article/stolen-guns-america/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While ATF is the only agency with oversight of the gun industry,
and additionally provides critical crime gun tracing services to
Federal, State, and local law enforcement, it is woefully under-
resourced. Despite having a goal of inspecting all FFLs every 5 years,
the agency has consistently fallen well short of that,\10\ inspecting
only 12 percent to 13 percent of all dealers, pawnshops, and
manufacturers on average.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ DOJ, Review of ATF's Federal Firearms Licensee Inspection
Program.
\11\ Department of Justice, Fact Sheet--Facts and Figures for
Fiscal Year 2021, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives:
August 2022. Available at https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/fact-
sheet/fact-sheet-facts-and-figures-fiscal-year-2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ATF consistently falls short enforcing the law against the gun
industry, primarily because the gun lobby has tied the agency's hands
behind its back by denying it funding and hamstringing its leadership.
Without a fully resourced ATF, the small portion of gun dealers who are
diverting illegal weapons into communities will continue to go
unchecked, driving up rates of violence and crime. Congress should
provide adequate funding for ATF to ensure robust oversight of the
firearms industry to prevent the illegal diversion of firearms which
endanger law enforcement officers.
Brady has represented several law enforcement officers, and their
families, when they have fallen victim to guns diverted to the illegal
market due to the negligent and irresponsible behavior of gun industry
actors. We will continue to work on their behalf, but implore Congress
to work toward solutions that protect their safety.
Most Sincerely,
Mark A. Collins,
Director, Federal Policy, Brady.
______

Statement of Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence Submitted by
Ranking Member Seth Magaziner
May 16, 2023
how weak gun laws endanger law enforcement
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence was formed 30 years ago
after a mass shooting at a San Francisco law firm and renamed for
former Congresswoman Gabby Giffords after joining forces with the
organization she leads. Giffords Law Center fights for laws, policies,
and programs proven to save lives. We combine deep expertise with
tenacity and fierce dedication to lasting systemic change, and arm
advocates, legislators, and the media with the tools they need to
understand the facts about the gun violence crisis and the solutions
that will solve it. Giffords Law Center accomplishes this by filing
amicus briefs in cases challenging lifesaving gun laws, by tracking and
analyzing firearm legislation around the country, and by developing in-
depth reports on various aspects of our country's gun violence crisis.
In a little over 1 week, the 1-year mark of the massacre at Robb
Elementary in Uvalde, Texas, will be upon us. In the last month,
countless lives have been lost and irrevocably changed by the presence
of a gun: Less than 2 weeks ago 8 people, including several children,
lost their lives in Allen, Texas; a few days before that one person
lost their life and 4 others were injured in Atlanta, Georgia; a few
days before that 5 people lost their lives, including a 9-year-old in
Cleveland, Texas; almost a week before that, 9 teenagers were injured
in Jasper, Texas; and in the span of less than a week, 3 shootings
involving an innocent mistake by the victims resulted in their
victimization--mistakenly ringing the wrong doorbell, mistakenly
pulling into the wrong driveway, mistakenly entering the wrong car.
This list does not even account for a quarter of the shootings or
victims of gun violence in the last month.
This list also does not account for the innumerable law enforcement
officers who are called to respond to these dangerous situations and so
many more, putting their lives on the line to save the lives of
countless individuals, often becoming a victim themselves--physically
and mentally. In 2021, almost 73 percent of law enforcement officers
who died from felonious assaults were killed by firearms. This is a 36
percent increase over the number of officers killed by firearms in 2020
and the second leading cause of line-of-duty deaths of law enforcement
officers. One study found that the law enforcement officer homicide
rate was 3 times higher in States with high firearm ownership compared
with States with low firearm ownership.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ David I. Swedler, et al., ``Firearm Prevalence and Homicides of
Law Enforcement Officers in the United States,'' American Journal of
Public Health 105, no. 10 (October 2015): 2042-2048, doi:10.2105/
AJPH.2015.302749.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We cannot allow this violence to continue for the next generation.
Proposed gun law reforms, many of which have been introduced this
Congress, would make a difference, not just to keep the public safe but
to also protect law enforcement. Gun safety laws can reduce the
quantity of illegal firearms in circulation, make it difficult for
individuals who are prohibited from possessing guns to possess them,
and reduce the number of dangerous illegal modification devices
proliferating in communities. In these ways, they also help prevent and
reduce the myriad of incidents that lead to law enforcement officer
firearm-related death and injury. Some of the biggest dangers to law
enforcement involve firearms in the wrong hands. The life-saving
proposals described below, which enjoy the support of overwhelming
numbers of Americans and will protect our law enforcement officers,
just require action by this legislature.
assault weapons
Besides enabling mass shootings, assault weapons pose a particular
danger to law enforcement officers. From 2016 to 2018, 1 in 5 law
enforcement officers were killed in the line of duty by an assault
weapon. Assault weapons are extremely lethal and law enforcement, when
faced with assault weapons, are outgunned and under-trained; body armor
often does not protect them from these lethal weapons.
Assault weapons are designed to maximize the number of people shot
in the shortest amount of time. The key feature of assault weapons is
the ability to accept detachable large-capacity ammunition magazines,
which are magazines with a capacity of more than 10 rounds of
ammunition that allow a shooter to keep firing for longer periods of
time, increasing casualties and reducing victims' ability to escape or
intervene.
In July 2016, a gunman ambushed a group of police officers who were
assigned to a protest in the streets of Dallas, Texas. Five officers
were shot and killed, and 9 others were injured. The shooter used a
semi-automatic variant of a Kalashnikov AK-74 rifle to murder these
police officers. Although the shooter had received military training,
Federal law still enables anyone to access the kind of rifle he used
through legal channels. In addition to the rifle, the shooter carried a
handgun with a high-capacity magazine. Because the shooter and his
weapons were so dangerous, police initially thought there were multiple
shooters who ``planned to injure and kill as many law enforcement
officers as they could,'' and police had to use a bomb attached to a
remote control bomb disposal robot to stop the shooter.
This was a targeted attack on law enforcement that then-President
Barack Obama called a ``vicious, calculated, despicable attack'' and a
``tremendous tragedy.'' Dallas Police Chief David Brown said that
police efforts to identify the shooter were complicated by the fact
that up to 30 civilians were openly carrying rifles during the protest
and was quoted as saying, ``We're trying as best we can as a law
enforcement community to make it work so that citizens can express
their Second Amendment rights. But it's increasingly challenging when
people have AR-15s slung over their shoulder and they're in a crowd. We
don't know who the good guy is versus the bad guy when everyone starts
shooting.''
That same month (July 2016), in an unrelated incident, a man in
Baton Rouge, Louisiana, shot 6 police officers, killing 3, with a semi-
automatic assault rifle at a shopping complex near a convenience store
close to the Baton Rouge Police Department's Headquarters. The weapon
the shooter used to attack law enforcement was a variant of the weapon
deemed standard for the Israeli infantry's combat units. The officers
killed were Deputy Bradford Allen ``Brad'' Garafola, 45, who had been
with the East Baton Rouge Parish Sheriff's Office since 1992, and had 4
children; Officer Matthew Lane Gerald, 41, a former Marine who had been
with the BRPD for 4 months; and Corporal Montrell Lyle Jackson, 32, who
had been with the BRPD since 2006, and who had a 4-month-old child.
These two attacks were premeditated ambushes, where the shooter
chose assault weapons so they could outgun and kill as many police
officers as possible.
Congress must do more to restrict access to these deadly weapons.
We are glad Representative Cicilline introduced H.R. 698, the Assault
Weapons Ban Act, which would ban the future manufacture and sale of
assault weapons and large-capacity magazines. We are also glad
Representative Ivey introduced his bill, H.R. 2870, to prohibit the
sale of certain semiautomatic centerfire rifles and semiautomatic
centerfire shotguns to persons under 21.
armor-piercing handguns
Armor-piercing handguns, such as AK-47 pistols, are a kind of
assault weapon designed specifically to get around the regulation of
short-barreled rifles in the National Firearms Act. These handguns,
which fire ammunition traditionally used in rifles, combine those
weapons' armor-piercing capability with the concealability of a
handgun. As a result, they can pierce the standard body armor worn by
police but can be hidden under a coat or cloak. The National Firearms
Act subjected short-barreled rifles to strict taxation and registration
requirements to reduce the risk that concealable weapons firing rifle
ammunition posed to police. But now the gun industry is evading those
requirements through the development of armor-piercing handguns.
In February 2019, a 17-year veteran of the Milwaukee Police
Department and a Marine who served in Iraq, Matthew Rittner was killed
by an AK-47 pistol while he was executing a search warrant. An autopsy
revealed that the bullet pierced both lungs and his aorta. Prosecutors
said the other shots were fired through the door, nearly striking the
other officers. Bullets were also recovered from a garage door across
the alley from the home and from a chimney on top of the garage. ``The
defendant did admit that he knew that AK-47 ammunition was `devastating
ammunition' and that hitting someone in the chest with that round would
probably result in that person dying.''
The Law Enforcement Protection Act, which was introduced by former
Congresswoman Demings last Congress, would bring armor-piercing
handguns within the ambit of the National Firearms Act, so they are
regulated like short-barreled rifles. We urge Congress to take up and
pass such a bill.
stabilizing braces
Not content to simply evade the law through the development of
armor-piercing handguns, the gun industry has also designed devices
known as stabilizing braces to convert these handguns into true short-
barreled rifles. As noted above, these firearms can penetrate the body
armor commonly worn by law enforcement, meaning that they pose a
serious threat to the safety of police officers. ATF has recently
finalized a rule that formally classifies these weapons so that they
are properly subject to the National Firearms Act's provisions
regarding short-barreled rifles. However, a House Committee has
approved a resolution that threatens to rescind that rule, once again
putting officers in danger. We implore this Congress to vote against
this resolution, as passage would leave not only the public but also
law enforcement vulnerable to the threat of these concealable firearms
that are able to fire with rifle-like accuracy and firepower.
trafficking/straw purchased firearms
Laws against gun trafficking reduce the ways in which people at
risk of violence can obtain firearms. When people who should not have
access to firearms are limited in their means for accessing firearms,
public safety improves and lethal threats toward law enforcement
decline.
Gun traffickers take advantage of weaknesses in the law to obtain
large numbers of difficult-to-trace guns that are often used in crimes
without undergoing background checks.\2\ Gun trafficking can undermine
a State's strong gun safety laws,\3\ especially if a neighboring State
has weaker gun laws. For example, 74 percent of guns used in crimes in
New York State between 2010 and 2015 originated out-of-State. Nation-
wide, the percentage of out-of-State guns used in crimes was 29
percent. In addition, straw purchasers often obtain guns from sellers
who are known to openly collude with gun traffickers or to sell guns
without asking too many questions.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Philip J. Cook, et al., ``Some Sources Of Crime Guns In
Chicago: Dirty Dealers, Straw Purchasers, And Traffickers,'' Journal of
Criminal Law & Criminology 104, (October 2015): 717-760.
\3\ Daniel W. Webster, et al. ``Relationship between licensing,
registration, and other gun sales laws and the source State of crime
guns,'' Injury Prevention 7: no. 3 (September 2001): 184-189.
\4\ Garen Wintemute, ``Firearm Retailers' Willingness to
Participate in an Illegal Gun Purchase,'' Journal of Urban Health 87,
no. 5 (September 2010): 865-878, doi:10.1007/s11524-010-9489-6.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Straw purchases (in which one person falsely claims to be the gun
purchaser on behalf of another, who is usually ineligible to purchase
the firearm) are the most common channel identified in trafficking
investigations. One man in Indiana completed the proper paperwork to
purchase a firearm for his friend who lived in Chicago and was
ineligible to purchase firearms, which the man knew. In August 2021,
the friend and his brother killed 29-year-old Officer Ella French in
Chicago, Illinois, and critically wounded her partner using the straw
purchased firearm. Both men involved in the shooting were prohibited
from purchasing and possessing firearms because of their criminal
records. Because of this straw purchase, one cop is dead, and another
was injured.
On January 26, 2015, 31 members of the New Hope Police Department,
their relatives, and city employees were gathered at the New Hope City
Hall near Minneapolis for a swearing-in and awards ceremony. Officer
Beau Schoenhard, whose wife and 15-month-old son were nearby, was the
first officer to notice a man with a shotgun approach the crowd. The
man lifted the gun and began shooting. The attack landed Schoenhard and
fellow officer Joshua Eernisse in the hospital, and the man with the
gun was killed by police. The New Hope Police Chief later said the
scene resembled ``a war zone.'' The shooter had been formally committed
to a mental institution twice before and had been found incompetent to
stand trial for a previous crime. He was nevertheless able to obtain
the shotgun he used in the shooting and two other shotguns that the
police later found in his car through an on-line auction. Although he
was the highest bidder for these guns, the auction house required the
transactions to be processed at a gun store. He knew that he could not
pass a background check, so he asked his friend to go to the gun store
and buy the guns on his behalf (a straw purchase).
Milwaukee police officer Matthew Rittner was hit by one of four
shots fired from an AK-47 semi-automatic pistol by a suspected gun
trafficker in 2019. The charging document says the ``no knock'' warrant
was obtained through Milwaukee County Court Commissioner J.C. Moore
after a confidential informant told police that the shooter was
involved with the straw purchase of 13 to 15 weapons in recent months.
The complaint paints a picture of the shooter, meanwhile, as someone
heavily involved in straw purchases of firearms that he and a friend
later would resell at a profit. The shooter said he assembled rifles
and sold them at gun shows.
The Bipartisan Safer Communities Act, enacted in June 2022, created
new Federal firearms trafficking and straw purchasing laws, providing a
way to protect law enforcement and the public from illegal guns. Proper
utilization of this law, however, requires unprecedented cooperation
and effort by Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
Department of Justice (DOJ) and Congressional leaders must continue to
provide a way forward to ensure that gun traffickers are held
accountable.
preventable community violence
In many of the Nation's most disadvantaged, low-income
neighborhoods, gun violence is a tragic fact of everyday life,
including for the law enforcement officers who work or live in those
communities. However, when there is investment in community violence
intervention (CVI) programs, everyone is safer. Fewer shootings and
homicides lead to increased public safety for all members of the
community, including law enforcement officers who have to respond to
violent incidents.
Community violence is defined by the CDC as violence between
``unrelated individuals, who may or may not know each other, generally
outside the home.'' This includes homicides, shootings, stabbings, and
physical assaults. Community violence is highly concentrated
geographically and disproportionately impacts communities of color.
Seventy-four percent of gun homicide victims in the United States are
Black or Latinx, despite being 31 percent of the U.S. population. In
2020, more than 24,500 Americans lost their lives to homicide--nearly
80 percent of which were committed with a firearm--and tens of
thousands more were injured severely enough to require hospitalization.
American rates of community violence are many times higher than other
developed nations.
Despite the severity of this crisis, we know that significant
reductions in community violence are possible with the implementation
of holistic, public health-informed strategies focused on addressing
the root causes of violence. In any given city, a small number of high-
risk individuals commit the majority of acts of community violence.
Evidence-based community violence intervention and prevention programs
identify and effectively intervene with this population, interrupting
cycles of violence and retaliation, and have been proven to be highly
effective at reducing rates of community violence:

Hospital-Based Violence Intervention Programs address the
fact that experiencing violence is a significant risk factor
for future exposure to violence.

Street Outreach and Violence Interruption are proactive
approaches that employ trained outreach workers to identify and
mediate conflicts in their community.

Group Violence Intervention calls for a local partnership of
law enforcement, service providers, and community members to
work together to identify potential offenders and bring them
together to intervene with a message that the violence must
stop.
Since 2007, Richmond, California, has invested in CVI efforts,
including through the Advance Peace model and a hospital-based violence
intervention program. The city saw a 70 percent reduction in homicides
and shootings between 2007 and 2019.
Too many police officers have died as a result of community
violence. Community violence intervention programs could have prevented
these deaths and other shootings of law enforcement officers. For
example, in October 2021, a DEA agent was killed and two other officers
were injured during what was supposed to be a routine check for illegal
money, weapons, and drugs on an Amtrak train when a man began firing a
handgun as officers were detaining another man. The shooter had a
lengthy criminal history. In October 2021, a 14-year-old boy shot a Los
Angeles police officer with a ghost gun. The boy had ties to a local
gang that was producing ghost guns. In March 2022, two Chicago police
officers were shot when a gunman accidentally dropped his firearm in
front of them while waiting in line to get food and then picked up the
firearm and started shooting the officer in line behind him and an
officer waiting in their squad car. In July 2016, a man shot at 4
Baltimore police officers after they arrived at an apartment complex
from which they'd heard shots fired. The shooter had an extensive
criminal history.
Last Congress, Representative Horsford introduced his bill, H.R.
4118, the Break the Cycle of Violence Act, which would authorize
community-based violence intervention programs, like those previously
discussed. Congress should take up and pass this important bill.
pensacola loophole
In December 2019, an aviation student from Saudi Arabia killed 3
U.S. Navy sailors and injured 8 others in a terrorist attack
facilitated by one the most egregious loopholes in our gun laws. The 3
victims who died from their injuries were a 19-year-old airman from St.
Petersburg, Florida; a 23-year-old ensign and recent graduate of the
United States Naval Academy from Coffee, Alabama; and a 21-year-old
airman apprentice from Richmond Hill, Georgia.
While foreign nationals, including individuals admitted under
nonimmigrant visas, are generally prohibited from purchasing or
possessing guns, it is far too easy for a person with bad intentions to
get around this law by obtaining a hunting license from a State. Many
States issue hunting licenses liberally, without any serious
investigation about the person. This is how the Pensacola shooter
obtained a firearm.
Federal law should ensure that ATF (or whoever the Attorney General
chooses to fulfill this role) has approved a foreign national to obtain
or possess a gun before he or she can do so. That way, dangerous people
cannot once again take advantage of this loophole. Specifically,
Federal law should require a foreign national who has been admitted to
the United States under a nonimmigrant visa to obtain a waiver from the
Attorney General before purchasing and possessing a firearm. This
waiver should only be available if the person has resided in the United
States for 180 days, has approval from the person's embassy or
consulate, and the Attorney General finds it would not jeopardize
public safety and is in the interests of justice.
Notably, the background check system contains criminal history
information from all 50 States, but does not include data from foreign
countries, so foreign nationals with extensive criminal backgrounds
might be approved by the system. Federal law should therefore give DOJ
the opportunity to do a more thorough assessment before the individual
purchases a firearm.
In the 117th Congress, former Representative Crist introduced his
bill, H.R. 2971, the Foreign National Firearms Background Check
Enhancement Act, which would close this loophole by ensuring a foreign
national obtains a waiver from the Attorney General before purchasing a
gun.
safe storage
Too often, firearms that are not stored safely end up in the hands
of people who are not legally eligible to possess them (because of age,
criminal history, or for another reason). Whether a child or other
unauthorized individual gains access to a firearm or a firearm is
stolen from a home or car, that firearm is a threat to law enforcement.
Eliminating a person's ability to gain unauthorized access to firearms
decreases the danger to law enforcement and the whole community.
For example, in January 2022, a man used a stolen gun to murder two
New York City police officers. The firearm was stolen from a woman's
safe in Baltimore in 2017 allegedly by her 13-year-old son who then
sold the firearm. Whether the two officers would've been murdered if
the firearm was stored and inaccessible to the 13-year-old is unknown,
but that firearm would likely not have been the one used in the
murders. And, in February 2013, a man used an unsecured gun stolen from
a vehicle earlier in the month to kill a retired ATF special agent.
Safe storage laws promote responsible gun ownership by requiring
gun owners to store their firearms securely. These laws can reduce gun
suicides, unintentional shootings, and gun theft.
Gun owners who do not store their firearms securely are at greater
risk of having their firearms stolen and diverted into underground
firearms markets and used in crime.\5\ Annually, roughly 380,000 guns
are stolen from individual gun owners each year, with the majority of
stolen firearms recovered by police between 2010 and 2016 being
recovered in connection with crimes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ David Hemenway, et al., ``Whose guns are stolen? The
epidemiology of Gun theft victims,'' Injury Epidemiology 4, no. 11
(December 2017), doi:10.1186/s40621-017-0109-8.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are grateful to Representative DeLauro for reintroducing her
bill this Congress, H.R. 660, Ethan's Law, which would incentivize
States to pass child access prevention laws and require gun owners to
safely store firearms in their home.
accessories/modification devices
The gun industry has developed a wide variety of devices that
increase the rate of fire of semiautomatic firearms, often causing them
to approximate the speed of fire of a machine gun. Sometimes these
devices do, in fact, convert these weapons into machine guns; in these
cases, these devices are already illegal but too easy for criminals to
obtain. All of these devices increase the danger to law enforcement
officers.
More than 200 California police officers were present at the Las
Vegas mass shooting where bump stocks were used. ATF has now amended
its regulations to include bump stocks within the definition of
``machine gun,'' making these devices illegal, although the ban on
these weapons is still subject to court challenge and other similar
devices are still available.
``Auto sears,'' also known as switches, are accessories that
convert semiautomatic firearms into fully automatic machine guns.
Regulating auto sears and similar modification devices that turn lethal
weapons even more destructive helps ensure law enforcement is not
placed at extreme risk. A risk that is insurmountable in some cases.
Auto sears are becoming more prevalent in cities around the country
and law enforcement are finding increasing numbers of auto sears at
crime scenes. In 2021, ATF seized 1,500 weapons modified with auto
sears, 1,200 more than were recovered in 2020. In Houston, Texas, an
auto sear was used on a handgun to kill senior police officer William
``Bill'' Jeffrey and injure another officer. The officers were
executing an arrest warrant at the time. Soon after the apartment door
opened, rapid gunfire came at them from inside the apartment.
Too often auto sears are smuggled into the country or produced at
home. As a result, auto sears are an accessible modification device
available to the masses at an inexpensive price. Anyone can illegally
purchase an auto sear on-line, without a background check, for less
than $20. And installation of an auto sear can take seconds, not
requiring special tools or skills. Like ghost guns, which auto sears
are also being used in combination with, auto sears can be created
using a 3D printer.
Auto sears inflict severe damage and are technically illegal
because on their own they are considered a machine gun. Criminal gangs
view auto sears as an advantageous new accessory, especially when
joined with high-capacity magazines, because they can inflict
incredible damage and intimidate enemies.
Representative Spanberger introduced her bill this Congress, H.R.
2909, Preventing Illegal Weapons Trafficking Act, which would require
Federal law enforcement to coordinate efforts to prevent the
importation and trafficking of conversion devices. Representative Titus
also introduced her bill, H.R. 396, Closing the Bump Stock Loophole
Act, which would explicitly add bump stock to the list of firearms
subject to regulation under the National Firearms Act and under the Gun
Control Act of 1968. These are common-sense steps to protecting the
lives of law enforcement officers this Congress must act on.
ghost guns
Ghost guns are untraceable, ``do-it-yourself'' firearms
manufactured in the home. When gun parts are easily accessible, these
firearms can be assembled by unlicensed persons, obtained without a
background check, lack serial numbers, and are therefore untraceable by
law enforcement if used in a crime. The alarming proliferation of these
weapons is a threat to public safety, including law enforcement. Ghost
guns evade all the regulations which apply to the regulated firearms
industry and are thus an attractive option for firearm traffickers and
people who would otherwise be unable to pass a background check and
purchase a firearm, and they have been appearing more frequently in
crime. Ghost guns are also an attractive option for people interested
in illegal guns, like assault weapons in the 9 States that ban them.
Ghost guns have been used to target law enforcement. In 2021, a man
used a ghost gun to shoot at a United States Secret Service agent and 3
security guards. United State Park Police officers responded to the
scene where law enforcement recovered three 9mm ammunition shell
casings and located a bullet fragment within a wall. The shooter was
prohibited from possessing firearms because of a felony record but was
able to use the gaps in our laws to obtain an unserialized, untraceable
firearm. In Los Angeles, a 14-year-old boy was arrested after shooting
at a detective with a ghost gun. He was tied to a local gang that was
producing ghost guns. Even though the boy was ineligible to possess
firearms because of his age, he had access to ghost guns that were
allegedly being produced using various tools, including a 3D printer
and a drill press. In 2019, gunmen firing assault-type ghost guns
fatally shot law enforcement officers in an ambush attack in Sacramento
and a deadly shoot-out in Riverside, California. The shooters in these
incidents would have been unable to purchase a serialized gun, either
because the gun they used was illegal in that State or because the
shooters were prohibited from purchasing guns.
On April 11, 2022, President Biden announced the finalization of
the ``ghost gun'' rule that will define the unfinished parts used to
make ghost guns as firearms, which means that those who sell them will
have to be licensed, will have to serialize them and retain records,
and will have to conduct a background check before every sale, closing
a major loophole on how firearms enter civilian hands without any
oversight. This rule will help make it more difficult for people
prohibited from purchasing firearms or interested in illegal firearms
to access a firearm, potentially decreasing some interactions law
enforcement will have in these dangerous situations. Ghost guns,
however, still litter our streets with nearly 24,000 ghost guns
recovered at crime scenes between 2016 and 2020.
Comprehensive legislation such as Representative Cicilline's
Untraceable Firearms Act, H.R. 3088, which he introduced last Congress,
would address this problem. Congress must act on this legislation to
ensure that all firearms carry a serial number that makes them
traceable by law enforcement and that 3D printing technology is not
used to create firearms that end up in the hands of people prohibited
from possessing them.
pretrial release
A loophole in current law enables people to pass a National Instant
Criminal Background Check System (NICS) background check even when they
are prohibited from possessing guns by a pretrial release court order.
Due to this loophole, State, local, and Tribal authorities are unable
to rely on the background check system to enforce the pretrial
condition of persons who were specifically ordered by a court not to
purchase firearms. In fact, January 6th defendant Thomas Robertson was
able to purchase 34 guns despite a release order that barred him from
possessing firearms.
While bail reform is controversial, we can all agree that too many
police officers have been shot or killed by people who were out on
bail. The issue of whether a defendant subject to an explicit court
order not to possess guns can pass a background check to buy a gun is
simple. Last session, former Representative Carolyn Maloney introduced
the Preventing Pretrial Gun Purchases Act, H.R. 6717, which would close
this loophole, enabling the background check system to deny guns to a
person subject to a condition of release of this kind.
domestic violence
Domestic violence calls are some of the most dangerous for police
officers. In December 2021, 4 people were killed in Georgia, including
a police officer, after officers responded to a domestic disturbance
call in Clayton County. When officers arrived, they encountered an
armed man who shot and killed Officer Henry Laxson and wounded another
officer, according to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation.
Just a few weeks before, Jackson County Deputy Lena Nicole Marshall
was also shot responding to a separate domestic violence 9-1-1 call.
She died from her wounds 3 days later. Authorities say deputies were
called to Highway 124 West for a domestic incident. One deputy was shot
after arriving at the location. Other deputies, authorities say,
returned fire eventually striking and killing the alleged suspect. The
Georgia Bureau of Investigation said the homeowners sought to remove a
woman from their home who didn't live there. The sheriff's office said
when deputies arrived, the woman pulled out a gun, fired at the
deputies and struck Marshall. The second deputy returned fire and
killed the shooter, the sheriff's office said. The shooter had been in
a custody dispute with her ex-husband, who cited her erratic behavior
and said she had not enrolled the children in school. The shooter had
also previously voiced hatred toward local judges and law enforcement
officers.
While Federal law prohibits certain domestic abusers from
possessing guns, those laws have been hard to implement, and many
abusers continue to possess guns even though they have been convicted
of domestic abuse or become subject to a restraining order, losing
their eligibility to possess guns legally. Requiring people subject to
domestic violence-related protective orders to provide proof that they
actually relinquished their firearms (relinquishment laws) is one way
States have acted to implement the Federal gun laws. These State laws
are linked to a 16 percent reduction in intimate partner gun homicides.
They also protect police who must often respond to domestic violence
situations by removing the presence of a gun. That is why it is
imperative that this Congress provide funding to State efforts to
remove guns from domestic abusers who are prohibited from possessing
them, as called for in Representative Jackson-Lee's Lori Jackson-
Nicolette Elias Domestic Violence Survivor Protection Act.
the threat of armed far-right extremists to law enforcement officers
In recent years, extremist groups have become emboldened to expand
beyond their private meetings, chat rooms, and message boards,
recruiting new members through mainstream social media and gathering
openly in public. This upswell of hateful ideology has also been
accompanied by an escalation of public intimidation with firearms.
Law enforcement officers are not immune to the violence of armed
far-right extremists. In fact, far-right extremists' anti-Government
and anti-law enforcement ideologies place them at odds with law
enforcement, which shows up in the purposeful targeting of law
enforcement for ideologically-motivated violence and when there are
opportunities to commit violence against law enforcement while law
enforcement officers conduct routine activities (e.g., during patrol).
Far-right extremists also find themselves at odds with law
enforcement where law enforcement officers must respond to the criminal
activities of extremists.
One study of the sovereign citizens movement, a movement within the
right-wing anti-Government extremist movement, found that, in the 75
instances in which sovereign citizens attempted or did harm law
enforcement officers between 1983 and 2020, 27 law enforcement officers
were killed, and 65 officers were injured. Of those officers killed, 30
percent died during traffic stops, 30 percent died during ambushes, 22
percent died during stand-off situations, 15 percent died during
routine check or serving a warrant, and 3 percent died in a gun battle
in a store parking lot.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Christine M. Sarteschi, ``Sovereign citizens: A narrative
review with implications of violence toward law enforcement,''
Aggression and Violent Behavior 60, (September 2021), doi:10.1016/
j.avb.2020.101509.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the last few years, amid COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, law
enforcement officers have been attacked by far-right extremists. Fueled
by anger about pandemic restrictions, a Federal protection officer was
shot and killed by two members of the anti-Government boogaloo movement
and later a sheriff's deputy was killed while attempting to arrest one
of the suspects.
The January 6 insurrection demonstrated for the world the steps
these far-right extremists will take. The violent riot and breach on
the U.S. Capitol, guarded by law enforcement, contributed to the death
of multiple law enforcement officers and the injury--physical and
mental--to countless officers.
Last session Representative Schneider introduced his bill, H.R.
350, the Domestic Terrorism Prevention Act, which would help ensure
that existing laws are enforced against domestic terrorists and white
supremacists and improve law enforcement efforts to intercede in these
situations before they become even more violent. Given the easy access
to firearms in this country, it is imperative that Congress take action
to reduce the danger posed by armed extremists.
conclusion
Law enforcement officers are placed in dangerous situations on a
daily basis. One way to protect these officers is to strengthen our gun
laws, so that our officers, who we depend on to protect us, are able to
do so. The only thing standing in the way of progress on gun safety is
the lack of political will. We urge Congress to find the courage to
strengthen these laws, to show leadership on this life-and-death issue,
and to act, now.
Our gun violence crisis is a uniquely American problem. It's a
problem that plagues our country in countless different ways and exacts
a devastating toll on our communities, including our law enforcement
officers. But it's a problem with solutions. While one single law will
never stop all gun violence, we know strong gun laws save lives. We
know that taking proven steps to decrease the danger law enforcement is
forced to face daily is not a partisan issue, or at least it shouldn't
be.
We have seen progress in recent years, particularly with the
passing of the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act last Congress. That
progress must be the expectation, not the exception. So today, we ask
all Members of this committee and Congress as a whole to recommit
themselves to making progress and taking action to reduce gun violence
in this country and in turn aiding in law enforcement's ability to
carry out their mission and ensure the safety of our communities.

Chairman Pfluger. I would now like to recognize the
Chairman for the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology, the gentleman from New York, Mr. D'Esposito. Before
he speaks, know that he is also a former detective for the New
York Police Department and has also spent time being willing to
sacrifice his own, his own life for the betterment of his
community. Mr. D'Esposito.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good
morning, everyone. I want to first, on this Police Week, I want
to thank you for your service and your commitment to keeping
this Nation and our community safe. I want to thank Chairman
Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and Ranking Member Carter
for joining me to convene this hearing today, where we will
examine the critically important topic of the state of crime in
the United States of America and the Federal Government's role
in supporting State and local law enforcement efforts
throughout the country.
As we mentioned, it is Police Week. I do want to thank our
Nation's police officers for putting their lives on the line
each and every day to protect our neighborhoods and keep our
families safe. As a retired New York City Police Department
detective, I know first-hand how challenging a career in law
enforcement can be. Regardless of the risk, police officers
show up every day to put the needs of their communities first.
They truly stand the line between good and evil.
To our police officers and law enforcement serving
throughout the Nation, thank you for your bravery and for your
service. We commend all of you for your unwavering commitment
to keeping us all safe. To those who we have honored over the
last few days in the line of duty, we honor you. When we all
take an oath to protect and serve, we also make a promise in
our hearts to never forget. I promise that I will do everything
in my power to make sure that we never forget them.
As we will hear in your testimonies, the challenges facing
our law enforcement community are increasingly complex and
every day seem to evolve. Americans can't turn on the news
without hearing stories of carjackings, robberies, increased
acts of senseless violence across this country, not to mention
the continued threat of terrorism. The sad fact is, many
Americans no longer feel safe in their communities. As Members
of the Homeland Security Committee, we must ensure that our
Nation's law enforcement personnel have the resources and
necessary tools to keep our communities safe and protect this
great homeland. That is why we are dedicating this time to
evaluate how the Federal Government can continue to support our
State and local agencies.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, or FEMA, suite of
preparedness grants assist State, local, Tribal, and
territorial governments to prepare for, protect against,
respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks, major
disasters, and other emergencies. From lessons learned after
the terrorist attacks of September 11, these grant programs
provide local law enforcement with the vital training and
equipment they need to prepare for new challenges as they arise
in our communities. In fact, over the last 10 years, the New
York City urban area has received over $2 billion in grant
funding to prevent, prepare for, and protect against terrorist
attacks in New York City.
My home State has benefited immensely from the Urban Area
Security Initiative, the State Homeland Security Grant Program,
and the Transportation Security Grant Program, to only name a
few. For example, Federal grant funding supports the
Counterterrorism Officer Program that provides NYPD patrol
officers with specialized counterterrorism training to enable
officers to conduct counterterrorism operations at specific
intelligence-driven locations throughout the city. Grant funds
have been used to purchase concrete barriers to save
pedestrians and cyclists from vehicular terrorism, a necessary
tool following the 2017 vehicle ramming in Lower Manhattan.
Grant funds have supported the Vapor Wake Detection Canine
Program, which trains canines to trail explosive or chemical
odors.
With New York remaining a top terror target, the importance
of grant funding, not only in New York City, but throughout
this country, is paramount. As the Chairman of the Emergency
Management and Technology Subcommittee, I will continue to
advocate for robust investment in these security grant
programs. However, when examining these grant programs, it is
also important to ensure that smaller or more rural enforcement
agencies across the country have the resources that they need
to adapt to the changing threat landscape in their respective
States.
In the past decade, the threats against our homeland have
changed. Domestic and small-scale acts of terrorism now
threaten our communities, and hate-filled attacks have become
more frequent. According to a recent FBI report, hate crime
incidents increased by 11.6 percent in 2021 from 8,210
incidents in 2020 to over 9,000 in 2021. More than half of all
religious hate crimes were motivated by antisemitism, further
highlighting the importance of the nonprofit Security Grant
Program, which provides our faith-based communities with the
means to harden their defenses, acquire security equipment, and
provide training to better safeguard their congregants.
The rise in crime across the country points to the
importance of FEMA's preparedness grant programs and the need
for strengthening local law enforcement efforts, many
departments like you represent. Today, the national homicide
rate is 34 percent higher than it was in 2019. Major crimes in
New York rose by 22 percent in 2022. Burglaries and robberies
increased by 37 percent. However, instead of supporting law
enforcement, we have heard calls for slashing police budgets
and defunding police, which have promoted soft-on-crime
policies that allow repeat offenders to roam the streets.
At a time when crime is increasing, we should be
strengthening law enforcement, not making our communities more
vulnerable. I want to take a minute to focus on New York, where
Democrats impose cashless bail in criminal justice reform. As
someone who has lived and seen the criminal justice system at
work, I understand all well that reforms do need to be made.
But those reforms can't be done with a broad brush. They also
can't be done without having conversations with people from law
enforcement. We have seen that now in places like New York,
criminals are free to roam the streets and once again commit
more crimes after committing their first.
We want to talk about gun violence, we should focus on gun
violence and removing illegal guns off the street first. That
is where our focus should be. Our focus should be on providing
law enforcement with the resources that they need to take
illegal firearms off the street. It is interesting when we hear
individuals talk about gun violence and talk about different
weapons used, kind of weapon, or know the difference between
weapons, but they do know that it looks, ``scary.'' But what is
scary is being in the middle of a street in some of the most
violent neighborhoods in the communities that you represent, or
the ones that I used to patrol, and actually wrestling an
illegal gun off the street with your life in your hands.
So, instead of focusing on where we are failing, we should
focus and make sure that rogue DAs throughout this country who
like to rewrite laws are actually putting bad people behind
bars. Every day our Nation's police officers are on the front
lines, responding to threats against our homeland. They are our
heroes. Right now, they need our support. Whether they serve in
big cities like Los Angeles or where I came from in the NYPD,
or in smaller towns like Island Park, where I grew up, or
Nassau County, or where you represent, we owe law enforcement
community a huge debt of gratitude.
I also want to talk about accountability, because it's a
two-way street, and we must hold our police departments to a
higher standard. Small and mid-size departments need to be
targeted investments to address on-going challenges with
recruitment, retention, and PTSD. We must ensure that police
departments across this country, no matter how large or how
small, are working effectively to serve the people. It is our
job to make sure that they have the resources they need to do
that.
I want to thank you for upholding the rule of law and thank
you for putting yourselves in harm's way to protect our
freedom. I have mentioned it throughout this week that Police
Week always makes me reflect back on the inscription at the
memorial. Right under the lion it says, it is not how these
individuals died that made them heroes, it is how they lived.
So, let's make sure that we can do all we can to give the
resources to the men and women that live every day protecting
and serving. I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
to learn how we can strengthen local law enforcement efforts.
Now more than ever, we must work together to protect our
homeland. I think you would all agree with me that the
thousands upon thousands of 9-1-1 calls we have responded to,
there has never once been a question asked whether you are a
Democrat or Republican. So, let's work together, not as parties
in politics, but as Americans, to keep this great Nation safe.
Mr. Chairman, thank you. I yield back.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]
Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito
May 16, 2023
I would like to thank Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner,
and Ranking Member Carter for joining me to convene this hearing today
where we will examine the critically important topic of the state of
crime in the United States and the Federal Government's role in
supporting State and local law enforcement efforts throughout the
country.
In honor of National Police Week, I first want to thank our
Nation's police officers for putting their lives on the line every day
to protect our neighborhoods and keep our families safe. As a former
NYPD detective, I know first-hand how challenging a career in law
enforcement can be. Regardless of the risk, police officers show up
every day to put the needs of their community first.
To our police officers and law enforcement serving throughout the
Nation, thank you for your bravery and your service. We commend you for
your unwavering commitment to keeping us all safe. And to those who
lost their lives in the line of duty, we honor you and we will never
forget the sacrifice you made. To our witnesses, thank you for your
participation today in this important hearing. We look forward to
hearing from each of you.
As we will hear in your testimonies, the challenges facing our law
enforcement community are increasingly complex and ever-evolving.
Americans can't turn on the news without hearing stories of
carjackings, robberies, and increased acts of senseless violence across
the Nation, not to mention the continued threat of terrorism. The sad
fact is, many Americans no longer feel safe in their communities.
As Members of the Homeland Security Committee, we must ensure that
our Nation's law enforcement personnel have the resources and necessary
tools to keep our communities safe and to protect our homeland. That is
why we are dedicating this time to evaluate how the Federal Government
can continue to support our State and local law enforcement.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) suite of
preparedness grants assist State, local, Tribal, and territorial
governments to prepare for, protect against, respond to, and recover
from terrorist attacks, major disasters, and other emergencies.
From lessons learned after the terrorist attacks of 9/11, these
grant programs provide local law enforcement with the vital training
and equipment they need to prepare for new challenges as they arise in
their communities.
In fact, over the past 10 years, the New York City Urban Area has
received over $2 billion in grant funding to prevent, prepare for, and
protect against terrorist attacks in the city.\1\ My home State has
benefited immensely from the Urban Area Security Initiative, the State
Homeland Security Grant Program, and the Transportation Security Grant
Program--to name only a few. For example, Federal grant funding
supports the Counterterrorism Officer Program that provides NYPD patrol
officers with specialized counterterrorism training to enable officers
to conduct counterterrorism operations at specific intelligence-driven
locations throughout the city. Grant funds have been used to purchased
concrete barriers to save pedestrians and cyclists from vehicular
terrorism--a necessary tool following the 2017 vehicle ramming in lower
Manhattan.\2\ And grant funds have supported the Vapor Wake Detection
Canine Program, which trains canines to trail explosive or chemical
odors.\3\ With New York remaining a top terror target, the importance
of grant funding cannot be overstated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ ``Preparedness Grant Effectiveness Case Study: New York City.''
FEMA. March 2021. https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
fema_nyc-case-study_2019.pdf.
\2\ Id.
\3\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the Chairman of the Emergency Management and Technology
Subcommittee, I will continue to advocate for robust investment in
these security grant programs. However, when examining these grant
programs, it is also important to ensure that smaller, or more rural
law enforcement agencies across the country have the resources they
need to adapt to the changing threat landscape in their respective
States.
In the past decade, the threats against our homeland have changed;
domestic and smaller-scale acts of terrorism now threaten our
communities, and hate-filled attacks have become more frequent.
According to a recent FBI report, hate crime incidents increased by
11.6 percent in 2021--from 8,210 incidents in 2020 to 9,065 in 2021.
More than half of all religious hate crimes were motivated by
antisemitism, further highlighting the importance of the Non-profit
Security Grant Program, which provides our faith-based communities with
the means to harden their defenses, acquire security equipment, and
provide training to better safeguard their congregants.\4\ \5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ ``FBI Releases Supplement to the 2021 Hate Crime Statistics.''
U.S. Department of Justice. https://www.justice.gov/crs/highlights/
2021-hate-crime-statistics.
\5\ Krystina Shveda. ``U.S. antisemitic incidents at highest level
since group started recording them in 1970's.'' ABC 7 New York. March
23, 2023. https://abc7ny.com/antisemitic-incidents-rising-jewish-
americans/12999377/, https://abc7ny.com/anti-defamation-league-
antisemitism-antisemitic-incidents-new-york/12999468/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The rise in crime across the country points to the importance of
FEMA's preparedness grant programs and the need for strengthening local
law enforcement efforts. Today, the national homicide rate is 34
percent higher than it was in 2019.\6\ Major crimes in New York rose by
22 percent in 2022. Burglaries and robberies increased by 37
percent.\7\ However, instead of supporting law enforcement, calls for
slashing police budgets and defunding the police have promoted soft-on-
crime policies that allow repeat offenders to roam the streets. At a
time when crime is increasing, we should be strengthening our law
enforcement, not making our communities more vulnerable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Major Cities Chiefs Association, Violent Crime Survey--National
Totals Year End Comparison, 2022, https://majorcitieschiefs.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/02/MCCA-Violent-Crime-Report-2022-and-2021-Year-
End.pdf.
\7\ Chelsia Rose Marcius and Ed Shanahan, Major Crimes Rose 22
Percent in New York City, Even as Shootings Fell, New York Times
(January 5, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, accountability is a two-way-street, and we must also hold
our police departments to a higher standard. Small and mid-size police
departments need targeted investments to address on-going challenges
with recruitment, retention, and PTSD burn-out. We must ensure that
police departments across the country are working effectively to serve
the people they swore to protect.
Every day, our Nation's police officers are on the front lines,
responding to threats against our homeland. They are our heroes; and
right now, they need our support. Whether they serve in big cities like
Los Angeles or New York, or in smaller towns like my hometown of Island
Park, we owe our law enforcement community a huge debt of gratitude.
Thank you for upholding the rule of law. Thank you for putting
yourselves in harm's way to protect our freedom.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today to learn how we
can strengthen local law enforcment efforts. Now more than ever, we
must work together to protect our homeland.
And with that, I yield back.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito. I now
recognize the Ranking Member for the Subcommittee on Emergency
Management and Technology, the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Carter, for his opening statement.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Ranking Members,
and to our guests, thank you for being here. We look forward to
hearing your testimony.
I want to take a moment to reflect on the tragic shootings
in Allen, Texas. My condolences go out to the families of the
victims. The video that circulated of this man jumping out of
an SUV, wielding an AR-15, and wearing a tactical vest as he
mercilessly killed people until an officer who just happened to
be at the mall took him out. It was horrible. But the video is
a visual testimony. It is testimony of the depravity of weak
gun laws in our country. It is a testimony to the risk of our
communities and our police officers face because Republicans
refuse to pass meaningful gun violence prevention laws.
Many of you know that I am a gun owner and an avid hunter.
But I am a responsible gun owner who firmly believes in
stronger gun laws, one who believes in the Second Amendment,
but also recognizes that we can do better in making sure that
we are protecting our communities without infringing upon one's
Constitutional right to bear arms. Weak gun laws are killing
our children. They are killing our parents, our grandparents.
These are not Black or white, Republican or Democrat, rich or
poor. They are Americans. They are people. They are human
beings. They deserve better. We, as a committee and as a
Congress, have a responsibility to do better. As my colleague
said moments ago, it is not Republican or Democrat, and we
should be able to come together. But heretofore we have not,
and we have got to do better.
I am hopeful through the testimony today that we are able
to keep it in focus of why we are here and what our true task
is. Not to over-politicize, not to self-aggrandize, not to
create theater, but to create policy that will save lives. I am
glad that we are holding this hearing and protecting the
homeland and supporting law enforcement because we want to talk
about protecting the homeland, and supporting law enforcement,
we must talk about weapons of war that are on our streets and
making our homeland less safe and putting law enforcement in
the line of fire.
Over the years, we have seen dramatic increases in gun
violence against civilians and law enforcement. My district has
struggled with gun violence in New Orleans, accounting for
nearly 5 percent of all mass shootings across the country this
year, far outpacing any other city in the country. Gun violence
isn't isolated to one space. We have seen gun violence in our
schools, malls, houses of worship, and public areas. Our
country has a problem.
We need strong, common-sense gun law in every State, not
only to protect children, but also to protect you, our law
enforcement. Officers often find themselves in dangerous
situations while performing their duties. In States with weak
gun regulations, the dangers officers face is substantially
greater. To the Gifford's Law Center, which grades States based
on the strength of their gun laws, States that receive an F in
their gun laws saw higher rates of police fatalities from 2017
to 2021. These are real statistics. These are real numbers.
These are real lives. These are real people.
The virtually unregulated guns circulating in our
communities are threats to homeland security and to law
enforcement lives. The data is clear. In 2021, almost 73
percent of law enforcement officers who died from felonious
assaults were killed by firearms. These firearms have only
risen in recent years, making guns one of the leading causes of
death in the line of duty for law enforcements in America. We
must do more to protect our homeland, our communities, and our
officers. That means we need to work across the aisle to pass
common-sense gun laws and continue to work together to
strengthen and fund the Department of Homeland Security's grant
programs, which are critical to protecting our communities and
law enforcement personnel from these threats.
Programs like the Urban Area Security Initiative, UASI, and
the United States Security Grant Program, SHSP, assist in
assuring that local law enforcement have the resources they
need to defend our communities against threats. The Nonprofit
Security Grant Program provides nonprofits with funding to help
with their security, which is critical given the surge in
right-wing violence against nonprofits, including religious
organizations. While we work to address gun violence, we must
continue to do our part to provide the Department of Homeland
Security with funding for its grants programs to ensure that
nonprofits and law enforcements have the resources they need to
protect our communities.
To our witnesses, thank you for being here today. The law
enforcement witnesses, I want to thank you and all those who
stand beside you for your service. We appreciate your being
here today during National Police Week. I look forward to
hearing from you. I look forward to us having a meaningful
exchange, one that I hope can stay within the boundaries and
stay within the lines. I compel my colleagues, likewise, that
we make this a clear opportunity to make a difference and not
to make a statement for the press. That we use this as an
opportunity to find resolve and solutions, not to further
divide a country that is sickened with the bloodshed that we
see in our communities. Each day it gets a little closer. I
hope and pray that we collectively can find a way to have
resolutions that don't have Rs or Ds behind them but have
American lives that are being saved. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Troy A. Carter
May 16, 2023
I want to take a moment to reflect on the tragic shooting in Allen,
Texas. My condolences go out to the families of the victims. The video
that circulated of this man jumping out of his SUV wielding an AR-15
and wearing a tactical vest as he mercilessly killed people until an
officer, who just happened to be at the mall, took him out, was
harrowing. But that video is visual testimony. It is testimony to the
depravity of weak gun laws in this country. It is a testimony to the
risk our communities and our police face because Republicans refuse to
pass meaningful gun violence prevention laws.
Many of you know that I am a gun owner and avid hunter, but I am a
responsible gun owner who firmly believes in stronger gun laws. Weak
gun laws are killing children. They're killing parents and
grandparents. They are killing law enforcement officers. And they are
making our homeland less safe.
So, I am glad we are holding this hearing on protecting the
homeland and supporting law enforcement. Because if we want to talk
about protecting the homeland and supporting law enforcement, we must
talk about the weapons of war that are on our streets making our
homeland less safe and putting law enforcement in the line of fire.
Over the years, we have seen a dramatic increase in gun violence
against civilians and law enforcement. My district has struggled with
gun violence with New Orleans accounting for nearly 5 percent of all
the mass shootings across the country this year, far outpacing any
other city in the country. Gun violence isn't isolated to one space; we
have seen gun violence at our schools, malls, houses of worship, and
other public areas. Our country has a problem. We need strong and
common-sense gun safety laws in every State not only to protect
children but also to protect law enforcement.
Officers often find themselves in dangerous situations while
performing their duties. In States with weak gun regulations, the
dangers officers face is substantially greater according to the
Giffords Law Center, which graded States based on the strength of their
gun laws. States that received an ``F'' for their gun laws saw higher
rates of police fatalities from 2017 to 2021. The virtually unregulated
guns circulating in our communities are threats to homeland security
and to law enforcement lives. The data is clear--in 2021, almost 73
percent of law enforcement officers who died from felonious assaults
were killed by firearms. This figure has only risen in recent years,
making guns one of the leading causes of death in the line of duty for
law enforcement officers.
We must do more to protect our homeland, our communities, and our
officers. That means we need to work across the aisle to pass common-
sense gun laws and continue to work together to strengthen and fund the
Department of Homeland Security's grant programs, which are critical to
protecting our communities and law enforcement personnel from threats.
Programs like the Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) and State
Homeland Security Grant Program (SHSP) assist in ensuring that local
law enforcement have the resources they need to defend our communities
against threats.
The Nonprofit Security Grant Program provides nonprofits with
funding to help with their security, which is critical given the surge
in right-wing violence against nonprofits, including religious
institutions. While we work to address gun violence, we must continue
to do our part and provide the Department of Homeland Security with
funding for its grant programs to ensure that nonprofits and law
enforcement have the resources they need to protect our communities.
To our witnesses, thank you for being here today. To the law
enforcement witnesses, I want to thank you, and all those who stand
beside you, for your service. We appreciate you being here during
National Police Week.

Chairman Pfluger. I thank the Ranking Member, and I now
recognize the Ranking Member of the full committee, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr.
Chairman, I appreciate the witnesses being here at today's
hearing on ``Protecting the Homeland: An Examination of Federal
Efforts to Support State and Local Law Enforcement.'' Before I
begin, I want to condemn the hateful violence we saw yesterday
when two Congressional staffers, one of them an intern on her
first day at work, were beaten with a baseball bat while at
work in Virginia for Congressman Gerald Connolly. I pray for
their recovery quickly.
Protecting the homeland ultimately means protecting the
people who live here, which is what the brave men and women who
serve in law enforcement do every day. We thank them for their
service as we commemorate National Police Week. I welcome
today's discussion about how the Federal Government can support
State and local law enforcement in their efforts to protect our
communities. Tragically, in the days and weeks leading up to
this hearing, there have been a series of mass killings
inspired by those who hold extremist views. My heart goes out
to the victims and families of those murdered in an apparent
right-wing extremist shooting in Allen, Texas. My heart also
goes out to the victims and families of those killed after a
driver rammed his SUV into people waiting outside near a
shelter in Brownsville, Texas, after he reportedly shouted
anti-immigrant rhetoric.
When we talk about protecting the homeland and supporting
State and local law enforcement, we must acknowledge that
extremist views, coupled with weak gun laws, is driving
violence across the United States. Moreover, weak gun laws are
making our law enforcement officers less safe. The United
States is facing a crisis of epic proportion when it comes to
gun violence. Children are not safe at school. Shoppers are not
safe at stores. Worshippers are not safe at church. Journalists
are not safe in the newsroom. Gun massacres are happening more
often, and they are deadlier than ever.
If we want to protect the homeland and support law
enforcement, we must reform the laws that let dangerous people
obtain weapons and turn them on our communities and those who
are sworn to serve and protect. When we talk about protecting
the homeland, we must acknowledge the very real threat from
heavily-weaponized domestic terrorists, including white
supremacists and anti-Government extremists have. As FBI
Director Christopher Wray has said, domestic terrorism,
particularly white supremacist extremism, is the most
persistent and lethal threat to this country.
It is unfortunate that my colleagues across the aisle
refuse to include domestic terrorism as a part of this
committee's oversight plan, as we cannot properly examine how
to protect the homeland and support law enforcement without
acknowledging the most persistent terrorism threat we face as a
country. It is my hope that moving forward, the Members of this
committee can find common ground on combating violence and
protecting the homeland.
When it comes to protecting our communities from violence,
the Department of Homeland Security's grant programs are key.
For example, the Urban Area Security Initiative, commonly
called UASI, and State Homeland Security grant help ensure that
local law enforcement have the training and equipment they need
to protect against terrorist threat. As the Chairman from New
York so eloquently put, that $2 billion that New York has
gotten from UASI is a Homeland Security grant. It's a wonderful
program. I wish we had more money. The Department struggles
because we can only do so many cities across the country, and
those who fall off the list are the ones who come and complain
that we need the money to do it. So, I am sure some of our
colleagues will hear from those communities with the next round
of eligible communities.
The Nonprofit Security Grant Program provides nonprofit
organizations at high risk of a terrorist attack with funding
to help bolster their security, which is especially important
given the rise of right-wing extremist attack against
nonprofits such as faith-based communities. Even though
Congress has increased funding for the program, there is a
growing need for organizations to access the funding. The
Nonprofit Security Grant Program Improvement Act, which I
authored, make improvements to the program, and will provide
support to nonprofits with particular attention to nonprofits
in underserved communities.
As we work to ensure that law enforcement has the resources
to protect our communities, we must remain steadfast and
provide DHS with full and robust funding for the critical
grants program. I hope to hear from our witnesses on how we can
better support our law enforcement and public safety by passing
common-sense gun reform, combating domestic terrorism, and
supporting DHS grant funding, including UASI and Nonprofit
Security Grant Program. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 16, 2023
Before I begin, I want to condemn the hateful violence we saw
yesterday when two Congressional staffers, one of them an intern on her
first day at work, were beaten with a baseball bat while at work in
Virginia for Congressman Gerry Connolly. I pray they recover quickly.
Protecting the homeland ultimately means protecting the people who
live here, which is what the brave men and women who serve in law
enforcement do every day. We thank them for their service as we
commemorate National Police Week.
I welcome today's discussion about how the Federal Government can
support State and local law enforcement in their efforts to protect our
communities. Tragically, in the days and weeks leading up to this
hearing, there has been a series of mass killings inspired by those who
hold extremist views. My heart goes out to the victims and families of
those murdered in an apparent right-wing extremist shooting in Allen,
Texas. My heart also goes out to the victims and families of those
killed after a driver rammed his SUV into people waiting outside near a
shelter in Brownsville, Texas, after he reportedly shouted anti-
immigrant rhetoric.
When we talk about protecting the homeland and supporting State and
local law enforcement, we must acknowledge that extremist views coupled
with weak gun laws is driving violence across the United States.
Moreover, weak gun laws are making our law enforcement officers less
safe. The United States is facing a crisis of epic proportions when it
comes to gun violence. Children are not safe at school. Shoppers are
not safe at stores. Worshippers are not safe at church. Journalists are
not safe in the newsroom.
Gun massacres are happening more often, and they are deadlier than
ever before. If we want to protect the homeland and support law
enforcement, we must reform the laws that let dangerous people obtain
weapons and turn them on our communities and those who are sworn to
serve and protect. And when we talk about protecting the homeland, we
must acknowledge the very real threat from heavily-weaponized domestic
terrorists, including white supremacists and anti-Government
extremists. As FBI Director Christopher Wray has said, domestic
terrorism, particularly white supremacist extremism, is the ``most
persistent and lethal threat'' to the country.
It is unfortunate that my colleagues across the aisle refused to
include domestic terrorism as part of this Committee's Oversight Plan,
as we cannot properly examine how to protect the homeland and support
law enforcement without acknowledging the most persistent terrorism
threat we face as a country. It is my hope that, moving forward, the
Members of this committee can find common ground on combating violence
and protecting the homeland.
When it comes to protecting our communities from violence, the
Department of Homeland Security's grant programs are key. For example,
the Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) and State Homeland Security
Grant Program (SHSP) help ensure that local law enforcement have the
training and equipment they need to protect against terrorist threats.
The Nonprofit Security Grant Program (NSGP) provides nonprofit
organizations at high risk of a terrorist attack with funding to help
bolster their security, which is especially important, given the rise
in right-wing extremist attacks against nonprofits such as faith-based
communities. Even though Congress has increased funding for the
program, there is a growing need for organizations to access this
funding.
The Nonprofit Security Grant Program Improvement Act, which I
authored, makes improvements to the program and will provide support to
nonprofits, with particular attention to nonprofits in underserved
communities. As we work to ensure that law enforcement has the
resources to protect our communities, we must remain steadfast and
provide DHS with full and robust funding for critical grants programs.
I hope to hear from our witnesses on how we can better support our
law enforcement and public safety by passing common-sense gun reform,
combating domestic terrorism, and supporting DHS grant funding,
including UASI and the Nonprofit Security Grant Program.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member. Other
Members of the committee are reminded that opening statements
may be submitted for the record. I am pleased to have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this very
important topic, and I ask that our witnesses please rise and
raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Pfluger. Thank you. Let the record reflect that
the witnesses have answered in the affirmative. You may be
seated. I would like to now formally introduce our witnesses.
Michael Gerke serves as chief of police for the Odessa, Texas
Police Department. In this role, he serves as the chief
administrator of the Odessa Police Department and is
responsible for the policy, development, control, supervision,
and program implementation of this department and is
accountable for the effective delivery of police service to the
community. The chief's office is the command center of the
department and administrates the department's annual budget.
Chief Gerke has proudly served Odessa, Texas and that
department for more than 26 years. He received an associate
degree in criminal justice in police science from Odessa
College, a Bachelor of Applied Arts and Science and Criminal
Justice in Law Enforcement from Midwestern State University,
and a Master of Science from Tarleton State University.
I would like to now--and, Chief, thank you for being here.
I would like to now recognize the gentlewoman from California,
Mrs. Michelle Steel, to introduce Sheriff Don Barnes.
Mrs. Steel. Thank you very much for inviting me here today.
It is my honor to introduce Sheriff Don Barnes of Orange
County, California. With over 30 years of service, Sheriff
Barnes is well-versed in the public safety needs of Orange
County residents. Sheriff Barnes leads the 4,000 sworn
professional men and women who provide a variety of vital
public safety service to our community, our residents, over 3.2
million people.
Involvement in both State and national law enforcement
organizations that advocate common-sense public safety policy
is a priority for Sheriff Barnes. When I was the chair of the
Orange County Board of Supervisors, Sheriff Barnes and I worked
closely to respond to emergencies like COVID-19, civil unrest,
and wildfires. We also fought back together against
California's sanctuary State policies that would have
prohibited the county from working with ICE to apprehend
dangerous criminals.
It is not just serious work only, but we had fun too. I
wanted to show my appreciation to the sheriff's department and
sheriff. I brought the In-N-Out truck so we shared the burger
together during the lunch. So, it is not just serious work
relationship, but we are building our relationship together,
and I really love Sheriff Barnes.
I am proud to be here with Sheriff Barnes and look forward
to our continued work together to keep the people of Orange
County safe. The sheriff also serves as an executive officer
with the California State Sheriff's Association and serves as
the chair of California State Sheriff's Association's
Technology Committee. At the national level, he is chair of
Major County Sheriffs of America Intelligence Commander
Committee.
Sheriff Barnes strongly believes that members of law
enforcement must be engaged with the community they serve. He
is everywhere in Orange County. He serves as the board chairman
for Orange County Crime Stoppers. Because of our sheriff in
Orange County, his men and women, Orange County is one of the
safest cities in the United States, especially California, that
our crime rates are very high.
I can truly say from my personal experience that he is one
of the most exceptional law enforcement officers in the
country. I think he is the best and we are fortunate to have
him before this committee. I really want to thank him for being
here and it is very nice to see him in Washington, DC, not just
in Orange County. Thank you.
Chairman Pfluger. I thank the gentlelady from California
for that very nice introduction. I now recognize the Ranking
Member from Rhode Island, Mr. Magaziner, to introduce
Commissioner Cox.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. While there are parts
of the country where crime has increased in recent years, it is
also important to note that there are parts of the country that
have bucked that trend. For example, in my home city of
Providence in 2022, we had our lowest number of homicides in 50
years last year. Right up the road from us in Boston, the city
of Boston has had stable record levels of violent crime in
recent years that are near historic lows. So, in order to share
the lessons learned and the best practices from the
historically low rates of violent crime in Boston in recent
years, I am pleased to introduce Commissioner Michael Cox of
the Boston Police Department, a department of which he is a 30-
year veteran.
Prior to his appointment as commissioner in the Boston
Police Department, Commissioner Cox served as a bureau chief
and a sergeant detective in the Intelligence Unit, where he
performed dignitary protection duties, served as a liaison to
the U.S. Secret Service, and as a supervisor assigned to the
Joint Terrorism Task Force. Commissioner Cox also served as
chief of police for the Ann Arbor Police Department in Ann
Arbor, Michigan from 2019 to 2022. Welcome, Commissioner Cox,
and thank you.
Chairman Pfluger. I thank the Ranking Member. I would now
like to introduce our final witness on the panel. Mr. Rafael
Mangual is a fellow and head of research for the Policing and
Public Safety Initiative at the Manhattan Institute, a
contributing editor of City Journal, and a member of the
Council on Criminal Justice. Mr. Mangual's work has been
featured and mentioned in numerous publications, including the
Wall Street Journal, the Atlantic, the New York Post, and other
outlets. In 2020, he was appointed to serve a 4-year term as a
member of the New York State Advisory Committee on the U.S.
Commission on Civil Rights. Mr. Mangual has also testified
multiple times before Congress on policing topics. He holds
degrees from City University of New York and DePaul University
in Chicago, including a law degree.
Thank you for being here, and I would like to thank all of
our witnesses for being here. Now for the part that we actually
came for, the witness testimony. I would ask each of you, you
have submitted your written testimony, so please summarize, and
do try to stay within 5 minutes, because we do have lots of
Members who want to ask you questions. I now recognize from
Odessa, Texas, Chief Michael Gerke for your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL GERKE, CHIEF OF POLICE, ODESSA POLICE
DEPARTMENT

Chief Gerke. Well, good morning, distinguished Members of
the committee. The reason for the existence of law enforcement
agencies is to make the lives of the citizens that they serve
better. It's my belief that the main way that we do that is to
reduce violent crime. Violent crime has the most significant
effect on the victims. To this end, as an example of effective
policing, about 2\1/2\ years ago, we partnered with the United
States Attorney's Office in the Western District of Texas for
the priority prosecution of those individuals apprehended in
our community who were convicted felons, narcotic dealers, and
gang members who were in possession of firearms. This led not
only to a reduction of violent crime in the area, but also a
reduction in property crimes such as auto thefts and
burglaries. This is a shining example of what partnerships
between local and Federal authorities can accomplish.
We continue to have a very strong relationship with the
Assistant United States Attorney in our area, and she is one of
the most trusted and valued members of our team. It's very
important to have these relationships as we move into the
future and face the coming challenges.
The most persistent challenge that we feel at this point in
my community is the use and abuse of fentanyl. The use of
fentanyl has led to numerous overdoses and numerous deaths in
our community. We all know that that route, that trade route
for fentanyl starts in China, comes through Mexico, and crosses
the border, and ends up in our community. Particularly in West
Texas, it's harming predominantly our children, our young
adults. We've seen 12-year-olds to 19-year-olds to 60-year-olds
who have overdosed on fentanyl.
We're at the point in law enforcement that we have issued
Narcan or other types of antidotes to every one of our
officers, not just to help to relieve the overdoses with the
victims, but also to help each other, because, unfortunately
officers do come in contact with fentanyl when we find it
illegally on the street, unknowingly get contaminated, and we
have to apply those antidotes to each other.
But I also want to talk about another challenge that we
face. That challenge is staffing levels, pure and simple.
Odessa, as you look across this panel, I am the small guy on
the panel, so I have 181 sworn positions. Of those 181
positions, I'm about 38 short as we as we speak today. You
know, I live in Odessa, which is the Permian Basin, which is
one of the world's leading oil and gas producing areas, right?
So, high school graduates often don't see the value of
education. They don't see the value of waiting, and they move
into employment in the petroleum industry. Quite honestly,
those careers pay more than a career in law enforcement. You
can take an 18-year-old young man that graduates from Permian
High School, and that young man in a matter of a few months,
can be making six figures in the oil field. Our starting salary
is $69,000. Also, in Texas, you know, individuals cannot be
employed as police officers until they're 21 years of age. Many
times, that 3-year gap leads individuals to different career
paths and down paths that no longer allow them to be in law
enforcement.
Going back to violent crime and fighting that and other
issues such as narcotics in our community, I want to take a
moment to just talk about the importance of technology because
when you look at smaller departments like mine, sometimes the
funding is not there, but there's grants. But sometimes those
smaller departments, even smaller than mine, have a very small
knowledge of those grants. So, I think there needs to be a
push, a help for those smaller departments to understand those
grants. Because I tell you, automatic license plate readers,
and video cameras, and advanced analytical software, and
forensic equipment are game-changers. They're absolute game-
changers.
Finally, I'd just like to say it's essential that more and
better cooperation between all levels of law enforcement happen
and that proper outcomes be identified. Please understand,
numbers of arrests and the numbers of seizures don't really
matter as much as lowering the number of crime victims. It's
what we should be worried about is our victims. We can only
accomplish these reductions if we all work together. Remember,
and this is what we say around the office all the time, egos
and attitudes are the enemy of progress. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Chief Gerke follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael Gerke
Distinguished Members of the committee, the reason for the
existence of law enforcement agencies is to make the lives of the
citizens that they serve better. It is my belief that the main goal of
local law enforcement to accomplish this endeavor is the reduction of
violent crime. These crimes have the most significant effect on their
victims. To this end approximately 2\1/2\ years ago the Odessa Police
Department entered a partnership with the United States Attorney's
Office for the Western District of Texas for the priority prosecution
of those individuals apprehended in our community who were convicted
felons, narcotics dealers, and criminal gang members. This led not only
to a reduction of violent crime in the area, but also to the reduction
of property crimes such as auto thefts and burglaries.
This is a shining example of what partnerships between the local
and Federal authorities can accomplish. We continue to have a very
strong relationship with the Assistant United States Attorney assigned
to our area and view her as one of the most trusted and valued members
of our team. It is very important to have these relationships as we
move into the future with the challenges that we currently face.
The most persistent challenge does not involve crime per se. It
involves the resources needed to fight crime, namely personnel. Like
many law enforcement agencies across America, the Odessa Police
Department is significantly short of police officers. We have an
authorized strength of 181 and are currently 38 officers short. In
Odessa, which is in the Permian Basin, which is one of the world's
leading oil- and gas-producing areas, high school graduates often do
not see the value of education after the high school level. This is
because they can move to employment in the petroleum industry that pays
more than a career in law enforcement. In Texas, individuals cannot be
employed as police officers until they are 21 years of age and many
times the 3 years after high school leads them to different career
paths or down paths that no longer allow them to be in law enforcement.
The social harm perspective looks at those issues in a community
that cause the greatest social harm. Undoubtedly the cause of the
greatest social harm in Odessa and the surrounding area currently is
sale and ingestion of Fentanyl by our citizens. This has led to
countless overdoses and many deaths. Officers and paramedics routinely
respond to these calls and many times administer an antidote such as
Narcan. While this product and others like it are effective, it is
getting more difficult to acquire an adequate supply for the needs of
first responders.
As we all know, the difference in Fentanyl and other abused
narcotics such as cocaine or methamphetamines is the drastically higher
lethality rate for Fentanyl. Also, Fentanyl has been introduced to much
of the population in a surreptitious manner. Many times, individuals
believe that they are ingesting one substance and unwittingly ingesting
Fentanyl as it has been added to the original substance or been made to
look like a substance that it is not. In Odessa, the predominate form
of Fentanyl that we see is in the form of counterfeit M-30 pills
(oxycodone). Because of the lethality of Fentanyl, we treat the selling
of it as a violent crime. When we identify a supplier, removing that
individual and their supply of illegal narcotics from our community
becomes a very high priority.
With this being said, the most predominate illegal narcotic used in
Odessa and the surrounding area is methamphetamine. Large quantities of
this substance are seized each year. Users commit crimes ranging from
robbery to theft to procure property or cash that can be traded for the
substance.
In the fight against violent crime and illegal narcotics as with
most endeavors, information is power and is essential. To this point it
is necessary to share information amongst all levels of law
enforcement. This allows for efficiencies which has become much more
necessary due to the shortage of law enforcement personnel. This
sharing of information requires two things. First that it be collected
and second that relationships exist between agencies that facilitate
the passage of information.
The collection of important information is made more difficult by
the reduced number of law enforcement officers. However, this gap can
be filled to some extent with technology. Many larger agencies have had
automatic license plate readers (ALPR), video cameras, advanced
analytical software, and forensic equipment for some time. The
acquisition of these technologies has been difficult for smaller
departments because of the lack of funding. These departments must
educate themselves with knowledge about Federal and State grant
opportunities and other funding avenues. The Odessa Police Department
has found ALPRs particularly effective in helping to identify vehicles
driven by suspects of crime. We have also found that purchasing the
equipment necessary to join the National Integrated Ballistic Imaging
Network and joining the network with the coordination of the Bureau of
Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms to be essential in solving and linking
firearms-related crime.
Creating relationships that facilitate the sharing of information
is accomplished easiest at the local level. The Odessa Police
Department and the Midland Police Department (our nearest neighbor)
have created the ability for the officers of each respective department
to view on demand, the report information from the other. These
departments have also created a local task force that focuses on
removing violent criminals and narcotics from both communities. We have
created a radio network in Ector County (the county in which Odessa
resides) that every agency in the county uses. Most Federal and State
agencies also have access to this network. Soon, this network will
expand to encompass a new radio network in Midland County.
Relationship building is most difficult when dealing with Federal
agencies. This difficulty, at least in our area, is caused by the
almost constant turnover of personnel in these agencies. In the past
this would not be as big of an issue because most departments had
officers stationed with the Federal agencies as task force officers.
The number of task force officers has declined because many departments
are recalling their officers to fill vacancies.
It is essential that more and better cooperation between all levels
of law enforcement happen and that proper outcomes be identified.
Numbers of arrests and amounts of seizures do not matter nearly as much
as lowering the number of crime victims. We can only accomplish these
reductions if we all work together. Remember, egos and attitudes are
the enemy of progress.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Chief Gerke. I now recognize
Sheriff Barnes for your opening statement of 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF DON BARNES, SHERIFF, ORANGE COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

Sheriff Barnes. Thank you, Chairman Pfluger and D'Esposito.
I want to also thank Ranking Members Magaziner, Carter, and
Thompson for allowing us to provide a local perspective on
policing in America. My testimony will focus on the challenges,
some of which are the result of misguided policies, and I will
share some what I believe solutions to these issues.
Before discussing broad threats, it is important for the
committee to know the environment law enforcement faces as a
result of policies that have boosted criminal activity and made
our jobs much more difficult. Over the last decade, California
has incrementally enacted laws reducing penalties for crime
while also removing tools from law enforcement. The results of
the decriminalization efforts are clear. Since 2011, we've seen
an almost 32 percent increase in homicides in the State.
Aggravated assaults have increased by almost 35 percent. Drug-
related deaths have more than doubled from 4,118 to 10,898 in a
10-year period, and the years following that have gone up
substantially more.
The National Retail Federation reported an estimated $94.5
billion in losses to retail theft Nation-wide in 2021, with the
largest losses occurring in the State of California
metropolitan areas. This number for comparison was $44 billion
in 2014.
As we address the policy-created lawlessness, we deal with
the local impacts of external threats facing our country. The
border crisis, the rapidly emerging cyber threat, and an on-
going wave of foreign malign influence, a fentanyl crisis of
epic proportions, and the proliferation of active-shooting
incidents across our country.
Regarding the border, most relevant to this committee is a
lack of an effective strategy to secure our Southern Border.
One thing this has meant for my community is an influx of
fentanyl. In 2021, just the Orange County Sheriff's Department
investigation seized 132 pounds of fentanyl and 16,000
clandestine-produced fentanyl pills. One year later, this
increased to 450 pounds of pure fentanyl and over 400,000
clandestine-produced fentanyl pills. What we're seeing at the
border today in the wake of Title 42 ending, will manifest into
security challenges for local communities.
The challenges faced by the men and women of law
enforcement are daunting, but there is hope. There are
solutions. Today, I will highlight one of those solutions, our
Fusion Center in Orange County, the Orange County Intelligence
Assessment Center, known as the OCIAC, created in 2007, has
evolved into addressing all crimes and all hazards, not just
counterterrorism. Recognizing the fact that sharing information
is key to addressing challenges of the day, we have integrated
OCIAC into facing many facets of our operations.
To meet the increased cyber threat, OCIAC developed a Cyber
Liaison Officer Program. To date, over 700 personnel have been
trained. We participate in active shooter and school safety,
over 300 assessments done in just the last calendar school
year. We created a house of worship training. In 2016, launched
the Faith Liaison Ops Program, and more than 500 houses of
worship have partnered in this program and training.
We participate in human trafficking. Last year during the
Super Bowl, the OCIAC led one of the Nation's most successful
human trafficking operations known as Operation Red Zone,
partnering with 11 local agencies, resulting in the arrest of
56 suspects, and 16 victims being recovered, including two
juveniles as part of that operation.
Finally, I'd like to highlight a few ways the Federal
Government can better support local law enforcement. The
security at the border is paramount. Congress must pass
legislation to secure our border once and for all. Major County
Sheriffs of America documented this in their border security
priorities and has been included in my written testimony. I
want to recognize and appreciate the fact that this committee's
recently-passed Border Reinforcement Act incorporates several
of those priorities.
Sustained investment in personnel and resources for our
fusion centers are paramount. Increased Homeland Security grant
funding and embedded personnel in our fusion centers will
strengthen our operations. More interagency communication among
partners would assist in addressing the cyber threat and local
tools to address technologies like unmanned aircraft.
California's example should be a warning for others
minimizing the consequences for law-breaking results in a
breakdown of society. Congress must be watchful of the
destabilizing impacts of policies that empower criminals and
victimize law-abiding residents.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share my
perspective. I'm happy to help and answer any questions you may
have of me. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Barnes follows:]
Prepared Statement of Don Barnes
May 16, 2023
Thank you Chairmen Pfluger and D'Eposito and Ranking Members
Magaziner and Carter for holding this hearing and seeking local law
enforcement's perspective on the security challenges facing the
American homeland.
We gather here today in the midst of National Police Week, an
annual time to honor the fallen peace officers of our communities. This
week is also a moment for our national leaders to focus on policies
that help law enforcement accomplish our public safety mission.
Today, law enforcement and the communities we serve face challenges
on multiple fronts. The risks are great, but there is also no greater
opportunity to take action. My testimony will focus on those
challenges, some of which are the result of misguided polices, and
share solutions that will ultimately secure our homeland.
policy-driven crime wave
I will start with a focus on crime. The 50 States have been called
laboratories of democracy. If that's the case, California's lab was
blown up by our experiment with decriminalization.
Over the last decade, consequences for crime have eroded and
certain tools used by law enforcement to keep our communities safe have
been removed. This has made our job harder and put the safety of law-
abiding residents at risk.
In 2011, the California State legislature passed Criminal Justice
Realignment (Assembly Bill 109), which shifted a substantial portion of
the State prison population to county facilities. In 2014, a
deceptively-titled ballot initiative, the ``Safe Neighborhoods and
Schools Act (Proposition 47),'' was approved. This bill turned the two
most prominent categories of crime, property theft and narcotics
violations, from felonies to misdemeanors. Two years later another
deceptive initiative was approved, Proposition 57, which resulted in
additional releases of people from State prison earlier than their
original sentence length.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Proposition 57 was approved with the intention of showing
leniency to offenders who are truly non-violent. Unfortunately, many
voters were not aware that the State's definition of ``nonviolent''
included rape of an unconscious victim, solicitation to commit murder,
and assault with a deadly weapon on a peace officer amongst many other
crimes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the same time, we have seen legislation that either removed
effective tools from law enforcement or placed burdensome requirements
on our agencies. Overly burdensome and unnecessary requirements on law
enforcement divert our resources away from front-line services and into
administrative bureaucracy. Even today, there are proposals being
considered to prevent the use of apprehension K9s, prohibit certain
investigative techniques, and eliminate the enforcement of certain
traffic violations.
The results of these policies speak for themselves:

Our State prison population has declined from 165,000 in
2010 to 90,934 as of March 2023. The Legislative Analyst Office
in California estimates that the State has nearly 20,000 empty
prison beds, comprising 20 percent of the State's total prison
capacity. Unfortunately this decline in the prison population
and empty bed space is not a reflection of a lack of need in
California. Rather, the State simply shifted a large number of
people from State custody to local communities.

In 2011 there were 1,794 homicides in California; this
number increased by 31.6 percent to 2,361 in 2021, compared to
our overall population increase of less than 10 percent over
that same period.

Aggravated assaults increased by 34.6 percent from 91,483 to
123,122 in 2021.

A lack of true consequences for illegal behavior has put law
enforcement in greater danger. The five most recent California
officers killed in the line of duty were murdered by
individuals with extensive criminal histories. The majority of
these individuals were released early due to lenient criminal
justice policies.

Drug-related deaths have skyrocketed in our State. According
to the California Department of Public Health there were 4,113
California drug-related deaths in 2011. A decade later, in
2021, that total more than doubled to 10,898.

While we see property crime still going unreported to law
enforcement, retail losses help tell the story of increased
theft. The National Retail Federation reported that, in 2021,
there was an estimated $94.5 billion in losses to retail theft
Nation-wide, with largest losses occurring in California
metropolitan areas. In a similar survey conducted in 2014 this
number was estimated to be $44 billion.

Although our proactive posture has kept crime rates in
Orange County--which is proudly home to more than 3.1 million
residents--relatively low, we are beginning to see the impact
of decisions made by the district attorney in the largest
county within the Southern California region--Los Angeles. The
DA's failure to prosecute on a variety of offenses has
emboldened career criminals. Just last week our deputies
arrested a burglary crew of four individuals from Los Angeles
attempting to burglarize a residence in Yorba Linda.
external security pressures
We cannot successfully bring down crime rates without violators
facing real consequences. In addition, our challenges are exacerbated
by external threats around our country. These threats include: the
border crisis, the rapidly emerging cyber threat, an on-going wave of
foreign malign influence, a fentanyl crisis of epic proportions, and
the proliferation of active-shooter incidents.
Border Challenges.--Most relevant to this committee is the lack of
an effective strategy to secure our Southern Border. One thing this has
meant for my community is an influx of fentanyl. In 2021, Orange County
Sheriff's Department investigators seized 132.9 pounds of fentanyl,
which equates to approximately 30 million potential lethal doses, and
16,278 pills. In 2022, this increased to 449.9 pounds of fentanyl and
405,283 pills suspected of containing fentanyl seized.
The lack of border enforcement has also extended to local
communities in part because U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) has virtually ceased picking up inmates who are released with a
detainer.
In calendar year 2021, the Orange County Sheriff's Department
notified ICE of 143 individuals who had detainers and were due to be
released from our jail. Of the 143 individuals referred, only 73--or 51
percent--were taken into ICE custody. Those not taken into custody by
ICE were released back into the community. A total of 24 of those
released individuals were re-arrested for new offenses in Orange
County.
In calendar year 2022, my department notified ICE of 155
individuals who had detainers and were due to be released. Of those 155
individuals, only 17--or 10.9 percent--were transferred to ICE's
custody. With respect to the other 138 individuals who, under State
law, were eligible for transfer to ICE, ICE took no action and these
individuals were released back into the community. A total of 20 of
these individuals were re-arrested for new offenses in Orange County.
Failure to remove these individuals jeopardizes the safety of all
Orange County residents. California law limits notifications to inmates
who have committed serious crimes and/or have a criminal history. In
effect, this State law results in my department only notifying ICE of
those individuals with detainers who pose the greatest risk to our
community. We only notify ICE when the individuals have aggravating
factors and therefore merit being taken into ICE custody.
What we are seeing at the border today in the wake of Title 42's
end, will manifest into additional security challenges for local
communities.
local solutions--fusion centers
I know this is a bleak picture. The challenges faced by the men and
women of law enforcement are daunting. But there is hope. There are
plausible solutions. As the inscription on the Nation's peace officer
memorial over at Judiciary Square states, ``in valor there is hope.''
There is much valor amongst the individuals working in law enforcement
today. There is a commitment to do the work necessary to meet those
challenges and to use innovative measures to overcome obstacles.
Today I will highlight how we use our fusion center in Orange
County to address threats before they materialize and support efforts
to address current crime trends.
The Orange County Intelligence Assessment Center (OCIAC) was
created in 2007 by the Orange County Sheriff's Department and our
municipal agency partners. It started as a Terrorism Early Warning
group pre-9/11. Operated by my department, OCIAC includes multiple
municipal, State, and Federal agencies working alongside each other
every day to make sure information stovepipes are minimized and
relevant threat information is shared routinely. While initially
designed to address threats of terrorism, it has evolved into a tool to
address all crimes and all hazards.
While some people criticize the expansion of fusion centers'
mission from terrorism-only to all crimes and all hazards, they ignore
the reality that information sharing among local, State, and Federal
agencies and the private sector is fundamental to countering all types
of threats, whether they are terrorism, cyber, or criminal. My agency
is responsible for preventing and investigating all of those types of
crimes, and we will continue to do all we can to ensure our people and
our partner agencies throughout Orange County, southern California, our
State, and our Nation get the benefit of that institutionalized
information sharing.
Recognizing the fact that the sharing information is key to
addressing challenges of the day, we have integrated OCIAC into many
facets of our operations. A few examples:

Cyber Threat.--According to the FBI, California residents
lost over $2 billion to cyber criminals in 2022. This number is
an increase from the $1.2 billion in 2021 and the $621 million
in 2020. Ransomware attacks are one of the most prevalent
threats. We have recently seen this kind of attack on public-
sector agencies like the San Bernardino Sheriff's Department
and the city of Dallas, Texas.
To meet the increased cyber threat OCIAC developed a Cyber Liaison
Officer (CLO) Program. Through this program we train our staff
to recognize cyber threats and take appropriate action. We
teach the CLO program at our academy. To date, approximately
700 personnel have been trained county-wide.
Last May, OCIAC led a multi-agency tabletop exercise regarding
cyber attacks with municipal agencies, Federal agencies to
include DHS, and private-sector partners. This preparation and
education of staff is critical to staying ahead of virtual
cyber criminals including terrorists.
An example of how OCIAC assists in addressing a cyber attack
occurred in 2021 when emergency call centers in Orange County
experienced a Telephone Denial of Service to our Public Safety
Answering Point, or 9-1-1 system. The incident caused by
malicious actors overwhelmed our incoming 9-1-1 lines with
illegitimate 9-1-1 calls delaying critical calls for service to
our community. The Orange County Cyber Crime Task Force (OCCTF)
and the Orange County Intelligence Center (OCIAC) Cyber Unit
were activated. OCIAC specifically helped with the
investigation and restoration of service by identifying similar
issues in other jurisdictions and best practices to resolve
this kind of attack.

Active Shooter and School Safety.--OCIAC is integrated with
our School Mobile Resource and Assessment Team (SMART). SMART
is utilized in school situations and incidents related to
violence, threats, possession and/or use of weapons, unstable
behaviors, and suicidal actions or tendencies. The team
responds at the request of law enforcement personnel or school
administration to provide services and resources, including
threat assessments, criminal investigation, case management and
referrals to mandatory counseling, where deemed appropriate.
The goal of SMART is to evaluate and assess each incident
individually, to effectively resolve the matter through the
least intrusive means available (while still maintaining safety
and security to the school), and ultimately return the staff
and students to their daily routine. For the 2021-22 school
SMART, in consultation with OCIAC, conducted over 300. As an
example, earlier this month OCIAC worked with public safety
agencies and school personnel to determine the veracity of a
viral social media posts circulating on-line threatening a
school shooting causing a pivot of law enforcement resources
while creating panic and anxiety to school districts, parents,
and our communities.
When an active-shooter incident occurred on May 15, 2022 at the
Geneva Presbyterian Church in Laguna Woods in Orange County,
OCIAC coordinated with the Las Vegas fusion center (the
suspect's home town) to provide vital information on the
suspect. This is an example of the type of information sharing
and collaboration that is uniquely enabled through the National
Network of Fusion Centers every day around the country.
OCIAC assisted in intelligence analysis that led to the arrest of a
40-year-old man who threatened a ``killing spree'' in YouTube
videos. The arrest stemmed from reports of bizarre email
exchanges and threats to a staff member of a large 4-year
university in Orange County. The suspect had 9 firearms in his
possession.

House of Worship Security.--In 2016, OCIAC launched its
Faith Liaison program. More than 500 houses of worship have
partnered in the faith outreach program. This program engages
the faith community in trainings for critical infrastructure
safety, active-shooter awareness, and security briefings.
Program staff fields 70-100 calls per week with 10-15 meetings
per week with faith communities. This effort was highlighted as
a ``best practice'' in the 2019 U.S. Homeland Security Advisory
Council Report, ``Preventing Targeted Violence Against Faith-
Based Communities.''

Foreign Malign Influence.--OCIAC has taken a lead in
educating local businesses and public officials about malicious
attempts by foreign actors to steal intellectual property and
influence elected officials. OCIAC is coordinating closely with
DHS's Office of Intelligence and Analysis and FBI's Foreign
Malign Influence Task Force. This includes vetting all requests
from foreign entities received by our county government.

Integration with High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area
(HIDTA) Program.--Fusion Centers have become an important
component of HIDTA operations. Fusion center can provide
tactical support during on-going investigations, analytical
products, subject workups, takedown packages, communications
charts, assessments, mapping products, organizational profiles,
and intelligence bulletins. This information provides our
narcotics information with tools to identify suspects and make
both seizures and arrests. OCIACs relationship with FBI and DHS
is critical to identify individuals and organizations involved
in transnational organized crime.

Human Trafficking.--OCIAC plays a critical role in efforts
to address human trafficking through their information sharing
amongst multiple agencies. As an example, In February 2022,
OCIAC coordinated Operation Red Zone in partnership with 11
local law enforcement agencies, the Orange County District
Attorney's Office and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security
to identify victims of human trafficking and hold their
perpetrators accountable. Fifty-six suspects were arrested and
16 victims were recovered, including two juveniles under the
age of 16.
federal solutions
In closing, I would like to highlight a few ways the Federal
Government can better support local law enforcement efforts. This
support will ultimately translate to a safer homeland.
Secure the border.--The crisis and the border and ensuing chaos
that has occurred since the expiration of Title 42 remains a
significant threat to the security of local communities. Congress must
pass legislation to secure our border once and for all. The Major
County Sheriffs of America's ``Border Security and Immigration
Principles'' document outlines necessary actions that should be taken
(attached). Key priorities include:

Gain and maintain operational control of all United States
borders.

Fully implement a biometric entry/exit system.

Use all available American power, including sanctions, to
eradicate murderous Mexico-based cartels.

Ensure access to information and intelligence for all State
and local law enforcement.

Support State and local law enforcement with proper training
and updated technologies.

Require reimbursement to locals for housing of illegal
immigrants.

Continue to work with local law enforcement to develop a
strategy to ensure proper procedure is followed regarding ICE
detainers.

The legal immigration process should be reformed and align
with enacted Congressional priorities.

In order to accomplish the above articulated goals, it is
imperative these efforts be fully budgeted, authorized, and
appropriated. Increased funding for Federal grants like
Operation Stonegarden would further help local law enforcement
mitigate security risks associated with the border.
I want to recognize and appreciate the fact that this committee's
recently-passed Border Reinforcement Act incorporates several of those
priorities.
Support fusion centers.--The way we utilize our fusion center in
Orange County is a model that jurisdictions across the Nation could
follow. To maximize our effectiveness, fusion centers require sustained
investment in personnel and resources. Increased FEMA grant funding
through the State Homeland Security Grant Program and the Urban Area
Security Initiative are important. An enhanced and sustained commitment
by Federal agencies to embed personnel in local and State fusion
centers will strengthen their abilities Nation-wide.
Cybersecurity and emerging technology.--More interagency
communication among Federal partners and with local partners would
assist in addressing the cyber threat. The current uncoordinated
approach of addressing the cyber threat creates a challenge. Multiple
Federal law enforcement agencies appear to be addressing the cyber
threat independent of one another with disparate approaches.
Additionally, we must redouble efforts to obtain lawful access to
encrypted devices and platforms when they are concealing evidence of a
crime. Finally, local law enforcement must be given the tools to
address emerging technologies like unmanned aircraft systems.
Guard against decriminalization.--Let California's example be a
warning for other jurisdictions. When consequences for law-breaking are
minimized, it results in less safety for our communities and ultimately
a breakdown of our society at the local level. Congress must be
watchful of the destabilizing impact of policies that empower criminals
and victimize law-abiding residents.
Thank you again for the opportunity to share my perspective and I
am happy to help this committee address the critical issues it
continues to address.
ATTACHMENT.--Major County Sheriffs of America Border Security and
Immigration Principles
February 2023
The Major County Sheriffs of America (MCSA) appreciates the on-
going national conversation about immigration and border security.
Policy solutions are long overdue. Our member sheriffs represent over
130 million Americans, and we cover regions on or near the Southern,
Northern, and Maritime Borders where the effects of illegal immigration
and inadequate border security are felt most acutely. From narcotics
and gangs to human trafficking and labor exploitation, this crisis
impacts our communities on a daily basis. As elected sheriffs who are
sworn and entrusted to protect the public, we have a duty to enforce
the law and an obligation to work with our Federal, State, and local
law enforcement partners to reduce the threat.
We recognize that the creation and enforcement of immigration
policy is fundamentally a Federal responsibility. The administration
and Congress must deal with many millions of illegally present
individuals in the United States while also modernizing our immigration
system into one that is functional and efficient. To date, America's
border security and immigration policy failures have created
significant State and local law enforcement challenges. MCSA is
encouraged that a bipartisan group of senators has renewed efforts in
the 118th Congress to explore workable immigration and border security
legislative solutions. Any solution must include tangible improvements
that front-line of law enforcement officials have been urging for
years.
major county sheriffs of america principles
Gain and maintain operational control of all United States borders.
The first step is to ensure that advanced technology, physical
infrastructure, and adequate Federal agency staffing levels are
deployed to secure all of America's borders--Northern, Southern, and
Maritime.
Fully implement a biometric entry/exit system.
Knowing who enters our country and if or when they leave the
country is basic yet vital information. The 9/11 Commission recommended
implementation of this system two decades ago, and still gaps remain.
Use all available American power, including sanctions, to eradicate
murderous Mexico-based cartels.
Violent crime and record-setting overdose deaths in our communities
are being fueled by the Mexican cartels--specifically the Sinaloa and
Jalisco New Generation cartels. Despite abundant evidence that these
foreign organizations are directly responsible for killing more
American citizens than any other entity on the globe--more than 100,000
in 2021 alone--U.S. foreign policy has been weak and utterly
ineffective at addressing the threat. Despite heroic efforts by our
underfunded Federal law enforcement partners, these transnational
criminal organizations operate with near impunity, and overdose deaths
continue to shatter records. Other foreign criminal organizations--
especially those based in China--that supply these cartels with
precursors to make fentanyl and other deadly narcotics need to be held
accountable as well. It is time for Congress and the administration to
implement a tougher, more comprehensive array of foreign policy tools
with Mexico, China, and other countries to isolate and neutralize the
cartels.
Ensure access to information and intelligence for all State and local
law enforcement.
Information sharing among Federal, State, local, and Tribal law
enforcement is critical to maintaining public safety and combatting a
wide variety of interstate and international threats. State and local
law enforcement must have access to all pertinent background
information about individuals we encounter in our jurisdictions,
whether in our correctional facilities or in our communities. When an
individual comes into police contact, a routine query should return
information from all relevant databases so that front-line officers and
deputies have comprehensive situational awareness. Officer safety and
public safety depend on timely and actionable information from multiple
sources. Local law enforcement has a need to know, and the Federal
Government has a need to share, as the 9/11 Commission recognized 20
years ago. In correctional facilities, complete and timely information
is vital for the classification process to ensure an individual is
placed at the proper security level, for their protection and that of
our correctional staff and other inmates.
Support State and local law enforcement with proper training and
updated technologies.
While immigration enforcement is and should be the Federal
Government's responsibility, many State and local law enforcement
agencies support their Federal partners through task forces and joint
operations. These agencies must be properly trained, equipped, and
informed to ensure their officers can provide critical support.
Protecting the homeland is a shared responsibility, and focused Federal
support of these efforts will help State and local law enforcement be
capable of doing its part.
Require reimbursement to locals for housing of illegal immigrants.
Locals should not be required to bear the cost associated with
housing any person that is in this country illegally. Federal
reimbursement must cover the stay of an illegal immigrant from the
moment they enter a detention facility until they are released. Just as
immigration enforcement is the Federal Government's responsibility, the
financial burden should be as well.
Continue to work with local law enforcement to develop a strategy to
ensure proper procedure is followed regarding ICE detainers.
Numerous Federal courts have determined ICE detainers are
unconstitutional and that arresting aliens based on immigration status
exceeds sheriffs' arrest authority. Without proper arrest authority,
sheriffs cannot disregard an individual's Fourth Amendment rights. No
law enforcement official wants to release an individual charged with
heinous crimes back into the community and ICE has the responsibility
to ensure the process for detaining an individual meets the legal
standards.
MCSA seeks continued support from the administration, Congress, and
specifically ICE to afford sheriffs an additional legal basis to defend
themselves when they are sued for faithfully executing their public
safety duties by detaining individuals at ICE's request.
The legal immigration process should be reformed and align with enacted
Congressional priorities.
The immigration system should ensure everyone who enters America is
fully vetted, the process is timely and efficient, and that the latest
technology including biometric verification is utilized. The process
should allow for temporary workers as long as they pay taxes and are
fully compliant with Federal, State, and local laws. Compliance with
Federal, State, and local laws by all visitors should be enforced. The
system should also be timely for those seeking permanent admission and
citizenship in line with Congressionally-established immigration goals.
It should also enable expedited due process so that people who violate
our laws are quickly removed from the country.
In order to accomplish the above articulated goals, it is imperative
these efforts be fully budgeted, authorized, and appropriated.
Sheriffs are the highest law enforcement officials in our counties.
Immigration policy and enforcement are Federal Government
responsibilities, and as such, a lawful, efficient, responsible, and
compassionate Federal system should be fully funded to reflect those
priorities.
The member sheriffs of the Major County Sheriffs of America are
available to discuss these issues and appreciate the opportunity to
work collaboratively with both the administration and Congress to
secure our Nation.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Sheriff Barnes. I now
recognize Commissioner Cox for his opening statement of 5
minutes.

STATEMENT OF MICHAEL COX, COMMISSIONER, BOSTON POLICE
DEPARTMENT

Mr. Cox. Thank you, Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member
Magaziner, Chairman D'Esposito, and Ranking Member Carter, and
Ranking Member Thompson for the invitation to testify alongside
my fellow law enforcement leaders.
It's my honor to represent the men and women of the Boston
Police Department and the city of Boston. I welcome the
opportunity to be with you today and share the impact of the
partnerships with the Federal Government that we're having in
Boston.
The Boston Police Department has a long history of
proactive community policing, combined with strategic
deployment, and focused interventions based on analysis and
crime data intelligence. A substantial portion of our analytic
capabilities are funded by our partnership with the Federal
Government through grants that are critical to public safety in
the Boston metro region.
First and foremost, we are a strong proponent of community
policing in our department. To keep our city safe, the police
must build trust with residents in all the neighborhoods we
serve through deliberate and consistent relationship building.
These efforts are critical to preventing crime and terrorism.
Indeed, community members will not report criminal or
suspicious behavior if they don't trust the local police to act
appropriately with the information. The Boston Police
Department prioritizes partnering with stakeholders to address
issues and solve problems. In addition, the BPD partners with
mental health and social service programs to connect those at
risk with services and support.
Our department has strengthened our on-going engagement
efforts and started community CompStat meetings in each of our
11 police districts. The goal is to take a sense of empowerment
and problem solving we get from the internal CompStat meetings
and push it out into the community. Our Intelligence-Led
Policing Model complements our community policing. It provides
real-time intelligence and analysis to inform strategic
decision making and deployment of resources with a focus on
individuals driving crime and violence.
This model is paying dividends in Boston. Overall, serious
crime, Part I crime, have been going in a downward trend,
declining more than 50 percent since 2005, which correlates
with the establishment of our Boston Regional Intelligence
Center, better known as the BRIC, that same year. Year to date,
Part I offenses have declined 6 percent compared to 2022 and 6
percent below a 5-year average.
Annual shooting victim totals have fluctuated over the past
10 years. In 2018, 2019, and 2021, our number has been
historically low then. Then, like many other cities, total
shooting victims reached a 10-year high in Boston in 2020.
However, unlike other major cities, Boston saw a 28 percent
decrease in 2021. In 2022, shooting victims totals declined an
additional 8 percent to the lowest level since the 1950's.
Despite the decline in crimes, firearm violence continues
to be a concern. Aftermarket enhancement, like large-capacity
magazines and sear switches, as well as the emergence of
privately-manufactured firearms, better known as ghost guns,
have exasperated the issues. Last year, with the assistance
from our Federal partners, we investigated individuals
manufacturing ghost guns and yielded firearm parts, 3D
printers, and ammunition. The number of ghost guns recovered in
2022 increased 79 percent from 2021.
Overall, there was 24 percent increase in recovered crime
guns between 2019 and 2022 in Boston. In 2022, approximately 10
percent of crime guns recovered were reported stolen. Thirty-
three percent of those were from Massachusetts. The rest were
from elsewhere. Repeat offenders account for a large portion of
violence in our city. In 2022, 564 individuals were arrested on
firearm charges. Forty-two percent had prior firearm arrests,
with 102 of those arrested having 3 or more.
The BRIC was established in 2005 to coordinate efforts with
public safety participants in the Boston Urban Area Security
Initiative, better known as UASI grant. It was created to
reduce criminal activity and prevent and respond to terrorism
in all its forms. DHS and the intelligence analyst personnel
are instrumental to the intelligence-sharing and risk
mitigations. DHS cybersecurity expertise has provided effective
support in investigating ransomware attacks and other
financially-motivated cyber crimes.
I and many of our counterparts are concerned that level
funding or decreasing grants is the potential here, and we are
deeply concerned about that. Congress could assist law
enforcement by increasing funding across Homeland Security
Grant Program to include the UASI and consider broadening its
applicability beyond terrorism to include threats traditionally
mitigated by U.S. Department of Defense and the intelligence
community.
Federal investments in grant programs are vital, as are the
assignments of DHS and the personnel assigned to its fusion
centers. Without these resources, cities and towns are
vulnerable, and I encourage Congress to continue to invest in
these programs. Thank you for giving me this opportunity.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Cox follows:]
Prepared Statement of Michael A. Cox
May 16, 2023
Thank you Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, Chairman
D'Esposito, and Ranking Member Carter for the invitation to testify at
this hearing alongside my fellow leaders in law enforcement. The
Federal Government is a critical partner in public safety for local
police departments, and I welcome the opportunity to be with you today
to share the impact these partnerships are having in the city of
Boston.
The Boston Police Department (BPD) has a long history of proactive
Community Policing combined with strategic deployment and focused
interventions based on real-time analysis of crime data and
intelligence. A substantial portion of our analytic capabilities are
funded by the Federal Government through grants that are critical not
only to public safety in Boston but to the entire Metro Boston region.
First and foremost, I am a strong proponent of Community Policing
and believe that in order to have a truly safe city, we must have the
trust of the communities that we serve. Trust is achieved through
deliberate and consistent relationship building over time between
police and residents in all of our neighborhoods. The community is
crucially important to preventing crime and terrorism. Indeed,
community members will not report criminal activity or suspicious
behavior if they don't trust the local police department to act
appropriately with that information.
BPD prioritizes building relationships with the community and
partnering with stakeholders to address issues and solve problems. In
addition, BPD partners with mental health and social service programs
to connect those at risk with services and supports.
Recently, one way the Department has sought to further strengthen
our on-going efforts to engage directly with the community is by
beginning to implement ``Community CompStat Meetings'' in each of the
11 police districts. The goal of Community CompStat is to take the same
sense of empowerment and problem solving from the Department's internal
CompStat meetings out into the community. Rather than incorporating
CompStat into any existing community meetings--which tend to focus on a
variety of issues--the Department engages at the neighborhood level to
address the unique issues facing each specific community. Additionally,
these meetings provide an opportunity to familiarize the public with
the good work done by the Department and to provide transparency and
accountability through sharing data and analysis.
The Boston Police Department's Intelligence-Led Policing Model
complements Community Policing. Intelligence-Led Policing provides
commanders with real-time synthesized intelligence and analysis to
inform strategic decision making and deployment of resources to focus
on the individuals and/or groups that are driving crime (or fear of
crime) and violence in the city, while also targeting locations of
concern.
The combination of Community Policing and Intelligence-Led Policing
is paying dividends in the city of Boston. Overall, serious crimes
(i.e., ``Part I Offenses'' as defined by the FBI Uniform Crime
Reporting Program) have followed a consistent downward trend in recent
decades in our city, declining more than 50 percent since 2005--which
correlates with the establishment of the Boston Regional Intelligence
Center that same year. Year to date, Part I Offenses have declined 6
percent compared to 2022 and are 6 percent below the 5-year average.
Despite the decline in overall serious crimes, firearm violence
continues to be a persistent concern in our city. Annual shooting
victim totals have fluctuated significantly over the past 10 years,
often spiking and dropping every other year. In 2018, 2019, and 2021,
the number of total shooting victims were historically low. Following a
pattern seen in other major cities, total shooting victims reached a
10-year high in Boston in 2020; however, unlike other major cities,
totals decreased 28 percent in Boston the following year. Last year, in
2022, shooting victim totals declined an additional 8 percent, the
lowest levels experienced since the 1950's.
Violent crime in Boston continues to be largely driven by gang-
related retaliatory activity and by the continued availability of out-
of-State firearms. These issues have been exacerbated by increasing
recoveries of firearms with aftermarket enhancements, like large-
capacity magazines and sear switches, and the emergence of privately-
manufactured firearms (PMFs). BPD officers recovered 695 crime guns
from the streets of Boston in 2022, a 9 percent increase compared to
the prior year and a 24 percent increase compared to 2019.
Approximately 10 percent of crime guns recovered in 2022 had been
reported stolen. Of those reported stolen, 33 percent were reported
stolen from Massachusetts, 18 percent from Maine and 11 percent from
Georgia.
In 2022, BPD conducted several investigations into individuals
manufacturing PMFs in Boston. Multiple firearm parts, 3D printers, and
ammunition were recovered from these investigations. Privately-
manufactured firearm recoveries increased 79 percent from 2021, with a
total of 104 recovered in 2022, accounting for 15 percent of the
overall guns recovered in that time period.
We continue to experience problems with firearm arrests for repeat
offenders, which we know make up a very small percentage of our overall
residents, but account for a large proportion of violence in our city.
In 2022, 564 individuals were arrested on firearms charges; 42 percent
had prior firearm arrests in Boston, with 102 of those arrested having
3 or more prior firearm arrests.
Another major trend we are experiencing in the city is an increase
in juvenile offender involvement in firearm violence. Increasing
numbers of firearms have been recovered from juvenile offenders in
recent years, including 88 juveniles arrested in possession of a
firearm in 2022. Firearm arrests of those under 17 increased by more
than two-thirds in 2022 compared to 2021 and more than doubled 2020
totals. Juvenile offenders also appear to be escalating from less
serious property crime offenses to robbery and firearm violence over
increasingly shorter time periods.
The Boston Regional Intelligence Center (BRIC) is responsible for
maintaining and preparing these statistics and analysis and drives
BPD's Intelligence-Led Policing efforts. The BRIC is the cornerstone of
BPD's data and intelligence analysis, information sharing, and
counterterrorism efforts, and serves as a critical resource for the
Metro Boston region.
The BRIC was established in 2005 to coordinate efforts of the 9
cities and towns in the Metro Boston region who receive Boston Urban
Area Security Initiative (UASI) grant funding to reduce criminal
activity and prevent terrorism. Since its inception, the BRIC has
become a hub for public and private stakeholders in and around Boston
for the collection and analysis of intelligence information and the
investigation of homeland security-related criminal activities.
Within the Boston Police Department, the BRIC plays an important
role in aligning Intelligence-Led Policing with Community Policing. For
several years, the BRIC has provided information on high-risk
individuals for intervention and services through the State's Safe and
Successful Youth Initiative. The BRIC also develops relationships with
the networks of colleges and universities in Boston, as well as
hospitals and faith-based organizations, for information sharing
regarding public safety topics. Recently, the BRIC provided threat
briefings to LGBTQIA+ groups and worked with Boston Children's
Hospital, Catholic Churches, historically Black Churches, and Jewish
community organizations to share information, mitigate threats, and
complete investigations. The BRIC works to build trust with the
community by providing important information to keep individuals
informed and safe.
The BRIC's analytical and investigative staff are co-located in a
shared workspace within the Boston Police Department. Critical liaison
personnel such as representatives from Boston Emergency Medical
Services, Boston Fire Department, Department of Homeland Security
Office of Intelligence & Analysis (DHS I&A), and Federal Bureau of
Investigation's Boston Field Office are also assigned within the BRIC.
The BRIC further partners with local law enforcement agencies, other
first responders and the private sector operating throughout the Metro
Boston region; Federal law enforcement and intelligence partners; and
other State and major urban area fusion centers to prioritize, collect,
analyze, produce, and disseminate actionable intelligence--often in
real time.
The importance of information sharing between Federal, State, and
local law enforcement partners cannot be overstated, as this has proven
critical to staying ahead of the threat environment. The national
network of fusion centers, along with the network of intelligence
commanders in major cities and counties, has established a critical
foundation for information sharing about emerging threats to protect
our communities. BPD's participation in the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task
Force has been instrumental for assessing threats and collaborating on
terrorism investigations to protect the city of Boston, the Metro
Boston region, and the Nation.
DHS I&A personnel assigned to the BRIC and the region have also
proven instrumental in intelligence sharing and risk mitigation. These
personnel have provided unique access to valuable resources, including
trainings, threat briefings, classified systems, specialized expertise
in areas such as cybersecurity and intelligence community reach-back
for unique insights regarding threats that may impact our jurisdiction.
The DHS Intel Officer assigned to the BRIC has provided cybersecurity
expertise that enabled effective intelligence support to several
incidents to include ransomware attacks targeting State and local
government and critical infrastructure partner IT systems, business
email compromises and other financially-motivated cyber crimes. The
Intel Officer has also provided situational awareness of nation-state
and advanced persistent threat actor campaigns targeting elections and
helped us prepare accordingly to the heightened tensions during the
early days following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Furthermore, DHS I&A
personnel have contributed to joint analytic production on topics and
events of concern such as last year's U.S. Open Golf Championship,
Boston Marathon, and countless other special events that occur in the
Metro Boston region each year.
Additionally, the BRIC and the Boston Police Department work
closely with several DHS component Federal agencies to fulfill our
public safety responsibilities. These agencies include: United States
Coast Guard, United States Secret Service, Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, Customs and Border Protection, Homeland
Security Investigations, Transportation Security Administration,
Science and Technology Directorate, Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office, and Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Federal investment in local law enforcement through grants is
crucial to crime prevention and terrorism prevention throughout the
country.
One significant investment that the city of Boston has made, in
partnership with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security's (DHS)
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD), regional law
enforcement agencies and first responder agencies, is actively
participating in the Securing the Cities (STC) program. The goal of
STC-Boston is to build local capacity to find and intercept
radiological or nuclear material before it can be used in a terrorist
attack. This program augments local resources with Federal funding with
the goal of detecting, deterring, and defending against terror attacks
that use radioactive material. Working with public safety agencies
throughout the Metro Boston region, STC-Boston will help build an
enduring radiological detection network that integrates with other
counter-terrorism initiatives already in place, such as the Boston
Urban Area Security Initiative, Massachusetts State Police, Massport
Police Department, Massport Fire Dept, and several other State and
local first responder partners.
Since joining the STC Program in 2020, Boston has received a total
of $4,450,000 in funding. The most recent grant will provide the Metro
Boston region with additional funding to provide equipment, training,
and support in the detection and interdiction of illicit radioactive
material.
A second critical source of Federal funding is provided through
UASI grants. These resources are indispensable to the city of Boston's
capability to prepare, prevent, respond to, and recover from an act of
terrorism in all of its forms. The investments received to date are
utilized daily, whether it be personnel, equipment, software, or
expertise gleaned through training, exercise, or networking events.
UASI funding has allowed the BRIC to increase its human capital and
technology capabilities to identify and mitigate both domestic and
international threats to Boston's communities. The expertise and
analysis provided by the BRIC is utilized to inform decision making by
BPD and the Metro Boston region's public safety agencies each and every
day.
Perhaps most notable, UASI provided resources to purchase tactical
equipment and training that literally saved the lives of police
officers in BPD's Special Operations Division. For example, in November
2021, an armed barricaded subject, who had threatened the lives of
family members, shot several BPD officers through a door. These
officers sustained serious, but thankfully not life-threatening,
injuries. Ballistic shields, ballistic vests, ballistic helmets, and an
under-door camera system purchased with UASI funding protected the
officers and ultimately saved their lives. This is just one example of
how these capabilities protect BPD personnel and allow officers to
respond safely and effectively to the dangers presented by the current
threat landscape.
Historically, Metro Boston has ranked within the 15 highest-risk
UASI regions. For UASI 2023, Boston's risk ranking increased from No.
12 to No. 11, yet the region is eligible to receive $200,000 less in
the total allocation compared to last year. This decrease in funding is
problematic because the Boston region has maximized its annual
expenditure and has remained largely in a capability sustainment mode,
despite increasing expectations for homeland security-related
responsibilities. I and my counterparts are concerned that this may be
indicative of the beginning of a trend of declining homeland security
funding, while homeland security demands are rapidly increasing.
The terrorism threat landscape has grown substantially broader
through various forms of violent extremism. Additionally, national
security threats from nation-state actors and their proxies managing
aggressive campaigns to sow seeds of discord in our communities through
mis/dis/mal information, cyber attacks, and counterintelligence threats
require more from our intelligence professionals, investigators and
front-line officers to protect our communities. These are issues that
our Nation's first responders have not traditionally dealt with and, as
a result, we require more training, more personnel, more embedded
analytical experts, and more technical capabilities to mitigate these
threats.
A significant way that Congress could assist law enforcement would
be to increase funding across the Homeland Security Grant Program--to
include UASI--and consider broadening its applicability beyond just
``terrorism'' to include other threats traditionally mitigated by the
U.S. Department of Defense and intelligence community.
Federal investments in the UASI and STC grant programs are vital to
local efforts to prevent and mitigate potential threats, as are the
assignment of DHS I&A personnel to fusion centers. Without these
important resources cities and towns are vulnerable to individuals and
groups intent on inflicting harm. I encourage Congress to continue to
invest in these important programs.
I want to thank the committee again for the opportunity to share
what we are doing in Boston. I believe our model of community policing
combined with intelligence-led policing is working as evidenced by the
data. This successful model would not be possible without the
significant and important Federal investments that have been made in
the Boston Police Department by the Department of Homeland Security.
Federal partnerships with, and investments in, local and State police
departments are vital to the safety and security of the United States.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Commissioner Cox. I now
recognize Mr. Mangual for his opening statement of 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF RAFAEL MANGUAL, SENIOR FELLOW AND HEAD OF RESEARCH
POLICING AND PUBLIC SAFETY INITIATIVE, MANHATTAN INSTITUTE FOR
POLICY RESEARCH

Mr. Mangual. Thank you, Chairman Pfluger, Chairman
D'Esposito, distinguished Members of the committee. I want to
thank you all for the opportunity to testify in a matter of
great importance. The law enforcement community is facing many
challenges, but two that stand out the most, particularly in
and around major cities, are the challenges of responding to a
real increase in crime at a time in which many agencies are
struggling with officer recruitment and retention. In other
words, in many parts of the country, police are being asked to
shoulder a much bigger burden with respect to crime and
disorder, and they're being asked to do so with fewer and/or
less experienced officers.
In 2019, the Police Executive Research Forum, PERF,
surveyed its member agencies on this issue. Only 12 percent
reported not facing a shortage of full-time sworn personnel,
while a plurality, 41 percent of respondents, reported that
their shortages had increased over the prior 5 years. A 2021
follow-up survey reported a 5 percent decline in the hiring
rate and an 18 percent increase in the resignation rate, as
well as a 45 percent spike in the retirement rate relative to
the prior year. The largest agencies in that set bore the brunt
of these trends.
In between these 2 years, the United States saw a 30
percent spike in homicides, the largest ever 1-year increase in
at least a century. While a more recent PERF survey showed an
increase in police hiring rates in 2022, the increase was
outpaced by resignations and retirements, driving a continued
overall decline in total staffing. Even if hiring kept up in
departments, they would nevertheless have to contend with the
decline in the median experience levels of their officers as
retirees and resignees take their institutional and practical
knowledge with them.
Add to this mix the understandably heightened level of
scrutiny police now face, as well as the often-indefensible
vitriol hurled at police as an institution, and you exacerbate
all of the issues that flow from these challenges by sapping
the morale of the officers that remain to face this all-
important task. This is not a recipe for success. Addressing
these issues by helping to reinforce American police
departments should be considered a top priority by Congress
because it will reduce crime. But it may also help send a
message to an embattled institution, one that says, we are
behind you, at a time in which cops need to hear that probably
more than ever.
Now, the body of evidence that can be marshalled in support
of a large-scale effort to add to the ranks of America's police
departments is overwhelmingly strong and robust. Indeed, one of
the most consistent findings in the criminological literature
is that more police means less crime and vice versa. Moreover,
the police recruitment and retention crises are ones that the
Federal Government is actually well-positioned to address by
funding the hiring of new recruits, as well as funding
incentive programs aimed at retaining senior officers and
investigators.
Now, because the impact of such expenditures will turn on
how well police perform, which in turn depends in significant
part on how well they understand the problems that they face in
their respective jurisdictions, the need for more and better
data on crime and enforcement trends is particularly
pronounced, especially in light of the very poor transition
from the Uniform Crime Reports to the National Incident Based
Reporting System. This need for data to inform how police can
put their limited resources to their highest end uses
highlights other opportunities for meaningful Federal
interventions aimed at funding and incentivizing more granular
data collection.
Now, Congressional efforts to boost police hiring to
accelerate the growth of the body of research that will be
essential to deepening our collective understanding of what
works with respect to crime control and related outcomes are
two of just five important recommendations laid out in a recent
Manhattan Institute report authored by my colleague Charles
Fain Lehman. Rounding out his list of recommendations are the
following: using money to rehabilitate failing prisons and
jails with a carrot-and-stick approach; creating and
propagating national standards for criminal case processing,
which often takes far too long; and upgrading our national data
infrastructure, especially by creating a national sentinel
cities program.
Now, these ideas have enormous potential to do good by
improving the quality of the services that our Nation's
criminal justice systems were established to provide, thereby
enhancing the most precious public commodity that we have,
public safety. With respect to implementation, recent Federal
initiatives can offer some meaningful insight into how such
efforts might be structured. Examples include Operation
Stonegarden, which directed Federal funds toward State and
local law enforcement agencies participating in a joint effort
with the Department of Homeland Security to help secure our
borders. The Community Oriented Policing Services Program,
which helped fund State and local law enforcement agency
hiring, among other initiatives.
I'll close by noting that I'm encouraged by these
committees' interest in assisting State and local law
enforcement agencies facing one of the more challenging
outlooks in a generation. As Thomas Payne noted in his famous
pamphlet, Common Sense, security is the true design and end of
government. The provision of public safety is therefore the
most important of governmental functions that this body can
help serve. I hope that you will consider the recommendations
that I have made with respect to how Congress might go about
that important mission, and I look forward to your questions.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mangual follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rafael A. Mangual
Tuesday, May 16, 2023
Chairmen Pfluger and D'Esposito, distinguished Members of the
committees, I want to thank you for the opportunity to testify on a
matter of great importance.
The law enforcement community is facing many challenges, the most
significant of which--particularly in and around major cities--involve
responding to a real increase in crime at a time in which many agencies
are struggling with officer recruitment and retention. In many parts of
the country, police are being asked to shoulder a much bigger burden
with respect to crime and disorder, and they're being asked to do so
with fewer and/or less-experienced officers.
In 2019, the Police Executive Research Forum (PERF) surveyed its
member agencies on this issue. Only 12 percent reported not facing a
shortage of full-time sworn personnel; a plurality of respondents
reported that their shortages had increased over the prior 5 years.\1\
A 2021 follow-up survey reported a 5 percent decline in the hiring
rate, an 18 percent increase in the resignation rate, and a 45 percent
spike in the retirement rate, relative to the prior year.\2\ The
largest agencies bore the brunt of these trends. And while a more
recent PERF survey showed an increase in police hiring in 2022, the
increase was outpaced by resignations and retirements, driving a
continued overall decline in total staffing. Even if hiring kept up,
departments would nevertheless have to contend with the decline in the
median experience levels of their officers, as retirees take their
institutional and practical knowledge with them.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.policeforum.org/assets/WorkforceCrisis.pdf.
\2\ https://www.policeforum.org/workforcesurveyjune2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Add to this mix the understandably heightened level of scrutiny
police now face, as well as the (often-indefensible) vitriol hurled at
police as an institution, and you exacerbate all of the issues that
flow from these challenges by sapping the morale of the officers facing
this all-important task. This is not a recipe for success.
Congress should consider addressing these issues a top priority
because reinforcing American police departments will reduce crime. But
it may also help send a message to an embattled institution, saying
``we're behind you,'' at a time in which cops need to hear that more
than ever.
The body of evidence that can be marshalled in support of a large-
scale effort to add to the ranks of America's police departments is
overwhelmingly robust. Indeed, one of the most consistent findings in
the criminological literature is that more policing means less crime
(and vice versa).\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See this small sampling of studies (including high-quality
randomized control trials) illustrating the benefits of hiring
additional police, spending more on policing, and expanding police
presence and proactivity (especially in crime hot-spots): https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=461280 (showing significant
crime declines in Washington, DC, caused by boosts in police presence
in response to changes in the terror threat level); https://
www.law.upenn.edu/live/files/8949179jrss831pdf (showing that expanding
police patrols outside the University of Pennsylvania led to an
estimated crime decline of 43 percent-73 percent); https://
eml.berkeley.edu/?jmccrary/chalfin_mccrary2018.pdf (documenting a
return of $1.63 on every additional dollar spent on policing in 2010);
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
283878402_Do_Stop_Question_and_Frisk_Practices_Deter_Crime_Evidence_at-
_Microunits_of_Space_and_Time (finding significant crime declines
resulting from discretionary stops conducted in crime hotspots in New
York); https://www.nber.org/papers/w27324 (showing significant increase
in crime in the wake of abrupt declines in the volume of police
activity in five cities (declines driven by pattern and practice
investigations initiated by the Federal Government)); https://
media4.manhattan-institute.org/pdf/cr_22.pdf (a causal analysis finding
that police in New York City prevented more than 60,000 violent crimes
between 1989-1998); https://www.princeton.edu/?smello/papers/cops.pdf
(finding significant crime reduction effects resulting from COPS hiring
grants); https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/
journal.pone.0157223 (finding sharp declines in crimes resulting from
police surges in New York City); https://www.aeaweb.org/
articles?id=10.1257/aeri.20200792 (finding that ``Each additional
police officer abates approximately 0.1 homicides.''); https://
www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aeri.20200792 (finding a strong
effect of reductions in response times on crime, such that ``hiring an
additional response officer would generate a benefit, in terms of
future crime prevented, equivalent to 170 percent of her payroll
cost.''); https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w12202/
w12202.pdf (finding that police arrest and stop activity (as well as
sentence lengths) decline in the wake of arbitration losses, driving
crime increases relative to instances in which the arbitration fights
are won by the police unions studies); https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/233374127_The_Effects_of_Hot_-
Spots_Policing_on_Crime_An_Updated_Systematic_Review_and_Meta-Analysis
(a meta analysis finding that both hot spots and problem-oriented
policing strategies reduce crime).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, the police recruitment and retention crises are ones that
the Federal Government is well-positioned to address by funding the
hiring of new recruits, as well as incentive programs aimed at
retaining senior officers and investigators. The example of the police
funding component of the 1994 Crime Bill is one that this body can
build on, with one important modification: Resources for hiring should
be allocated to the agencies facing the largest deficits and/or the
highest levels of serious crime. A comprehensive effort to use the
spending power to help fill the police staffing gap should reflect an
assessment of how to maximize the impact such expenditures will have on
crime. Moreover, as I recommended in two 2021 Manhattan Institute Issue
Briefs, such an effort would also present an opportunity to experiment
with efforts to incentivize the hiring of police recruits with higher
levels of educational attainment.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, https://manhattan.institute/article/ideas-for-the-new-
administration-criminal-justice and https://manhattan.institute/
article/a-public-safety-and-policing-plan-for-nycs-next-mayor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Because the impact of such expenditures will turn on how well
police perform--which depends in part on how well they understand the
problems they face in their respective jurisdictions--the need for more
and better data on crime and enforcement trends is particularly
pronounced. This is especially true in light of the poorly-executed
transition from the Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) to the National
Incident-Based Reporting System (NIBRS). This need for data to inform
how police can put their limited resources to their highest end uses
highlights other opportunities for meaningful Federal interventions
aimed at funding and incentivizing more and more-granular data
collection, as well as at funding additional criminal justice-related
research. Congressional efforts to boost police hiring and to
accelerate criminological research are two of five important
recommendations laid out in a recent Manhattan Institute report
authored by my colleague, Charles Fain Lehman. Rounding out that list
are:

Rehabilitate failing prisons and jails with a carrot-and-
stick approach;

Create and propagate national standards for criminal case
processing; and

Upgrade our data infrastructure, including by creating a
national ``sentinel cities'' program.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ https://manhattan.institute/article/modernize-the-criminal-
justice-system-an-agenda-for-the-new-congress.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These are ideas that have enormous potential to do good by
improving the quality of the services our Nation's criminal justice
systems were established to provide, thereby enhancing the most
precious public commodity: public safety.
With respect to implementation, recent Federal initiatives can
offer some meaningful insight into how such efforts might be
structured. Examples include:

Operation Stonegarden, which directed Federal funds toward
State and local law enforcement agencies participating in a
joint effort with the Department of Homeland Security to help
secure our borders;\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ https://www.congress.gov/congressional-report/116th-congress/
senate-report/212/1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) Program, which
helped fund State and local law enforcement agency hiring
(among other initiatives);\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF10922.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Urban Area Security Initiative, which helped fund terrorism
preparedness efforts in major cities;\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ https://uscode.house.gov/
view.xhtml?req=(title:6%20'section:604%20edition:prelim).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

``1033 Program'', which provided State and local law
enforcement agencies with surplus military equipment that
ranged from rifles and body armor to vehicles and night-vision
goggles.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ https://www.dla.mil/Disposition-Services/Offers/Law-
Enforcement/Program-FAQs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I will close by noting that I am encouraged by these committees'
interest in assisting State and local law enforcement agencies facing
one of the more challenging outlooks in a generation. As Thomas Paine
noted in his famous pamphlet, Common Sense, ``security'' is ``the true
design and end of government.''\10\ The provision of public safety is
therefore one of the most important governmental functions this body
can help serve. I hope that you will consider the recommendations I
have made with respect to how Congress might go about that important
mission, and I look forward to your questions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ https://billofrightsinstitute.org/primary-sources/common-
sense.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thank you.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Mangual. Members will now
be recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning. An additional round of questioning may be called
after all Members have had the opportunity to be recognized. I
now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I would like to thank all of you for your service, for
being here, for telling us your own community's needs,
experiences, and how we can better come together. I want to
push back on something that we just heard from some of our
opening statements. We had 26,031 homicides in 2021, and this
is on the CDC's website. The rate of hate crimes in those
homicides was .0008 percent.
So, Commissioner Cox, congratulations on, you know,
bringing the crime rate down. I think what you have done is
remarkable in Boston. You know, I have got the data here this
year looking at 588 aggravated assaults. You compare that to
New York City, 8,901 in New York City. Eight thousand nine
hundred one in a soft-on-crime locality where aggravated
assaults are there. So, would you say that most of the 588
aggravated assaults are white supremacy-related?
Mr. Cox. I would say that there's no correlation. Well, you
know what? I don't know without the data on that, but----
Chairman Pfluger. But, I mean, is that consistent with the
homicide rate, the aggravated assault rate that it is extremely
low?
Mr. Cox. There's no correlation I know of right now between
white supremacist and the data.
Chairman Pfluger. This notion that we hear, let's focus on
violent crime and the violent crime offenders. Let's focus on
making sure that we actually take care of business. So, I
needed to push back on that because what we have just heard is
that the numbers aren't matching up.
Chief Gerke, I want to talk about fentanyl a little bit.
You know, you have identified that fentanyl is one of the
greatest harms in Odessa, Texas, and the surrounding area.
Since 2019, fentanyl-related deaths among Texans have increased
500 percent. What is the greatest challenge you face in
preventing fentanyl deaths and trafficking of fentanyl?
Chief Gerke. Really that's easy. It's keeping them from my
community. You know, once they get into the community, it's
very difficult to root them out. Again, it's heartbreaking to
see that a lot of these, the fentanyl overdoses and deaths are
concentrated on young people.
Chairman Pfluger. How difficult is it, the open border
policies that we have, how difficult is that on Odessa, Texas?
Chief Gerke. Well, you know, as far as I'm concerned, it
seems like there's just a sieve, those narcotics. We're not
just talking about fentanyl. We're talking about all narcotics.
Particularly in Odessa, I think our most predominant narcotic
is probably methamphetamine use.
Chairman Pfluger. Can you talk to us about human
trafficking and the effect that that has had on your community?
Chief Gerke. Absolutely. Well, you know, you get calls
about safe houses constantly. You respond to those things you
see constantly, get calls. I know just over some time last
week, we worked a prostitution sting and actually recovered two
Chinese nationals who were trafficked. So, yes, it's an on-
going problem I would think in Odessa, but I would also think
all over the State of Texas and probably all over the Southern
Border.
Chairman Pfluger. Thank you for your service to Odessa,
Texas, you know, for the shining example of what you've done
over the last 26 years and now leading that department.
Sheriff Barnes, thank you for your testimony. You know, I
took a couple of notes, and you talked about how California is
an example and a warning of how not to be. What I would like to
focus on is you described how the consequences for crime have
eroded over the last decade while law enforcement authorities,
you know, are struggling to keep communities safe. Could you
kind-of tell the community or the committee here specific
examples of when policy changes have tied your department's
hands and not allowed you to have those consequences?
Sheriff Barnes. Sure, and I'll try to go fast. So, over the
course of the last decade, starting in 2011, was Assembly Bill
109, the State prison realignment. Anybody sentenced to prison
for non-violent, non-serious, non-sex acts are now being housed
for their time in county jails, not designed for long-term
incarceration. That resulted in a large impact on my facility
because our staff is not designed to house people for years and
they're very non-compliant. Two-thousand-fourteen, we had a
bill passed, Prop 46, that resulted in the largest
decriminalization of crime in the State, drug crime and
property crime. Those people are now not serving sentences as
they would before. Then we have Prop 57--I'm sorry--Prop 47,
Prop 57, mass decarcerations at the Federal prison--State
prison system that with SB54 prohibiting us acting with ICE on
immigration holds, except for very high-level offenders.
Oftentimes them not getting picked up by ICE because they don't
have the resources to do that.
All of these have manifested into a large decarceration
effort. I'll add that the last 5 peace officers killed in
California were killed by violent felons who should have been
in custody and were early released or pending sentencing on
crimes that they accessed to guns that they should not have
had. It's not the guns. It's the people getting possession of
guns, the criminals getting possession of guns that create the
greatest threat to our country.
Chairman Pfluger. Sheriff, thank you. We support you. We
love everything that all of you do to keep our community safe.
My time has expired. I recognize the Ranking Member for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. I thank all of our
witnesses as well. This is a serious topic, and I think we owe
it to our constituents back home to focus on solutions and not
partisan mudslinging. With solutions in mind, I want to focus
on the experience in Boston because the data is clear. Crime of
all categories down more than 50 percent since 2005. Violent
crime down by a similar number. As was stated during
Commissioner Cox's opening statement, shootings last year, the
lowest they've been since the 1950's. So, I want to learn from
you, Commissioner Cox, because you've been in Boston for 30
years as a sworn officer. What has worked? What would you
attribute those successes to? What can other parts of the
country learn from your example?
Mr. Cox. Thank you. Well, as I started off as saying that
Boston police has operated within a community policing model
for a long period of time. You know, not only do we practice
that around building trust with our community, but we partner
with everyone, including the Federal Government, including
Homeland Security. We've gotten a lot of grant funds and things
of that nature to actually give us the data and technology to
maybe, you know, to build it further from maybe 20 years ago
around data and technology.
So, partnership and actually acknowledging that we can't
solve it alone from a law enforcement perspective. There needs
to be certainly a component where partnership with the
community and the public and actually a place and role for our
partners to do things that we can't to address the issues that
might be driving the violence around us. You know, whether it's
helping people find jobs, helping them with substance abuse,
things of that nature, helping those families that have
traditionally been maybe involved in some of this, helping them
get out of that cycle of poverty and things of that nature.
So, I mean, we've done a lot over a long period of time,
but, you know, we're constantly working to make sure we
continue to do that. By also making sure that we're not alone.
I think we've understood the fact is that law enforcement is
not the total cure for this. We need others to partner.
Everyone from the judicial, to, you know, probation, to, you
know, the schools, everyone in our community needs to partner
around taking public safety seriously. We are just more or less
the educator of if you're going to do it, this is how we're
going to do it together.
Mr. Magaziner. Well, thank you for sharing that. I think
this emphasis on community policing, which you are right,
Boston has been doing for decades, is a lesson well-learned. It
also so happens that Massachusetts has some of the toughest gun
safety laws in the country. So, can you speak to the
relationship there? Do you feel that the gun safety laws that
have been passed in Massachusetts to keep firearms out of the
hands of dangerous individuals, have made your job easier and
have protected the lives of the men and women who you lead?
Mr. Cox. Thank you for that. Yes, we do have some of the
toughest laws in the country in that way. However, you know,
our experiences, you know, and I think I put out some stats
that for the most part, most of the guns are coming from
elsewhere throughout the United States around that. Then
obviously, the ghost gun phenomenon that's occurring. So, you
know, certainly the violent crime that we do have and the gun
arrests and things that we have are usually driven by guns
elsewhere around that. So, it doesn't seem to be any shortage
of them. No matter how many arrests that we have, we continue
to have more. Seeing younger and younger people with guns, you
know, which is a little disturbing.
Mr. Magaziner. I would argue that that speaks to the need
for a Federal approach when it comes to gun safety legislation
and not just a patchwork approach as we have had since the
expiration of the assault weapons ban.
We only have a minute left in my questioning. It's now the
10-year anniversary of the Boston Marathon bombing. As our
subcommittee is charged with counterterrorism, can you speak to
the lessons learned from that experience, and particularly the
importance of Federal and local information sharing through
fusion centers?
Mr. Cox. Absolutely. First of all, we're very appreciative
of all our Federal partners in the sense that from a local
perspective, you know, in Boston, at least, we can't have, you
know, have all the knowledge it takes, the work it takes, and
intel it takes to understand what's going on elsewhere
throughout the country, never mind outside the United States.
So, the partnerships and the intel that we have from
particularly Homeland Security and FBI are very, very
important. So, we can actually help our community stay safe
internally here, you know, since there is a bit more of a trend
around, you know, domestic terrorism, if you want to use that
term. Just having information on who people are coming into our
city before they get there, that is very valuable. So, we can
share it with our, you know, faith leaders and groups that
might be impacted by those.
This helps us build trust so we keep those ties with the
community we serve, so we can get people to see something and
say something, because we're providing some information about
what's going on so they can feel safe. Part of our job is not
only to deal with crime, but fear of crime. The partnerships
that we have, particularly with the Federal Government and the
grants that you do give us the ability to actually provide that
education to keep the trust.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
Commissioner.
Chairman Pfluger. Thank you. The gentlemen's time has
expired. I now recognize Chairman D'Esposito for his 5 minutes
questioning.
Chairman D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to
the witnesses, thank you again for being here and for your
service. I am going to start with Sheriff Barnes. I am a firm
believer in community policing. I am a firm believer as well in
the broken windows theory, where you focus on minor crimes and
it will reduce major crime. It was a policy of New York City
during Commissioner Kelly's tenure, and it is something that I
think truly and dramatically changed the face of New York City.
When I talk about violent crime and we talk about violent
crime, I think we know the issues that are plaguing the
communities. But I think what we need to focus on is that when
we want to talk about community policing and we want to talk
about the fact that that has helped in reducing crime in cities
and counties and towns throughout this country, community
policing is a buy-in. It is a buy-in between law enforcement.
It is a buy-in between prosecutors. It is a buy-in between
stakeholders. When one of those parts aren't bought in, the
community, policing falls apart.
So, I believe that small business is, well, really all
business, but definitely small business is the lifeblood of our
communities. One of the things that you talked about in your
testimony has nothing to do with violent crime, but I think it
tells such a story. You said that there was $94.5 billion in
retail theft throughout this country, the largest in
California. I am sure New York is probably right behind. When
we talk about community policing and we talk about failed
policies, the failure to prosecute, we have literally allowed
minor crimes, right? People often roll their eyes and say, you
are fear-mongering. This is petty theft. Well, I don't believe
that anybody who owns one of those stores that were victims of
that $94.5 billion thinks that this is petty.
So, I guess my question to you is I think I know the
answer, but it seems that we have some differing opinions up
here. How do you think that this needs to change? How do we
help solve this problem? Because $94.5 billion is a huge sum of
money. I guarantee you that there are business owners
throughout this country who have literally shut their doors,
Main Streets that are shuttered because of the crime that we
have allowed to occur in communities throughout this Nation.
Sheriff Barnes. Thank you, Chairman, for that question.
You're absolutely right. Unfortunately, in California, going
back to Prop 47 that decriminalized property crime from
felonies to misdemeanors resulted in exactly theft holidays. I
believe I agree with you that the small family-owned stores
suffered the most initially. Now what we're seeing are large
businesses, the Walmarts, the Targets, the CVS, they have the
biggest voices. All these other mom-and-pop shops as reporting,
they are a single voice. But now that these larger corporations
are being impacted, we're seeing the outcome of these bad
policies in very urban areas. In San Francisco recently, we had
Nordstrom's leave. CVS has left. Others have vacated that city.
I think we're starting to see a trend of, these are
corporations, they're for profit. If they don't make money,
they will leave. When we're seeing that happen in major urban
areas that have enacted bad public policy over the last several
years.
Chairman D'Esposito. Going back home where Mr. Mangual and
I live, I mean, there are CVSs and other stores, big stores
that have removed the shopping, you know, the things that you
carry out to put stuff in, because they don't want people just
filling them up and walking out the door with them. That's not
the America that we once created.
Commissioner Cox, I just want to go to guns for a minute.
You may not have this information. We were told that your State
has some of the strictest gun laws in the country. How many
guns were recovered by the Boston Police Department in 2022?
Mr. Cox. I can't say precisely, but I would say goodness
gracious, around 700 or 800.
Chairman D'Esposito. OK. Out of those 700 or 800 firearms
that were recovered, how many of them were assault weapons?
Mr. Cox. I couldn't give it to you with the, you know,
with----
Chairman D'Esposito. If you had to say, is it 10 percent,
is it 50 percent, is it 80 percent, is it 0 percent?
Mr. Cox. I would definitely not say it was 80 percent, but
I would say, you know, there were a number of them.
Chairman D'Esposito. Was it half?
Mr. Cox. I would have to look at the----
Chairman D'Esposito. The amount of shootings that you had
in Boston, how many of those shootings, how many shootings did
you have in Boston?
Mr. Cox. For 2022, non-fatal shootings.
Chairman D'Esposito. No shootings in general, non-fatal and
homicides?
Mr. Cox. So, let's see 2022, we had, this chart only gives
me year-to-date for a time period. It's not the whole year.
Chairman D'Esposito. OK. So, just real quick, because my
time has expired. Non-fatal shootings and homicides, how many
do you think of those non-fatal shootings and homicides were
occurred with the use of an assault weapon?
Mr. Cox. Yes, that I couldn't tell you because those are
the ballistics.
Chairman D'Esposito. Is it minimal? Is it half? Is it 80
percent? Or is it zero?
Mr. Cox. I would say it would be on the lower end of it,
but----
Chairman D'Esposito. OK. It is on the lower end of it?
Mr. Cox. I would say, but I can't----
Chairman D'Esposito. Right. So, illegal handguns are the
majority of the violence that is occurring in our communities.
Mr. Cox. Illegal handguns, but the fact is there are quite
different kinds. So, you have to match up ballistics evidence
in that and I don't want to do those----
Chairman D'Esposito. I understand that. But my point is
that illegal handguns are what is killing people in this
country.
Mr. Cox. Yes.
Chairman D'Esposito. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired. The
Chairman now recognizes the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr.
Carter for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Ranking
Member Thompson mentioned in his opening statement about
domestic violence and the--domestic terrorism, rather, and the
issue with racially-motivated threats and white supremacy.
Chairman Pfluger suggested or challenged that assertion. I want
to turn your attention to this report that was done January
2020 by the Texas Department of Public Safety, which says,
domestic terrorism poses a persistent and varied threat to the
State of Texas. It further goes on to say that based on the
prevalence of recently-conducted attacks Nation-wide, white
racially-motivated, or WRM, is currently the most violent
active domestic terrorism type.
Mr. Chairman, I would like unanimous consent to add this to
the record for the purposes of having everyone the opportunity
to review these statistics, to know that just because we don't
like it, because we don't want to talk about it, doesn't make
it go away. We see the rise of white supremacy and the violence
that's acted out on the streets of America every day. I'd like
to----
Chairman D'Esposito. So ordered, Mr. Ranking Member.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files and is also
available at https://www.dps.texas.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
director_staff/media_and_communica- tions/2020/
txterrorthreatassessment.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Carter. Thank you very much. I want to reiterate
something I mentioned in my opening remarks. I am grateful for
law enforcement the great work that you do, for the great
officers. We know that there are good ones, and we know that
there are bad. We want to make sure that we protect and provide
resources so our good police officers are able to protect and
serve all communities. But we know that there are things that
make it difficult for you to work.
We talk about and during particularly during this week of
Police Week, we talk about things that we are asking you to do
better. Yet, we aren't doing anything that would make your
lives safer when you go out to apprehend a villain. We know
that in many States we see the repeal of carry permits so
people can get firearms without carry. We know that in many
States, the duty to inform has been removed from the process of
those who are having concealed carries without permit. Can you
talk about common gun, common-sense gun safety reform, and what
it means, and what it would mean to you and your colleagues,
Commissioner Cox? We know that if we had more common-sense gun
measures, it will make a difference. Can you share with me your
view?
Mr. Cox. So, I mean, I can only speak for Boston----
Mr. Carter. I only asked you about Boston.
Mr. Cox [continuing]. In that way. Our gun laws are fairly
strong. So, you can't get a firearm if you, you know, certainly
have a record of that sort or certainly an open domestic
violence case, or any type of conviction for the most part, or
we have any other information that would indicate, and I have
the discretion that, you know, you would potentially put people
in harm's way around that stuff. From our perspective, I think
that the gun laws that I have certainly in the city of Boston,
you know, are fairly strong and addresses the issues. The
issues that we have is guns from other places that come in and
the fact that youth have these guns and the easy access of
guns. That's the issue that, you know, certainly that we see
and face of how, you know, the flow of them and the easy access
of them.
For the most part. We're not having an issue, certainly
locally where people are applying for license and doing things.
So, our region might be a little different. So, it is hard for
me to speak about another region on that one.
Mr. Carter. Let me shift gears for a second. The mass
shooting at Covenant Schools in Nashville, Tennessee took the
lives of 6, including 3 children, on March 27 brought this
year's school shooting count to 89, with 75 total victims
injured or killed. Next week, we will mark 1 year since the
massacre at Robb Elementary in Uvalde, Texas, which left 19
children and 2 teachers dead. I am outraged by the lack of will
of my colleagues on the other side to do more to protect their
children. Unfortunately, victims, their families, and law
enforcement directly feel the impact of these shootings. Since
Republicans refuse to support common-sense laws to protect
children, and their families, law enforcement, can you talk
about how local law enforcement has adjusted to the threats
posed by military-style weapons being used to target our
children in our Nation's schools, Commissioner Cox?
Mr. Cox. So, again, certainly making sure that people that
struggle with mental health issues don't have, you know, access
to guns or permits and things of that nature. You know, we
locally are partnering with schools in general to make sure
schools are prepared around active-shooter situations, the
faculty, and things of that nature. But, you know, certainly
looking out as a citizen, looking out in the big world, and
seeing that these, you know, mass shootings in general, the
increase of them, and then looking at the profile of some of
the people from a reporting perspective because I don't have
first-hand knowledge of it, you know, it does seem, you know,
bewildering like how some of these people got firearms in the
first half of the time. More importantly, it seems as though a
lot of the people who do these things showed signs of
potentially maybe doing these things, and yet no one reported
it.
Mr. Carter. OK, thank you. My time has expired. I will
perhaps come back on the next round. I yield.
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired. I
now recognize my fellow New Yorker, Mr. LaLota, for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaLota. I want to thank my good friends Chairman
Pfluger and Chairman D'Esposito for putting this important
hearing together during National Police Week and especially to
my fellow Long Islander Chairman D'Esposito who is a former
NYPD detective and chief of the Island Park Fire Department.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your dedicated service to our
community, but selfishly for bringing your experience to our
committee today. I also want to thank our witnesses for being
here. Chief, Sheriff, Commissioner, thank you especially for
your service to your communities and to our country. You keep
our children, our families, and our communities safe every day,
and this committee appreciates that.
I have the privilege of representing New York's First
Congressional District, or the east end of Long Island, Suffolk
County. The Suffolk County Police Department is home to 2,700
sworn police officers, 600 civilian members, and 400 school
crossing guards. We also have the Riverhead Southold, Shelter
Island, East Hampton, and Southampton police departments in my
district as well. They, like you, serve every day to protect
their communities, and we appreciate them as well.
As this is National Police Week, I want to discuss the ways
the Federal Government can be helpful to local law enforcement.
As my colleague from Rhode Island said, we want to be
solutions-oriented. So, Chief, Sheriff, and Commissioner, my
first question is for you, gentlemen. In my home State of New
York, we have unfortunately seen some of our elected leaders
choosing to support criminals more than our law enforcement
officers. In particular, cashless bail has been a disaster from
the very beginning. My question is, what would morale look like
for your departments, for your officers, for your deputies, if
they knew a criminal they had just taken in would be released
nearly hours later with no incentives to show back to court?
Sheriff, you want to give it a shot first?
Sheriff Barnes. That's exactly the environment we are
operating in in California. I'm fortunate, my roster is almost
full. I'm on the other end. I have a great retention in my
organization and we are attracting people. It's not because we
are the highest paid. I think we have a highly supportive
community and that's probably the first, most paramount thing
is having great community support. The media rhetoric is not
accurate. The vast majority of Americans do support policing.
So, I'd start with that.
I think one of the biggest issues probably beyond what this
board can do is get us out of social work. That solves probably
one of the biggest issues. If we didn't have to deal with the
mental illness, the substance use that we proliferate. Right
now, 1,000 people in my jail are on medication-assisted
treatment. I have, half of my people entrusted in my care, have
a daily nexus to mental health treatment. People I have run the
largest detox facility in our county, the Orange County jail.
So, those are probably the real issues that I think are the
most challenging.
Violent crime, of course. Criminals have to be there. But
when you look at resources and how tasked we are, getting us
out of social work and let us do the job we got into to do in
policing would probably be the biggest morale boost for our
team.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks, Sheriff. Commissioner or Chief, do you
guys want to add something?
Chief Gerke. Yes, sir. Thank you. I think in my neck of the
woods, which is West Texas, so, you know, we measure distance
in time not in miles. So, I would have to second what the
sheriff says in reference to mental health. If we encounter
someone in crisis, we will absolutely--that officer that is
assisting that person in crisis will be tied up their entire
shift. So, that includes a trip to a medical facility. But then
they will have to transport that person in crisis to a mental
health facility, which many times is 2-2\1/2\ hours away. That
does nothing for the officer and it absolutely does nothing for
that person in crisis. Could you imagine being in crisis and
having to ride in a police car for 2\1/2\ hours before you
could get help? So that's an issue for us and that's an issue
that needs to be fixed and we've been asking for it to be fixed
for forever.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. Commissioner.
Mr. Cox. Certainly, in my area, you know, we have
dangerousness hearings, which we still do. So, you know, if
someone actually were to do a heinous crime, you know, we don't
have that trend right now of them being released. But we do
have issues around juveniles and the fact is that, you know,
they might be involved in, you know, certainly multiple gun
arrests and things of that nature where they're not held at
all. I'm not saying that they should be, but, you know, around
juvenile crime, that's a different issue that we're facing.
Really, you know, that has issues. You know, as far as
morale concerning around the mental health challenges, I think
that we all face in every jurisdiction, we'd love to be out of
the business of dealing with folks that have mental illness.
But the reality is I don't know how we can because virtually
every call we go to in some way, shape, or form, it seems like
it pops up. So, if our officers aren't informed in some way,
you know, I'm really afraid of what the outcome might be. So,
we're always going to have the challenge of making sure that
they're trained around some of these issues.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. My time has expired. Mr. Mangual, I
apologize. I had another question for you, but maybe we'll get
you on a future round. I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. LaLota. I now recognize
Mr. Correa of California for 5 minutes.
Mr. Correa. Thanks, Chairman. Before we begin, I would like
to ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a letter----
Chairman D'Esposito. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Letter From Chicago CRED Founder Arne Duncan
Tuesday, May 16, 2023
To Members of the CTI Subcommittee of the Homeland Security
Committee: Thank you for the opportunity to testify today during police
week about the work Chicago CRED is doing in Chicago to reduce gun
violence. This work began in 2016, shortly after I stepped down as U.S.
Secretary of Education. At the time, gun violence in Chicago was
spiking sharply and the traditional approach to fighting crime--
primarily arrest and incarceration--was broadly seen as insufficient.
We built Chicago CRED around the simple belief that the best way to
reduce gun violence is to engage directly with those most at risk of
shooting or being shot. We serve participants through five core pillars
of activity: outreach, life coaching, therapy, education, and job
training. More than 1,000 people have gone through our program and
studies from Northwestern University show that they are significantly
less likely to be shot or rearrested compared to individuals with
similar characteristics. Many of the participants are now working in
the legal economy, supporting themselves and their families and living
safely.
Since 2016, a network of community violence intervention (CVI)
organizations have come into existence and are now serving more than 20
Chicago neighborhoods with some form of violence prevention. Initially,
these CVI organizations were mostly funded by private philanthropy but,
since 2019, local, county, and State governments have begun investing
in violence prevention. While Chicago CRED takes no public funding,
many other CVI programs in Chicago have received a share of Federal
COVID relief funds. We are hopeful that, as COVID-relief funds expire,
new Federal funds become available to support this work. An analysis by
a leading consultant firm shows a 19-1 return on investment for CVI
programs. We believe that violence prevention should be a permanent
feature of Chicago's public safety strategy.
We are not alone in this belief. Our law enforcement community is
increasingly convinced that CVI, in partnership with data-driven,
Constitutional policing, is the path to a safer Chicago. As former
interim superintendent of the Chicago Police Department and former Los
Angeles police chief Charlie Beck said about CVI, ``Your job is to stop
the next shooting. Our job is to investigate the last one.''
Respectfully, we invite the Members of the committee to visit
Chicago and see the work we are doing with young men and women at risk.
Spend time with them, listen to their stories, and see the transitions
under way in their lives. We are confident you will not only be moved
by their journey and impressed by their resilience but convinced that,
rather than them being the problem, they are, in fact, the solution and
that CVI is critical to a comprehensive public safety strategy.
We also hope you will recognize the profound need for gun safety
laws that limit the flood of guns into cities like Chicago. Today,
Chicago recovers more guns than any other city in America and roughly
60 percent of the guns recovered come from other States with weaker gun
safety laws. With easier and easier access to guns with large magazines
and easy conversion to automatic weapons, we are seeing more and more
mass shootings. These kinds of guns have no place in our society and we
implore you to pass laws that prohibit them.
There is much more we can say and show you. Thank you again for the
opportunity to testify and I hope to hear from some of you and
introduce you to some of the men and women who are making Chicago
safer.
Sincerely,
Arne Duncan,
Founder, Chicago CRED and managing partner, Emerson Collective.

Mr. Correa. I live in the city of Santa Anna, my daughter
was at home all alone. I was in El Paso, Texas. I got the phone
call. I called Santa Anna PD. They were there quickly. Thank
you very much to all the men and women in uniform for what you
do.
I just want to say that back home I like to think in my
district, other parts, that we take care of our men and women
in uniform. We give you collective bargaining, which justifies
make sure that you have a good salary, have good pensions, and
we have Workers Compensation presentives, which means when you
get hurt, we make sure that you are taking care of. A lot of
those bills I authored when I was in Sacramento.
Sheriff Barnes, if I can, I want to welcome you here today
and want to talk to you a little bit about it sounds like the
biggest issue we have back home, which is fentanyl. I agree
with you. In my district, not a week goes by that I don't hear
about a death, a young person overdosing on fentanyl. Supply
side, 90 percent of the fentanyl that is interrupted is
intercepted through our ports of entry. San Ysidro probably
accounts for 67 percent of all the fentanyl that is seized
coming into this country.
Operation Blue Lotus, we just talked to the port director
on Sunday. I was there visiting their operation. From March to
May, 6,900 kilos of narco, 900 kilos of meth, 1,400 of
fentanyl, just in those few months. Yet at the ports of entry,
only 2 percent of the vehicles coming through the port, through
our ports are actually scanned. Can you imagine if we scanned 4
percent, 5 percent, 6 percent of those vehicles? Sadly, I voted
against that border bill that was passed last week. Not a cent
goes toward those ports of entry. Not a new cent goes to hiring
new people there, hiring new technology, or I should say bring
in new technology, and more police dogs to scan, to help the
scanners. Again, can you imagine if we inspected more than 2
percent of those vehicles, the success we would have?
Sheriff, you said something in your testimony that caught
my interest, which is we have a situation. We have the
environment of California laws that prohibits you from
reporting certain individuals communicating with immigration
officials upon the release of certain inmates. Yet, you said
there are many inmates that you do talk to immigration
officials about, but they fail to actually come by and pick
those individuals up. Can you describe what kind of individuals
those people would be convicted of?
Sheriff Barnes. Sure, that's a result of a Senate bill in
California, SB 54. It only allows me to communicate with ICE
officials on high-level offenders or repeat offenders of
certain offenses.
Mr. Correa. Describe those high-level offenders.
Sheriff Barnes. These would be murderers, child molesters,
drug dealers, violent crimes.
Mr. Correa. If I may, I only have a minute left. Those are
the people I don't want in my community. My district, we have a
lot of undocumented workers that have been in the country 20-30
years. Hard workers who also don't want these individuals in
their neighborhood. So, I would offer to work with you on this
issue. I want to make sure, if there are people who are
supposed to be picked up after they rape in our communities,
that they are taken care of appropriately. They don't come back
to our communities. To hear from you that a lot of those
individuals are just that ICE fails to pick them up is
unacceptable to me.
So, you are my sheriff. We work together. We hang out
together, have lunch. I look forward to working with you on
this issue as we go forward.
Sheriff Barnes. Thank you, Congressman.
Mr. Correa. Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, I yield.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Correa. I now recognize
Mr. Strong from Alabama for 5 minutes.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member,
distinguished Members of the committee, it's an honor to serve
with each of you. I join my colleagues in recognizing our
Nation's law enforcement officers, and particularly the
individuals in my district that wear the badge and those that
have given all in the line of duty. To mention a few, Billy
Clardy was killed on December 6, 2019, by a drug dealer that
should have been in jail. Garrett Crumby, March 28, 2023, just
50 days ago, was killed on a domestic violence call. Mr. Gerke,
Mr. Barnes, and Mr. Cox, I would like to thank you for your
service and joining us here today and also those in law
enforcement that are seated behind you.
This hearing is particularly timely as we commemorate
National Police Week and the officers that have given their
lives. In the last 2 years, our country has become less safe,
both for the average American and for our law enforcement
officers. This year's FBI data regarding line-of-duty deaths
paint the picture. The number of ambush attacks on law
enforcement officers in 2022 reflects a 50 percent increase
from the previous year.
We may disagree on how we got here, but we should all agree
that we need to do more to support law enforcement and to
ensure that they can safely carry out their mission. With that,
I would like to start with a question for our law enforcement
officers today. Chief Gerke, how has the current climate
impacted your ability to do your job?
Chief Gerke. You know, things just get busier and busier,
and the current climate is I think that is one of the reason
that we see the numbers of sworn individuals in a lot of
municipalities have gone down. Everyone has open positions
because of they see the danger involved in policing. It's
broadcast constantly, those negative things, those bad things.
Law enforcement has done--law enforcement officials have done
some very bad things in the recent past. But those things get
attributed to every police officer, every sheriff's deputy the
United States, which is absolutely a false statement, right? I
will absolutely say that no one wants to get rid of a bad
police officer, a bad deputy, more than a good police officer
or a good deputy. That is an absolute fact.
Mr. Strong. Absolutely.
Chief Gerke. So, I think that those things absolutely
impact us numbers-wise. When you don't have numbers, it affects
your ability to do your job.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chief. In my previous service, I was
the chairman of the third-largest county in the State of
Alabama, and the largest city in Alabama, where in less than 10
years, our county almost doubled the size of its law
enforcement. Where greater than 50 percent of the general fund
is directed to the sheriff's department and in law enforcement,
which led to about a 59 percent increase in less than 10 years
for law enforcement. It worked. Your studies that we have seen,
research indicates less policing leads to less crime. Sheriff,
is that what you found?
Sheriff Barnes. I believe that it's the right policing
leads to less crime. So, it's not a saturation, it's an
engagement. It's partnering with the community. It's having
great multifaceted programs, juvenile-based, school-based,
response-based, faith community-based. It's all based on
relationships. So, what I found, and I believe the officers
working for me love the aspect of community engagement, many of
them live in these communities. So, it's the relationship and
the support that helps that. That's where this committee's
influence comes in so vital, because it's those resources that
allow us to build upon successful programs, emulate them, and
share them across a larger spectrum of our agencies to do what
we know works best. We have many examples of those in Orange
County.
Mr. Strong. That shows that more policing is better for our
communities. Mr. Mangual, would you agree that you have said
that defunding or diverting funds away from policing is not the
best way to stop rising crime in the United States. Is that
correct?
Mr. Mangual. That's absolutely correct. I mean, again, you
know, the overwhelming conclusion that you can draw from the
body of research on the effect of policing on crime is that the
more policing and the quality matters that you have, the less
crime that you're going to have. So, when you divert funds away
from the sort-of tip of the spear in your core law enforcement
institutions that is going to make streets less safe. I think
the data bears that out, and every analysis that actually tests
that question.
Mr. Strong. Would you say that by adding more law
enforcement in the field, would that reduce crime?
Mr. Mangual. Say that one more time, sir?
Mr. Strong. Would you believe that adding more law
enforcement officers, would that increase or decrease crime?
Mr. Mangual. It would absolutely decrease crime. It would
absolutely decrease crime. Every study that's ever been done to
assess the impact of either additional police, additional
police spending, or expansions of police patrols have found
significant reductions in crime of all sorts within those
jurisdictions.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired. I
now recognize fellow New Yorker, Mr. Goldman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. I was a Federal prosecutor working with task
forces, NYPD, and an assortment of Federal law enforcement
agents for 10 years. Chief Gerke, what you just said is exactly
what every law enforcement officer I ever worked with said,
which is we got to root out the bad apples because the vast,
vast majority are really good apples, working really hard to
defend our communities and promote public safety.
It is interesting as I sit here, because what I am hearing
from the witnesses on the ground about what the needs are and
what effective policing is, is very different from what I am
hearing from my colleagues up here. Sheriff Barnes, I think you
made an important distinction just now in the questioning you
received from my colleague from Alabama when he said more
policing would be better. You said, right policing is more
effective. I think that is incredibly important. More, in terms
of quantity, does not necessarily make the difference.
I want to focus a little bit on what several of you have
talked about in terms of community-based policing and
especially community-based violence intervention programs.
Commissioner Cox, can I start with you? Can you just explain
what you mean when you say you engage and utilize community-
based violence intervention programs?
Mr. Cox. Sure, thank you. So, you know, community policing
really is about building trust. How do you go about doing that?
You can do it multiple ways, from engaging youth in games, and
things of that nature, to mentoring kids in school, to actually
working with residents to address whatever the issue of the
day. The more you work with people and they get to understand,
you know, our officers and see that they're people, too, the
more trust they have, the more we are able to, you know,
provide education tips on how to stay safe.
The more they're able to tell us about where we should be,
right? Data is one thing, but having on-the-ground information
and intel from the people that live there around the problems
that go on, that is how we can put officers in the right place
to help prevent these things from happening in the first place.
So, understanding what the issues are in these communities
through dialog, through actually building relationships, we're
able to also bring in partners to address their other issues
and problems that might be the root of some of the, you know,
reasons why people choose to go down the life of crime.
Mr. Goldman. So, is it fair to say that if your officers
had more time to spend in the communities that they would be
able to prevent more crime from happening before it happens?
Mr. Cox. I believe so. Working in conjunction with the
residents there, yes, absolutely.
Mr. Goldman. One of the things that several of you have
touched upon is, and Chief Gerke, you just mentioned this and I
think this is important, is the prevalence of mental health
issues in the calls, the 9-1-1 calls, and other requests that
are made from--made to all of your offices. I guess I have a
basic question, which is, would it be helpful to you if you had
support from mental health professionals who could help to
either diffuse a situation or handle a mental health issue once
it had been diffused? Is that something that support would be
helpful to your staff?
Chief Gerke. I think that support would be helpful to any
law enforcement agency, absolutely. That is because mental
health issues are so prevalent in our communities.
Mr. Goldman. Your officers--am I right?--are not trained
mental health professionals.
Chief Gerke. They have some training in helping those folks
in crisis that we encounter, but no, they are not trained,
qualified mental health professionals.
Mr. Goldman. One of the things that the Chairman has talked
about here today several times is the notion of illegal
firearms. One of the issues, I think, Chief Gerke, that you may
be able to touch on is there was a significant and deadly mass
shooting in your county in 2019. It was an individual who
couldn't pass a background check, had been adjudicated by a
judge to be mentally incompetent. So, he wasn't able to buy a
gun legally, and he went and bought a gun illegally and then
used it for a mass shooting. If there were universal background
checks that would apply to private sales as well, that would
have caught that shooter, wouldn't it have?
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired. The
witness, you can answer the question.
Chief Gerke. So, absolutely. That mass shooting was
perpetrated by an individual that could not pass a background
check because of his mental health status. He did go and
purchase a firearm from an individual that was making these on
a personal basis, although I believe he was making about 60 a
year on a personal basis. So, he was absolutely he was a
manufacturer. So, if he was required to do a background check,
I think that, yes, that would have been caught.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Chairman, if I could just ask for
unanimous consent to enter into the record a New York Times
article titled, ``How Gun Traffickers Get Around State Gun
Laws,'' which shows that in New York and New Jersey, more than
two-thirds of guns used in crimes come from out of State,
mostly from States in the south with much more lax gun laws--
and that 6,000 guns used in crimes in California came from
other States with lax gun laws, such as Texas.
Chairman D'Esposito. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired. I
now recognize Mr. Crane of Arizona for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you guys for coming here today. I really
appreciate it. It is an honor to have so many police up in the
Capitol this week. Thank you for what you do and please let
your families know that we appreciate what they do as well.
I want to go ahead and read the Second Amendment real quick
because I think that it is something that probably doesn't get
read or mentioned enough up here. I think often some of the
politicians that have taken an oath to, you know, protect the
Constitution of the United States often forget what it says. A
well-regulated militia be necessary to the security of a free
state. The right of the people to keep and bear arms shall not
be infringed. Chief, what do you think of the Second Amendment?
Do you think that we should hold to it? Do you think we should
honor it, yes or no?
Chief Gerke. Absolutely honor it, no question.
Mr. Crane. Sheriff Barnes, what do you think?
Sheriff Barnes. I can guarantee you that I absolutely do
honor it.
Mr. Crane. Commissioner Cox, what do you think, sir?
Mr. Cox. We honor it.
Mr. Crane. I am sorry, let me get the name. Mr. Mangual,
what do you think, sir?
Mr. Mangual. I absolutely think it should be honored.
Mr. Crane. Well, I appreciate that you guys said that
because I know that there are plenty of people in this country
that would love to see it go away. Many of them don't want to
take it in one fell swoop. It is death by a thousand cuts. Do
you guys know that Mexico has some of the most violent gun
crimes in the world? Do you guys know what their gun laws are?
Do you guys know is it can people just own guns in Mexico like
we can here, Sheriff Barnes?
Sheriff Barnes. Their gun laws are very prohibitive.
Mr. Crane. Yes, they are. That's weird, isn't it, Sheriff?
Why is that? That doesn't add up. I don't understand, if their
gun laws are so strict, how is it often ranked in the top five
globally for gun violence? Maybe you can help me with that one.
Sheriff Barnes. Because they don't enforce their gun laws.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Is it true, Sheriff, Chief, Commissioner,
that criminals often don't care about laws?
Sheriff Barnes. I can tell you that what we've seen in some
of the lawlessness that those who are committing violent crimes
with guns are those who are prohibited from possessing them
because of their criminal acts. That's been my experience.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Thank you. Sheriff, you know, I was
listening to your opening testimony and one of the words, one
of the phrases that you chose struck me. You said policy
created lawlessness. Can you expound on that, Sheriff?
Sheriff Barnes. Certainly. So, I think that we have had
over the course in California and probably other parts of this
Nation policies that are passed for political extremist
positions rather than focused on keeping our public and our
constituents safe. We've seen that manifest over the last 10
years-plus in California. We've seen a tax on some of our--the
Second Amendment, for example, there's a bill in California to
make it so prohibitive, but on its face, it's believed to be
absolutely unconstitutional. So, why----
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Sheriff Barnes [continuing]. We'd pass something like that
is beyond my.
Mr. Crane. Yes, thank you. Chief, what did defund the
police, what did you think of that whole movement? What did
that do to your department?
Chief Gerke. Well, the area that I police in, I mean, that
wasn't even an option. That was never something that was
brought up or even considered, so----
Mr. Crane. Was it good? Was it good for you guys, Chief, or
bad?
Chief Gerke. Oh, it was bad because, you know, you look
around and you say those poor guys, wherever defunding was
happening, and you would say, those poor guys in that
department. You know, you'd hear our rank-and-file say, I'd
hate to work for that department. I'd hate to work for that
city----
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Chief Gerke [continuing]. Because they don't appreciate us
like they do in West Texas.
Mr. Crane. Commissioner Cox, what about you, sir? Defund
the police, was that good or bad for your department, for your
city?
Mr. Cox. I mean, defund the police, you know, philosophy,
as well as, you know, several other things, has probably made
it a lot more challenging to certainly retain officers and more
access to attract young people to our profession.
Mr. Crane. I thought so. The last thing I want to do is I
want to read bits of an article that a friend of mine wrote
about some of the gun data being thrown around. Activists
seeking restrictions on the Second Amendment are fond of
citing, ``homicide rate'', instead of raw homicide numbers.
They do this because it allows them to skirt any admission of
gun control failures in blue States. California's pro-gun
control Governor, Gavin Newsom, provides a good example of the
left's propensity to use rates to avoid the use of raw numbers.
On May 13, 2023, he tweeted, it has to be the humidity. Why
else would California's gun violence rate be 57 percent lower
than Florida's? That tweet, coupled with Newsom's on-going push
for more gun control, alongside criticism of Florida laws like
constitutional carry, concealed carry, et cetera, appears
designed to give readers the impression that California's gun
control keeps people safe while Florida's pro-2A costs more
lives. But here's the raw statistics. The number of homicides
in California during 2021 was 2,495 according to the CDC
homicide mortality map. The CDC's homicide mortality map shows
the number of homicides in Florida in 2021 was 1,468.
So, there's a lot of misdirection, more misinformation
about gun data and violence in the United States. It is the
same old thing----
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Crane [continuing]. Just shift, shift, fire. Thank you,
I yield back.
Chairman D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Crane. Before we get to
our next, I just have to comment, Chief Gerke, to Mr. Crane's
questioning. I think it is one of the reasons why we are having
this hearing today, and one of the reasons, one of the biggest
detriments that we see to law enforcement. When you discuss the
defund the police movement, you said that you heard over and
over again, not just from your department, from throughout
other people in law enforcement, ``I would hate to work for
that department.'' I think that sums up why we are here today.
We need to make sure that our law enforcement professionals
throughout this country never think that and never say that.
With that, I now recognize Ms. Titus of Nevada for 5 minutes.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here. We have heard a lot about community policing. I would
argue, and I think statistics show this, that part of that is
having police officers look like the people they serve, having
more diverse police departments because that way they can build
trust in the community. They can serve as role models for a
community. They can get more information from the community.
There is better communication. A Spanish-speaking officer, for
example, in an area that is largely Hispanic, would be able to
build that trust. So, I would just add that to the notion of
community policing.
You all also talked about the need for better cooperation
or collaboration between the Federal Government and the local
governments. You have mentioned grants. So, it is about money,
but also information. So, I would like to ask you about the
information that you are trying to get from the ATF about gun
tracing. We have tried to set up a national searchable,
centralized gun transaction database, but largely due to the
efforts of the gun lobby, that has not happened. So, the ATF's
hands are really tied and it takes, the statistics shows an ATF
employee would have to sift through about 1,800 documents per
day, absent a digital system, to determine the history of a
crime gun. We hear a lot about these illegal guns.
Commissioner, could you talk about the need for better
information to be able to better trace these guns?
Mr. Cox. I mean, we could always want more and better, so
there's no doubt about that. But we work well with the ATF
locally. As a matter of fact, we have them embedded in our
office, and we have officers embedded with them as well. So, I
mean, there's always a backlog of, you know, guns and, you
know, tracing and things of that nature. But I can't sit here
today and criticize ATF in any way because their partnership
has been fairly strong in Boston. But it's a matter of
resources, and so, you know, more would be better.
Ms. Titus. Are they part of your fusion center? I know most
large cities and States have fusion centers.
Mr. Cox. So, we have our Boston Regional Intelligence
Center, and they are not a part of that. But the fact is we
have a ballistics unit, and they actually have personnel
assigned to our unit and task force. We have multiple task
force, part of the JTTF, and we actually have one with ATF that
we have an actual body, actually two bodies assigned with them.
Ms. Titus. Well, I am glad to hear that is the case in
Boston, because it doesn't seem to be the case in a lot of
cities where we hear that ATF takes too long to provide
information.
Let me ask you another question about this cooperation
between State or Federal and local governments, and that is
with red flag laws. We haven't gotten much passed through the
Congress about gun violence regulation, but the bipartisan
Safer Communities Act did set aside $750 million in funding for
States to pursue, implement, improve what they called extreme
risk protection orders or red flag laws. I think 19 States have
done that, including Nevada has a red flag law. Could you tell
us, Chief or anybody, how these laws help you or hurt your
efforts in stopping violence with guns?
Sheriff Barnes. I can tell you that I'm a believer in red
flag laws, and we have several provisions in California to take
guns away from people who are prohibited from possessing
firearms. My agency not only has issued the most CCWs in
California, but also has investigative teams that go out and
take guns away from people who are prohibited from possessing
them.
To your previous question real quick, one of the big issues
on querying for databases on guns is the fact that you have to
go to I think it's 20 different databases to search for
ownership, guns, other things. If they could narrow that query
down to one query that searches all those databases would make
not only ATF, but agencies working with ATF much more
successful and utilize resources much more efficiently if that
were to be employed.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. I appreciate that. So, anybody else
have an opinion on red flag laws?
Chief Gerke. I'll say in Texas that, you know, particularly
victims of family violence, those are of great concern to us.
Those are issued emergency protective orders almost
immediately. When that happens, those people are prohibited
from carrying guns right at that point. My department we take a
very proactive approach to those. When we know that there's
been a protective order issued, we will go by that residence
sometimes twice a shift to check on those protected individuals
to make sure they're OK.
Also, going back to the ATF question, you know, we do
follow-up. Any time there is a gun crime, we want to know where
that gun came from. Many times, that gun is stolen. So, that
answers one question. But if that gun is not stolen and it's in
the hand of a 16-year-old gang member, how did that 16-year-old
gang member come to own that gun or possess that gun? So, we do
trace that back. We find those owners and we find out, you
know, particularly you want to know if that one owner has
bought 17, 20, 30 guns in the last 5 months, right? Those are
things that are important to know.
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
Chairman Pfluger. I now recognize Mr. Brecheen of Oklahoma
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you to the Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. You are heroes to people that you protect and I am
grateful to you. As my colleague said a while ago, also the
thanks to not only your families, but all the families who,
when they say goodbye in the morning, they know the danger that
their loved ones encounter throughout the day. So, what an
amazing testament of courage to our men and women in the
policing service.
I want to recognize in Oklahoma last year, we had three
officers lost in the line of duty. I just want to just pay
honor to them and their families. Deputy Sheriff Jeremy McCain
of Oklahoma County, Patrolman Joseph Barlow of McAlester, and
Detention Officer Kenneth Fowler of Pontotoc County.
I found it astounding this morning, Mr. Gerke and Mr.
Barnes, you both alluded to fentanyl being one of your priority
issues and which absolutely, as we know, is a result of lack of
enforcement, lack of capture at our Southern Border, given the
flow. So, in 2021, we know that 70,000 deaths occurred. It is
the leading cause of death, fentanyl poisoning. Many times,
people are thinking they are taking some other substance, they
are taking fentanyl, and it leads to their demise. That 70,000
would be as if a jetliner every day was crashing to get to that
annual number. It is the leading cause of death, 18 to 45 in
America today. In Oklahoma in 2022, there were 326 Oklahomans
who died from fentanyl. Just in the first 5 months of this
year, there's already 300. So, it is just a number that
continues to grow.
The deadly mixture of tranq that keeps Narcan from being
able to revive someone. My question to anyone at the panel.
What are you seeing with this? What is your experience? What
are your suggestions as it pertains to what the Federal
Government can be doing with this dangerous mixture concoction
of the fentanyl being laced with xylazine?
Sheriff Barnes. So, I'm also the county coroner in Orange
County, and we look at all that data. We've seen the presence
of xylazine increase over the last 4 years to become much more
dominant. So, we know that that is a causal factor in the
synergy created with fentanyl. So, it is an on-going issue.
The rise of the 70,000, in our analysis of the fentanyl
addiction, the vast majority of those deaths are people not
taking one pill, are people who are addicted to fentanyl, who
are seeking out fentanyl as an addiction that is causing their
demise. My analysis was 96 percent of those who died in my area
as a result of fentanyl had an addiction or prior arrest for
drug offenses that weren't first-time users. That does happen.
The clandestine-produced pills are often being sold as Xanax,
OxyContin, oxycodone, and other things. You do have xylazine
sometimes mixed. But it's mostly the addicts and they're
seeking out the pure fentanyl for an addictive high.
Mr. Brecheen. Sheriff Barnes, since I have got you on the
mic already, I want to kind-of pivot to something I found
really interesting. You talked about the lawlessness that
policies as a laboratory of experimentation that your State has
been seeing. You quoted some numbers that your prison
population as of 2010 was 165,000, and that dropped to 90,000
almost in half in a 10-year time period. To date, you are about
90,000 prison population. But what you talked about in your
opening remarks was that that decriminalization element where
State law has been changed, it has led to a 31 percent increase
of homicides in that same time period. A 31 percent increase in
homicides, and the population only rose 10 percent. It is
astounding. Also, in that 30-percentile range was aggravated
assaults had grown 30 percent.
You then talked about that those that are killed, officers
that are killed in the line of duty come from those with
extensive criminal records. You, a moment ago told a member of
this panel that it is not the gun, it is those that are getting
the gun. So, we see in America today, the gun is looked at as
the target for our focus. Yet I appreciate you talking about
the human factor. Would you expound upon that?
Sheriff Barnes. Sure. So just to put that in perspective,
I've issued 20,000 CCWs and none of those individuals have gone
out and committed a homicide. So, I think when you look at just
guns being issued, it's the criminal element using guns in the
commission of crimes, oftentimes when they should have been
incarcerated for the previous crimes, that is driving the
violence that we're seeing with these decarceration efforts.
Mr. Brecheen. So, just to follow and ending with this, Mr.
Chairman, that if we would be more apt to go after the
criminals and not bring about policy that decriminalizes them
on lesser crimes, we could go to the heart of what leads to
more aggressive, more violent behavior years later. It is
ushered in by being lax on criminal behavior. With that, I
yield.
Chairman D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Before we get to the next speaker, I just want to, going back
to my questioning before, Mr. Cox. So, in 2022 there were 563
people charged with unlawful possession in Boston. That was 93
percent of all firearm arrests. The overwhelming majority of
shootings both with victims and not with victims, involved
handguns. According to the complaints that were filed, there
was not one that referred to any white supremacy-driven violent
crime. With that, I now recognize Mr. Ivey of Maryland for 5
minutes.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to yield to Mr.
Correa to follow up on a point that was made earlier.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Ivey. I just want to ask for
unanimous consent to enter into the record an article from the
Trace titled Guns Recovered in Mexico Come Mostly from U.S.
Makers. It shows that as much as 90 percent of all guns
recovered in Mexican soil originate from the United States. If
I can admit this for the record, please?
Chairman D'Esposito. Without objection, Mr. Correa.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted by Honorable J. Luis Correa
guns recovered by mexico's military come mostly from u.s. makers
In the wake of a judge's decision to throw out the Mexican
government's lawsuit against the gun industry, data
shows American companies produce the weapons
driving cartel violence.
By Champe Barton, Alain Stephens, and Steve Fisher
Oct 20, 2022
On September 30, a Federal judge dismissed a groundbreaking legal
challenge to the gun industry filed by the government of Mexico. The
suit laid out an argument that major U.S. gunmakers have knowingly
facilitated more than a decade of deadly cartel violence across the
southern border. They have done this, Mexico argued, by marketing
weapons in a way that attracts criminals and turning a blind eye to
those weapons' diversion into trafficking routes. The judge dismissed
the claim on account of a special legal shield enjoyed by the gun
industry.
To date, data underlying Mexico's dramatic pronouncements--that as
much as 90 percent of all guns recovered on Mexican soil originated in
the U.S.; that as many as 597,000 weapons slip over the border each
year, most from American gun manufacturers--has only been shared in
aggregate form by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.
But data obtained from Mexico's Secretariat of National Defense
provides a detailed look at the specific manufacturers who produce
weapons commonly used in cartel violence. The data details every
firearm recovered by the Mexican military between 2010 and May 2020--
almost 125,000 weapons, including machine guns, grenade launchers, and
tens of thousands of pistols and rifles. Taken together, the numbers
tell a damning story of iconic American gunmakers' involvement in a
decade of Mexican bloodshed.
U.S. gun manufacturers make up seven out of the top 10 companies
whose guns are most frequently seized by the Mexican military. Colt
Manufacturing, based in Hartford, Connecticut, led the list, with more
than 8,500 firearms--6.8 percent of all guns recovered in Mexico over
the 10-year span. Winchester Repeating Arms, based in New Haven,
Connecticut, followed in second place with over 4,000 weapons
recovered. Major gunmakers including Smith & Wesson, Remington, Ruger,
and Browning, also appear in the top 10.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Altogether, U.S. weapons manufacturers accounted for at least 30
percent of guns in the dataset, according to a Trace analysis. Another
61,000 guns--roughly half of all the weapons recovered--either had no
identifiable manufacturing marks, or had their manufacturer information
left out during data entry. It's possible many of these guns originated
in the U.S., but had identifying characteristics scratched away by
their owners in attempts to evade tracking by authorities. (Like U.S.
police agencies, the Mexican government traces firearms with the ATF.)
It is also possible that many of the guns manufactured by foreign-
based gun companies originated in the U.S. Glock, an Austrian company,
has a separate operation headquartered in Georgia. Sig Sauer, a German
company, has headquarters in New Hampshire. These companies, along with
several others, manufacture and sell millions of guns domestically
every year. The Mexican military's data shows that 970 Glock firearms
were recovered in the country between 2010 and 2020. But because the
data does not specify the country in which each gun was manufactured,
guns produced by foreign companies were excluded from The Trace's
estimates of U.S.-made guns. ATF trace data, which may include some
subset of these firearms, as well as recoveries made by law enforcement
authorities other than the Mexican military, shows that more than
70,000 guns made their way from the U.S. to Mexico between 2015 and
2020.
Mexico enforces extremely stringent gun laws. There is only one gun
store in the entire country, and it's located behind fortified walls on
a military base. Anybody interested in purchasing a gun from this store
must undergo months of background scrutiny. Law enforcement and border
security experts have long recognized that these restrictions--paired
with a thriving array of cartels warring for regional power--make
Mexico a hot destination for trafficked firearms. The country's
proximity to the U.S. and the sheer abundance of guns in circulation
here make the U.S. a natural source.
``We produce some of the best firearms in the world,'' said David
Shirk, a professor of political science at the University of San Diego
who specializes in U.S.-Mexico relations. ``Some of the people who are
most interested in obtaining firearms and with the most financial
resources to do so are Mexican drug trafficking and criminal
organizations.''
The human cost of this black market transaction is extraordinary:
The Mexican government claims that more than 180,000 people were killed
in violent gun crimes between 2007 and 2019, spinning an unfathomable
web of grief and forcing many to flee their homes. The violence in
certain areas is so extreme that the U.S. Department of State has
advised travelers to avoid them.
This death toll has become a political sticking point for the
administration of Mexico's current president, Andres Manuel Lopez
Obrador. Where previous administrations have tried to snuff out cartel
activity by force, Obrador has tried to shift some of this focus to
root causes: socioeconomic struggles that make cartel involvement
appealing to young men, and arms trafficked over the country's northern
border. It was in step with this strategy that Mexico launched its
lawsuit against U.S. gun companies in 2021.
``[The manufacturers] should make necessary changes so they are not
appealing to narcos,'' said Alejandro Celorio Alcantara, a legal
advisor for Mexico's Foreign Ministry who was intimately involved with
the country's lawsuit. ``They have access to trace information.''
Domestically, countering arms trafficked from the U.S. has been of
second mind to policymakers, who have tended instead to focus on drugs
and people being trafficked north. But some efforts to clamp down on
southbound gun trafficking routes have picked up steam in Congress.
Most recently, in June, the U.S. Congress passed the Bipartisan Safer
Communities Act, which makes straw purchasing and gun trafficking
Federal crimes.
Law enforcement experts say it's dangerous to underestimate the
integral role firearms play in driving both drugs and people north.
``Tens of thousands of people are dying from fentanyl overdoses
every year in the U.S., and most of that fentanyl these days is coming
directly from Mexico, from the cartels,'' said Joseph Lestrange, a
retired Homeland Security Investigations division chief, who is now a
security consultant, adding that U.S. guns arm most of the cartels
sending these drugs north. ``[Gun trafficking] fuels and facilitates
the continued expansion of criminal enterprises in Mexico that are
feeding this demand.''

Mr. Correa. Thank you. Very quickly, if I can answer,
respond to my colleague who is not here right now. I wish he
would be here. About guns in Mexico. I don't make Mexican laws.
I am a U.S. lawmaker. But we did meet, Democrats and
Republicans met with the Mexican president about 2 or 3 months
ago. This was one of the issues that was brought up by the
Mexican president, which is he needs help from us addressing
the gun smuggling issue. He was telling the story of the arrest
of Chapo Guzman's son, 14 soldiers, Mexican soldiers died in
that action. He said they had 50-caliber weapons. We can't
compete with those. So, they need our help.
So, yes, Second Amendment, preserve it. But let's make
sure, like my sheriff says, that we go after the criminal
element as well. I yield.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you. To the Chairman's point, I appreciate
the fact that assault weapons are not the vast majority of--are
used in the vast majority of murders in the United States. I
don't think that means that we don't try and control both
because it is clear that assault weapons--we will have a
hearing at 2 and we will talk a lot about that today--are
driving the mass killings in the country by far.
This is Police Week. I want to take a moment and
acknowledge police officers, especially in my jurisdiction of
Prince George's County. I was a State prosecutor there for 8
years and worked with them closely. Prosecuted officers across
the line, but the vast majority of our more than 2,000 officers
did a hard job well.
I did want to say quickly with respect to the commissioner,
when I ran for office in 2002, the basis for my campaign was to
implement the Boston strategy in Prince George's County. The
logic of that for me was, yes, we need tough enforcement. We
want to have a carrot-and-stick approach. So, we want to make
sure that we do everything we can for intervention prevention
efforts. Chief, as you mentioned a minute ago, it is better to
preempt the crime than to deal with arrests after the fact,
because then you are saving victims from having to undergo the
suffering, the death, and the loss, and the like. Sheriff, you
mentioned the thefts that take place. Trying to preempt that is
a good way to go as well.
But I do want to preempt, or push back a little bit on the
approach, or the suggestion that incarceration is the only way
to deal with this problem. You know, I remember when we had 2.2
million people in jail here in the United States. I think there
was a point where we surged ahead of China and had more people
incarcerated than any other country in the world. Certainly,
there is a place for enforcement, but, you know, I found that
we had success with intervention prevention efforts that
incorporated the faith community, outreach to our schools, we
used coaches. Whatever strategy we could approach to try and
reach young people in particular before they got into trouble
or if they were in trouble, to pull them back out of trouble,
if they were in gangs, for example, we thought that was an
important way to go. I think that dovetailed well with the
community policing strategy that was outlined a minute ago by
the commissioner and also with respect to outreach to the
citizens.
It is a team effort, and the most successful strategies, I
think, are the ones that try and integrate law enforcement
along with prosecutors, but also making sure that the community
is brought in and is part of what is going on with respect to
reducing the crimes, because they are the witnesses in these
cases when they come to court. They are the ones that provide
the tips to the police to make the arrests. Sometimes they are
the ones that provide the tips to go get the gun before
somebody gets shot with it, you know, or gets brought out of
the car, or out of the police, or out of the school locker.
I did want to say this, too, just quickly with respect to
your testimony. I appreciated the fact that you outlined your
partnerships actually, both of you did, with Federal
prosecutors and Federal law enforcement. We have got bills here
in the House where one of my colleagues has offered, a
Republican colleague, offered a bill to eliminate ATF. One has
offered a bill to eliminate the FBI. There have been calls by,
you know, certain national leaders to eliminate the Department
of Justice and the FBI. But I know from my experience and just
based on what I read from your testimony, that the Federal and
State and local partnership can be very effective. In fact,
sometimes the most effective in fighting crime.
So, I commend you for the work that you do, and I encourage
you to keep it up. I thank you for coming here today.
Chairman D'Esposito. Well, thank you. Thank you to all the
witnesses for your valuable testimony, and obviously to my
colleagues for their questions. Perhaps we don't often agree on
everything, but I think during this week, especially whether
you are a Republican or you are a Democrat, we can recognize
and agree that we appreciate all of your hard work, your
sacrifice, the work that you do to keep our community safe. So,
thank you to all for being here, for making the trip here, and
I think for really engaging in a conversation to move policing
forward and keep police officers safe across this Nation for
the future.
The Members of the subcommittees may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and we ask the witnesses to
respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days. Without objection, the subcommittees stand
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:18 a.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Honorable Laurel M. Lee for Michael Gerke
Question 1. When it comes to information sharing between Federal
and State authorities, would you speak to some of the challenges Odessa
faces when it comes to communication with the Federal Government and
its partnership with the National Human Trafficking Hotline?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Would you walk us through what information sharing
looks like when attempting to identify broader trafficking trends?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. What other obstacles exist when attempting to stop
criminals trafficking humans and illegal narcotics?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Laurel M. Lee for Don Barnes
Question. In your written testimony, you included reference to
Operation Red Zone across a dozen or so law enforcement agencies. Would
you speak to some of the efforts of the Orange County Intelligence
Assessment Center in the fight against human trafficking?
Answer. With regard to Operation Red Zone, the Orange County
Intelligence Assessment Center (OCIAC) coordinated Operation Red Zone
in partnership with 11 local law enforcement agencies, the Orange
County District Attorney's Office and the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security to identify victims of human trafficking and hold their
perpetrators accountable. This operation took place during the week
leading up to the 2022 Super Bowl, which was held in Los Angeles.
The operation resulted in the arrest of 56 suspects and recovery of
16 victims. The more than 4 dozen arrests included men ages 20 to 55
from Orange and Los Angeles counties. Charges included human
trafficking, pimping and pandering, solicitation for sex, and
narcotics. In addition, one unregistered handgun was recovered.
Agencies conducted multiple operations utilizing investigative
techniques most impactful for their specific city. This included
undercover operations, investigation into online-based sex solicitation
websites and investigations into known problematic businesses.
As Orange County's fusion center, OCIAC plays a critical role in
addressing human trafficking. The analysts at OCIAC provide actionable
information to our human trafficking task force, threat briefings, and
assist in community awareness campaigns.
Another specific area where OCIAC has been instrumental is the
identification of on-line sex ads that use or target juveniles. In
2022, the Orange County Intelligence Assessment Center identified more
than 6,000 possible juveniles in commercial (on-line) sex ads in Orange
County. OCIAC flags and shares these ads with the appropriate law
enforcement agencies for further investigation.
During the pandemic, we saw a marked increase in the number of
potential human trafficking incidents in the form of commercial (on-
line) sex ads. This was attributed to an increase in the number of
young people staying home and participating in unmonitored on-line
activity.

2019: 5,293 commercial sex ads involving possible juveniles

2020: 20,456 commercial sex ads involving possible juveniles

2021: 10,000 commercial sex ads involving possible juveniles

2022: 6,232 commercial sex ads involving possible juveniles.
An increase in the number of commercial sex ads featuring possible
juveniles tells us that there is an increased probability human
trafficking is occurring. In many cases, participating in the sex trade
is not a choice, but rather a product of being trafficked.
Venues for on-line trafficking solicitation include on-line gaming
with direct messaging and voice messaging options and social media.
Traffickers may mass message individuals with an innocuous type
introduction message. The target is typically a young female but it
happens to boys and men, too. They may also pose as a scout for a
talent agency or something similar. The traffickers attempt to target
individuals with noticeable vulnerabilities, i.e. someone with low
self-esteem, someone who is lonely, or maybe a victim too young or
naive to understand what is happening. Once the victim engages in
conversation, the traffickers work to build trust. They may make false
promises of a loving relationship or the promise of a well-paying job.
Traffickers work to fulfill the victim's needs, whether that is
something tangible like money or a place to stay, or something
intangible like love or affection. Once they isolate these victims they
begin to exploit them. OCIAC is critical in identifying these on-line
sex ads and supporting law enforcement efforts to address and eliminate
this threat.
Unrelated to your specific question, but important to note with
regard to human trafficking is a new California law that has made law
enforcement's work to combat trafficking more difficult. Senate Bill
357 took effect January 1, 2023. The legislation repeals a law that
allows law enforcement to detain a person loitering with the intent to
engage in prostitution. Essentially this law de-criminalizes those
paying for services and those exploiting women. The former loitering
law was a tool used by investigators to engage potential victims in a
safe place and determine if they are a victim of human trafficking. It
also helped us identify those who may be conducting the larger
operation. The passage of SB 357 takes away an important tool and will
prevent us from identifying and, ultimately, helping victims of
trafficking. While this issue is currently specific to California, it
is important to highlight this poor public policy so that it is not
replicated in other jurisdictions.
Questions From Honorable Donald M. Payne, Jr., for Michael A. Cox
Question 1. In your testimony, you mention that UASI is a critical
source for your Department and that Boston is receiving $200,000 less
this year while going up in the UASI risk ranking. As you noted, the
threat landscape has broadened. Do you have recommendations on how DHS
grant programs can better address the growing threat landscape?
Answer. A significant way that Congress could assist law
enforcement would be to increase funding across the Homeland Security
Grant Program--to include UASI--and consider broadening its
applicability beyond just ``terrorism'' to include other threats
traditionally mitigated by the U.S. Department of Defense and
intelligence community.
In addition, flexibility regarding time frames for expenditure of
grant funds would better support long-term projects.
Question 2. Like many local government agencies, police departments
have been hit hard by ransomware attacks in recent years. Such attacks
risk exposing private information and sensitive details regarding
criminal investigations and can interfere with a police department's
ability to carry out its vital public safety mission. In just the past
couple months, law enforcement agencies in Dallas, TX; Camden County,
NJ; and San Bernardino County, CA have fallen victim to ransomware
attacks. Can you describe the potential impact a similar ransomware
attack could have on your agency and its ability to serve the public
and what steps your agency has taken to strengthen your cyber defenses?
Answer. A successful ransomware attack launched by a skilled
adversary against the Boston Police Department could hamper or cripple
emergency services and public safety communications throughout the
region. Law enforcement personnel could also lose access to case and
operational data for weeks, impacting active investigations and
prosecutions. Ransomware affiliates often steal data before encrypting
it on target systems and the personally identifiable information of
Boston area residents, sensitive criminal information and operational
details could all be leaked on the internet or used for nefarious
purposes. In addition to the impact on the Boston Police Department,
disruptions to network traffic flow may impact other city systems and
agencies.
A ransomware attack on our agency could also have far-reaching
operational impacts. One of the most immediate and critical would be on
the agency's Computer Aided Dispatch (CAD) system, which is essential
for timely emergency response and coordination of law enforcement
officers, firefighters, and emergency medical services. With CAD
disrupted, response times could see significant delays, putting lives
at risk.
In addition, the integrity of our telecommunications systems,
including both phone and radio communications that we heavily rely on
for internal communication and public contact, could be undermined. A
breach of this nature would not only obstruct our daily operations but
also impede emergency responses.
On the investigative front, a ransomware attack could result in the
encryption or total loss of essential data related to on-going
investigations. This would cause substantial setbacks and could impair
our ability to effectively solve crimes. A ransomware attack could also
threaten the availability, integrity, and confidentiality of our case
files and digital evidence. This could potentially undermine on-going
and future prosecutions.
On the administrative side, the disruption of our financial systems
could lead to substantial logistical issues. For example, systems used
for payroll, purchasing, budgeting and accounts could all be targeted,
preventing employees from being paid on time and vendors receiving
timely payment, therefore creating confusion related to our finances.
Surveillance systems could also fall victim to ransomware,
hindering our ability to monitor public areas and investigate crimes.
Last, public trust in our agency could be undermined, especially if
personal information is exposed or critical services are disrupted.
To mitigate the risk of ransomware attacks, our agency has
proactively undertaken several important measures. We conduct regular
backups to protect critical data and keep all software and hardware
updated to guard against known vulnerabilities. Our staff undergo on-
going cybersecurity training to spot potential threats. We utilize
incoming email filtering to block phishing attempts. Implementing next-
generation antivirus solutions and multi-factor authentication bolsters
our defenses further. Finally, we're in the process of upgrading our
firewall to a next-generation system, enhancing our threat detection
and prevention capabilities. These combined steps provide a multi-
layered defense against ransomware, helping safeguard our agency's
crucial services.
Question 3. How can the Federal Government better ensure law
enforcement agencies have the resources to defend against and respond
to these attacks?
Answer. Federal investments in the UASI and STC grant programs are
vital to local efforts to prevent and mitigate potential attacks.
Continued funding of these critical investments is necessary to defend
against and respond to these attacks.
National security threats from nation-state actors and their
proxies managing aggressive campaigns to sow seeds of discord in our
communities through mis/dis/mal information, cyber attacks, and
counterintelligence threats require more from our intelligence
professionals, investigators, and front-line officers to protect our
communities. Because these are issues that our Nation's first
responders have not traditionally dealt with, we require more training,
more personnel, more embedded analytical experts and more technical
capabilities to mitigate these threats.
Specific to cyber attacks:
The role of the Federal Government is crucial in ensuring that law
enforcement agencies like ours have the necessary resources to both
prevent and respond to cyber threats effectively. An increase in
Federal funding would significantly empower us to adopt advanced
cybersecurity tools and technologies that are vital to safeguard our
digital infrastructure. With the cyber threat landscape constantly
evolving, staying up-to-date with the latest defenses is extremely
important.
Additional financial support would assist us in attracting and
retaining the highly-skilled cybersecurity professionals who are at the
forefront of managing and improving our defenses.
In the unfortunate event of a cyber attack, Federal funding ensures
that we can respond rapidly and effectively, minimizing operational
disruption and swiftly restoring vital services. A proactive investment
in our systems through regular updates and maintenance, facilitated by
this funding, is another critical defense strategy.
Equally important are third-party security audits, which identify
potential vulnerabilities and areas for improvement. Last, Federal
funds could also support law enforcement agencies in covering the cost
of cyber insurance premiums, providing an essential safety net.

[all]
