- EXAMINING THE CURRENT STATUS OF IRAN'S AXIS OF RESISTANCE AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR HOMELAND SECURITY AND U.S. INTERESTS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE CURRENT STATUS OF IRAN'S
AXIS OF RESISTANCE AND THE IMPLICATIONS
FOR HOMELAND SECURITY AND U.S. INTERESTS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 20, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-55

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC IS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-450 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Mr. James Dunlap, Deputy Under Secretary for Analysis, Office of
Intelligence and Analysis (I&A), Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. Robert Wells, Assistant Director, Counterterrorism Division,
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI):
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Ms. Carrie Thompson, Chief of Intelligence, Drug Enforcement
Administration (DEA):
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
Ms. Elizabeth Richard, Ambassador-At-Large, Coordinator for
Counterterrorism, Bureau of Counterterrorism, U.S. Department
of State:
Oral Statement.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    25

EXAMINING THE CURRENT STATUS OF IRAN'S AXIS OF RESISTANCE AND THE
IMPLICATIONS FOR HOMELAND SECURITY AND U.S. INTERESTS

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark E. Green
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, Higgins, Guest, Gimenez,
Pfluger, Garbarino, Gonzales, Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Strong,
Brecheen, Crane, Thompson, Jackson Lee, Thanedar, Menendez, and
Suozzi.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair may declare the
committee in recess at any point.
Before I get started this morning, I want to welcome a new
Member to our committee. Mr. Suozzi, the gentleman from New
York, is now joining us, and we're glad to have you on the
committee.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. Were you on this committee when you were
here before?
Mr. Suozzi. No.
Chairman Green. Excellent. Excellent. We're glad to have
you.
Also, at 10:30 precisely we're going to vote on a measure
to go into Classified setting, and we have to have that at
10:30 even if the witness testimony here in the open session
lasts beyond 10:30. So right at 10:30 we'll stop and vote and
then continue.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony on the
full scale, scope, and pace of threats posed to the homeland by
Iran's proxy forces, and I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
The Islamic Republic of Iran presents a clear and present
danger to the United States homeland and our allies. Last
October, the committee heard testimony from a variety of
witnesses that highlighted the national security threats posed
by the Iranian regime. Two of the witnesses, former Ambassador
Nathan Sales and Robert Greenway, discussed the Iranian
regime's terror capabilities and the threats the regime poses
to the United States.
In addition, we heard the harrowing testimony of human
rights activist Masih Alinejad, who had been targeted multiple
times by the Iranian regime on U.S. soil. The stories she
shared opened the eyes of every Member of this committee to the
lengths that the regime will go to silence those who speak
truth to the regime's brutality.
Since our last hearing pertaining to the threats posed by
Iran, the security threats from Iran and their proxies have
metastasized even more.
These threats include assassination plots on former Trump
administration officials, targeting and attacking U.S. service
members abroad, disrupting trade and commerce and endangering
maritime security in the Red Sea, and attempting to coordinate
external terror operations in Europe and South America.
Today we will focus our efforts on the threats posed by
Iran's proxy networks, more commonly known as Iran's Axis of
Resistance.
The Axis of Resistance is a network of independent militia
groups that Iran uses to enhance their power projection
capabilities, provide plausible deniability for attacks
conducted on behalf of the Iranian regime, and create
instability for Iran's enemies in the region.
Most notably, these terrorist proxies include Hezbollah,
Hamas, the Houthis, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and various
Iraqi and Syrian militia groups. These proxies and their
sympathizers are present in countries such as Lebanon, Iran,
Yemen, Iraq, and Syria.
In exchange for these groups' support and actions, they
receive significant financial backing, material support, and
training from the Iranian regime.
Although we regularly hear about these groups' activities
in the Middle East, their operations are not confined solely to
that region.
Hezbollah, arguably the most powerful proxy within the Axis
of Resistance, has spent decades building the infrastructure
needed to carry out its agenda in all parts of the world.
As FBI Director Wray testified before the committee last
November, and I quote, ``The arrests of individuals in the
United States allegedly linked to Hezbollah's main overseas
terrorist arm and their intelligence collection and procurement
efforts demonstrate Hezbollah's interests in long-term
contingency planning activities here in our homeland.''
In addition, this terrorist organization has conducted
operations throughout Europe and South America and has
extensive ties to Venezuelan dictator Nicolas Maduro and his
authoritarian regime.
Last, Hezbollah has also engaged in narcotics, weapons, and
human trafficking, as well as money laundering, for
authoritarian regimes, transnational criminal organizations,
and other terror networks.
The Houthis, a Yemeni militia group, has been a long-time
proxy for the Iranian regime. The Houthis have conducted
operations that target U.S. partners in the Persian Gulf, such
as Saudi Arabia.
These attacks on one of our greatest allies in the Middle
East have shown evidence that Iran has provided the Houthis
with unmanned aerial vehicles equipped with explosives and
long-range missiles. These weapons have not only advanced
Iran's interests in the region, but have also helped the regime
test weapon systems before fielding their capabilities
elsewhere.
Recently, the Houthis targeted Western commercial shipping
with anti-ship missiles. These attacks have not only killed
innocent commercial sailors, but have created significant
delays in supply chains that will eventually cause the price of
goods to rise.
Sadly, the world is familiar with the dangers that Hamas
poses. Their barbaric terror attack against Israel on October 7
demonstrates this group is committed to carry out its hateful
agenda at any cost and that Iran is dedicated to bankrolling
the organization's quest to destroy Israel and the West.
Hamas' reach is not limited to the Gaza Strip and Israel.
In December of last year, German authorities detained 4
individuals with ties to Hamas for plotting attacks on Jewish
institutions in Europe. Their orders came from Hamas leaders in
Lebanon.
As mentioned earlier, these threats are not localized. What
happens in someone else's backyard will eventually make its way
to our own.
We must acknowledge that the Axis of Resistance is
committed to destroying Israel and the West. They've shown the
intent to conduct operations abroad and have demonstrated a
willingness to do so here in the United States.
These groups have also exploited conflicts via news outlets
and on-line communications to call on their supporters located
in the United States to carry out attacks.
I hope that today's hearing will give Members of this
committee the opportunity to fully examine these terror groups
and the current status of the threats they pose to the homeland
and U.S. interests.
We have circulated this proceeding in advance and have
coordinated with the Minority, but I want to reiterate so all
of our Members are aware: After the Ranking Member's statement
we're going to hear opening statements from our witnesses and
then there will be a vote to move into a closed session.
We have a space set aside in the SCIF at HVC-301, and we
will go over there with a goal of learning as much from our
witnesses on this topic as possible.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony today, and I
want to thank them all for being here.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green
March 20, 2024
The Islamic Republic of Iran presents a clear and present danger to
the United States homeland and our allies.
Last October, the committee heard testimony from a variety of
witnesses that highlighted the national security threats posed by the
Iranian regime.
Two of the witnesses, Former Ambassador Nathan Sales and Robert
Greenway, discussed the Iranian regime's terror capabilities and the
threats the regime poses to the United States.
In addition, we heard the harrowing testimony of human rights
activist Masih Alinjead, who has been targeted multiple times by the
Iranian regime on U.S. soil. The stories she shared opened the eyes of
every Member of this committee to the lengths that the regime will go
to silence those who speak truth to the regime's brutality.
Since our last hearing pertaining to the threats posed by Iran, the
security threats from Iran and their proxies have metastasized even
more.
These threats include:

assassination plots on former Trump administration
officials;

targeting and attacking U.S. service members abroad;

disrupting trade and commerce and endangering maritime
security in the Red Sea;

and attempting to coordinate external terror operations in
Europe and South America.
Today we will focus our efforts on the threats posed by Iran's
proxy networks, more commonly known as Iran's ``Axis of Resistance.''
The ``Axis of Resistance'' is a network of independent militant
Islamist groups that Iran uses to enhance their power projection
capabilities, provide plausible deniability for attacks conducted on
behalf of the Iranian regime, and create instability for Iran's enemies
in the region.
Most notably, these terror proxies include Hizballah, Hamas, the
Houthis, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, and various Iraqi and Syrian
militia groups.
These proxies and their sympathizers are present in countries, such
as Lebanon, Iran, Yemen, Iraq, and Syria.
In exchange for these groups' support and actions, they receive
significant financial backing, material support, and training from the
Iranian regime.
Although we regularly hear about these groups' activities in the
Middle East, their operations are not confined solely to that region.
Hizballah, arguably the most powerful proxy within the ``Axis of
Resistance,'' has spent decades building the infrastructure needed to
carry out its agenda in all parts of the world. As FBI Director Wray
testified before the committee last November, ``the arrests of
individuals in the United States allegedly linked to Hizballah's main
overseas terrorist arm, and their intelligence-collection and--
procurement efforts, demonstrate Hizballah's interest in long-term
contingency planning activities here in the homeland.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Worldwide Threats to the Homeland: Hearing Before the H. Comm.
on Homeland Sec., 118th Cong. (Nov. 15, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, this terror organization has conducted operations
throughout Europe and South America and has extensive ties to
Venezuelan dictator, Nicolas Maduro, and his authoritarian regime.
Last, Hizballah has also engaged in narcotics, weapons, and human
trafficking, as well as money laundering for authoritarian regimes,
transnational criminal organizations, and other terror networks.
The Houthis, a Yemeni militia group, has been a long-time proxy for
the Iranian regime. The Houthis have conducted operations that target
U.S. partners in the Persian Gulf, such as Saudi Arabia. These attacks
on our Middle East partners have shown evidence that Iran has provided
the Houthis with unmanned aerial vehicles equipped with explosives and
long-range missiles. These weapons have not only advanced Iran's
interests in the region but have also helped the regime test weapons
systems before fielding the capabilities elsewhere.
Recently, the Houthis targeted Western commercial ships with
antiship missiles. These attacks have not only killed innocent
commercial sailors but have created significant delays in supply chains
that will eventually cause the prices of goods to rise.
Sadly, the world is familiar with the dangers that Hamas terrorist
pose. Their barbaric terror attack against Israel, on October 7
demonstrates this group is committed to carry out its hateful agenda at
any cost and that Iran is dedicated to bankrolling the organization's
quest to destroy Israel and the West.
Hamas's reach is not limited to the Gaza Strip and Israel. In
December of last year, German authorities detained 4 individuals with
ties to Hamas for plotting attacks on Jewish institutions in Europe.
Their orders came from Hamas leaders in Lebanon.
As mentioned earlier, these threats are not localized. What happens
in someone else's backyard will eventually make its way to ours.
We must acknowledge that the ``Axis of Resistance'' is committed to
destroying Israel and the West.
They have shown the intent to conduct operations abroad and have
demonstrated a willingness to do so. These groups have also exploited
conflicts via news outlets and on-line communications to call on their
supporters located in the United States to carry out attacks.
I hope that today's hearing will give Members of this committee the
opportunity to fully examine these terror groups and the current status
of the threats they pose to the homeland and U.S. interests.
We have circulated this proceeding in advance and have coordinated
with the Minority, but I want to reiterate so all of our Members are
aware: after the Ranking Member's statement, we are going to hear
opening statements from our witness and then there will be a vote to
move into a closed session. We have a space set up in the SCIF at HVC-
301, and we will go over there with the goal of learning as much from
our witnesses on the topic as possible.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony today and thank them all
for being here.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman.
Good morning to our witnesses. I look forward to your
testimony.
I want to first welcome Representative Suozzi of New York
to the committee.
We're pleased to have you join us and look forward to
working with you on many issues that come before this
committee. Even if you're from New York, we welcome you to the
committee.
[Laughter.]
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. It's been more than 5 months
since the horrific terrorist attack by Iranian-backed Hamas
against Israel, which left more than 1,100 people dead. Still
today, Hamas is holding an estimated 130 Israelis, including
dual U.S. citizens, hostage.
That deadly October 7 attack caused a war that has claimed
tens of thousands of lives, including innocent civilians and
children both in Israel and Gaza.
Beyond the war in Gaza, Hamas' deadly attack has begun to
spill over and destabilize regional peace and global economic
security. We've seen Lebanese Hezbollah, also backed by the
Iranian regime, launch attacks against Israel since October 7,
killing a dozen Israeli soldiers and 6 civilians.
Just a few days ago, it was publicly reported that the head
of Iran's Quds Force met with Lebanese Hezbollah, and
Hezbollah's leaders told the Iranian regime that the terrorist
group is willing to fight Israel on its own without pulling in
Iranian armed forces. That should trouble us all.
Moreover, Houthis in Yemen have repeatedly attacked
commercial shipping, demonstrating how the United States and
our allies are threatened by Iranian-backed terrorist groups.
The Houthis have also claimed responsibilities for
attacking the U.S. Navy. While the claims have been refuted by
U.S. defense officials, it shed light on the group's terrorism-
related aspirations.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for the committee to hear
from national security agencies in a closed setting about the
threat Iranian-backed terrorist groups, like Hamas, Hezbollah,
and the Houthis, pose to the homeland and to U.S. interests
world-wide.
As I said in the immediate aftermath of the heinous attacks
on October 7, the United States condemns Hamas' actions.
We also keep the innocent civilians in Gaza who have died
in our prayers and call for lasting peace in the region.
Unfortunately, as the administration has worked tirelessly
to support Israel, bringing Americans home from the conflict
zone, prevent a wider war in the region, and address the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza, House Republicans have absolutely
refused to provide Israel with the resources they need to push
back the threats of terrorists and terroristic regimes.
Republican leaders are also refusing to work with Democrats
to provide humanitarian relief for civilians in Gaza.
Now, while I'm pleased that an apparent deal has been
reached to fund the Government, it is shameful that more than 5
months into fiscal year 2024 House Republicans' refusal to
govern has us once again on the precipice of a partial
Government shut-down.
If House Republicans do not put politics aside and pass the
agreed-upon spending packages, all 4 of the witnesses
testifying before us today are facing the shuttering of their
agencies.
This is a do-nothing Republican Majority.
Although I'm glad that we have an opportunity today to
better understand the current threat posed by Iranian-backed
terrorist groups, I have zero faith that my Republican
colleagues will actually do anything meaningful about it when
they leave this room.
Even Republican Members have acknowledged how dysfunctional
Congress has become under their own party's leadership.
I cannot believe I'm agreeing with Congressman Andy Biggs,
but I agree with his characterization of this Republican
Majority: It's embarrassing.
Republican dysfunction is a threat to the peace and
stability around the world, because under their so-called
leadership Congress cannot even come to the aid of its allies.
There is much to be done as Iran and other adversaries,
like Russia, North Korea, and China, continue to be a threat to
the United States.
I hope that today's hearing, particularly as we are
receiving information in a Classified setting, will serve as a
turning point.
I hope that Republicans will get serious about addressing
the threats that this country faces. It's time that we finally
focus our energy on helping Israel and other allies stand
against evil, and we must help provide much-needed humanitarian
aid to the Palestinian civilians.
I thank the panel for joining us today, and I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
March 20, 2024
It has been more than 5 months since the horrific terrorist attack
by Iranian-backed Hamas against Israel, which left more than 1,100
people dead. Still today, Hamas is holding an estimated 130 Israelis--
including dual-U.S. citizens--hostage. That deadly October 7 attack
caused a war that has claimed tens of thousands of lives--including
innocent civilians and children both in Israel and Gaza.
Beyond the war in Gaza, Hamas' deadly attack has begun to spill
over and destabilize regional peace and global economic security. We
have seen Lebanese Hizballah--also backed by the Iranian regime--launch
attacks against Israel since October 7, killing a dozen Israeli
soldiers and 6 civilians. And just a few days ago, it was publicly
reported that the head of Iran's Quds Force met with Lebanese
Hizballah, and Hizballah's leader told the Iranian regime that the
terrorist group is willing to fight Israel on its own, without pulling
in Iranian armed forces. That should trouble us all.
Moreover, Houthis in Yemen have repeatedly attacked commercial
shipping, demonstrating how the United States and our allies are
threatened by Iranian-backed terrorist groups. The Houthis have also
claimed responsibility for attacking the U.S. Navy. While the claim has
been refuted by U.S. defense officials, it sheds light on the group's
terrorism-related aspirations.
Today's hearing is an opportunity for the committee to hear from
national security agencies in a closed setting about the threat
Iranian-backed terrorist groups like Hamas, Hizballah, and the Houthis
pose to the homeland and to U.S. interests world-wide. As I said in the
immediate aftermath of the heinous attacks on October 7, the United
States condemns Hamas' actions. We also keep the innocent civilians in
Gaza who have died in our prayers and call for lasting peace in the
region.
Unfortunately, as the administration has worked tirelessly to
support Israel, bring Americans home from the conflict zone, prevent a
wider war in the region, and address the humanitarian crisis in Gaza,
House Republicans have absolutely refused to provide Israel with the
resources they need to push back the threat of terrorists and
terroristic regimes. Republican leaders are also refusing to work with
Democrats to provide humanitarian relief for civilians in Gaza.
Now, while I am pleased that an apparent deal has been reached to
fund the Government, it is shameful that more than 5 months into fiscal
year 2024, House Republicans' refusal to govern has us once again on
the precipice of a partial Government shut-down. If House Republicans
do not put politics aside and pass the agreed-upon spending package,
all 4 of the witnesses testifying before us today are facing the
shuttering of their agencies. This is a do-nothing Republican Majority.
Although I am glad that we have an opportunity today to better
understand the current threat posed by Iranian-backed terrorist groups,
I have zero faith that my Republican colleagues will actually do
anything meaningful about it when they leave this room. Even Republican
Members have acknowledged how dysfunctional Congress has become under
their own party's leadership. I cannot believe I am agreeing with
Congressman Andy Biggs, but I agree with his characterization of this
Republican Majority--``It's embarrassing''.
Republican dysfunction is a threat to peace and stability around
the world because under their so-called leadership, Congress cannot
even come to the aid of its allies. There is much to be done, as Iran
and other adversaries like Russia, North Korea, and China continue to
be a threat to the United States.
I hope that today's hearing--particularly as we are receiving
information in a Classified setting--will serve as a turning point. I
hope that Republicans will get serious about addressing the threats
this country faces. It is time that we finally focus our energy on
helping Israel, and other allies, stand against evil. And we must help
provide much-needed humanitarian aid to Palestinian civilians.

Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record, and I am pleased to
have a very important panel of witnesses for us today.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Green. Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Mr. James Dunlap serves as the deputy under secretary for
analysis within the Department of Homeland Security's Office of
Intelligence and Analysis, where he oversees a staff of 250
personnel and generates all of DHS's finished intel products
for a wide range of customers.
Prior to his appointment as deputy under secretary, Mr.
Dunlap served as the executive director of I&A's
Counterterrorism Center, where he oversaw all aspects of I&A's
counterterrorism analysis and represented DHS as the senior I&A
counterterrorism intelligence official within the intelligence
community and DHS intelligence enterprise.
Mr. Robert Wells serves as the assistant director of the
counterterrorism division within the FBI. He has served in a
variety of roles throughout his career and has served as the
assistant director since 2022.
Ms. Carrie Thompson serves as the chief of intelligence for
the Drug Enforcement Agency. In her role, she serves as a
strategic adviser to the DEA administrator on intelligence
matters and works daily to achieve DEA mission goals.
Ambassador Elizabeth Richard serves as the coordinator for
counterterrorism with the rank and status of ambassador-at-
large, leading the State Department's Counterterrorism Bureau
and serving as the principal adviser to the Secretary of State
on international counterterrorism matters.
Ambassador Richard also oversees U.S. engagement in the
Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS. Prior to her current role, she
served as the U.S. Ambassador to the Lebanese Republic from
2016 until 2020.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today. I now
recognize Mr. Dunlap for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JAMES DUNLAP, DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY FOR ANALYSIS,
OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYSIS (I&A), DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Dunlap. Thank you, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the committee.
As noted, my name is James Dunlap, and I serve as the
deputy under secretary for analysis within the Department of
Homeland Security's Office of Intelligence and Analysis.
In that capacity, I have the honor of representing the
almost 1,000 dedicated Government and contractor professionals
I work with every day to generate all of DHS I&A's intelligence
products for the full range of our customers, including the
President and senior national security staff, the Secretary of
the Department and senior leaders within DHS, and our Federal,
State, local, territorial, Tribal, and private-sector security
partners.
I&A's analytic expertise includes specialties in
counterterrorism and cyber threats to our Nation's critical
infrastructure, trans-border security and transnational
organized crime, and nation-state economic and
counterintelligence threats.
Iran's so-called Axis of Resistance, or its network of
proxies in the Middle East, poses a variety of threats to the
United States and to homeland security.
While correctly associated in the minds of many as a state
sponsor of terrorism, Iran poses a threat to the United States
from a variety of threat vectors, and it's on these vectors
that I will begin my remarks today.
Here at I&A, the work of our analysts examining the threats
from Iran span all 4 of our analytic centers.
A key part of our mission in I&A is to build the capacity
of our State, local, territorial, Tribal, and private-sector
partners to react to and prevent threats from developing in
their own jurisdictions, and, as such, we strive to publish
intelligence on this critical threat at the Secret level and
below.
Indeed, with regard to many of the threat vectors I will
discuss, we have been successful publishing at the
Unclassified, for Official Use Only level to maximize
readership among our authorized stakeholders.
Turning to cyber threats, I&A works routinely with the
Department's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
or CISA, to publish intelligence on the cyber threat from Iran,
which continues to pose a threat to U.S. systems, networks, and
information.
Iranian Government cyber actors employ a variety of
tactics, techniques, and procedures, including social
engineering, using easily accessible scanning and computer
hacking tools, and exploiting publicly-known software and
hardware vulnerabilities, to conduct cyber espionage operations
targeting the U.S. Government and the defense industry, and to
disrupt critical infrastructure.
The Israel-Hamas conflict shows how Iran uses cyber
operations to respond to geopolitical events while attempting
to maintain plausible deniability.
In November 2023, the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps, or IRGC-affiliated cyber actors, posing as a criminal
hactivist group called the Cyber Av3ngers, defaced Israeli-
manufactured operational technology devices in the United
States, specifically devices in water and wastewater systems
and other critical infrastructure sector entities.
While the attacks did not result in disruption of services
or impact public health, they are demonstrative of the Iranian
regime and its proxies' desires to target our citizens here in
the United States.
I&A also works with our interagency partners to produce
intelligence on Iran's efforts to target dissidents here in the
homeland and abroad. Iran continues to conduct transnational
repression activities within the homeland against anti-regime
critics. Tactics used in the past to target dissidents include
assassination attempts, digital threats and harassment, family
intimidation, spyware, and unlawful detention.
Iran has targeted Iranian dissidents in the United States
to suppress anti-regime protests and calls for social and
political reform in Iran. Notably, in January 2024 the United
States Department of Justice indicted one Iranian and two
Canadian nationals in a murder-for-hire scheme consistent with
these tactics.
Turning, finally, to terrorism, I&A works regularly with
our partners at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
National Counterterrorism Center, and other agencies to assess
the counterterrorism threat from Iran and its proxies,
including Lebanese Hezbollah.
I&A assesses that Iran will remain the primary state
sponsor of terrorism and continue its efforts to advance plots
against individuals in the United States.
Specifically, Iran maintains its intent to plot attacks
against current and former U.S. Government officials in
retaliation for the 2020 death of IRGC Quds Force Commander
Qasem Soleimani.
Iran typically relies on individuals with preexisting
access to the United States for surveillance and lethal
plotting, having previously used dual nationals, members of
criminal networks, and private investigators, and has attempted
plots that do not require international travel for operatives.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear here
today, and I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Dunlap follows:]
Prepared Statement of James Dunlap
March 20, 2024
introduction
Thank you, Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and
distinguished Members of the committee. My name is James Dunlap and I
am the deputy under secretary for analysis within the Department of
Homeland Security's (DHS or the Department) Office of Intelligence and
Analysis (I&A). I direct a staff of over 250 Government and contractor
personnel generating all of DHS/I&A's finished intelligence products
for I&A's full range of customers, including the President and senior
National Security Council staff, to the DHS Secretary and senior
leaders within the Department, and Federal and State, local,
territorial, Tribal, and private-sector (SLTT/PS) partners. I&A's
analytic expertise includes specialties in counterterrorism and cyber
threats to our Nation's critical infrastructure; transborder security
and transnational organized crime; and nation-state economic and
counterintelligence threats.
Now, Iran's so-called ``axis of resistance''--its network of
proxies in the Middle East--poses a variety of threats to United States
interests and homeland security. While correctly associated in the
minds of many as a state sponsor of terrorism, Iran poses a threat to
the United States from multiple threat vectors, and it is on these
vectors that I will begin my remarks today. Here at I&A, the work of
our analysts examining the threats from Iran span all 4 of our analytic
centers. A key part of our mission in I&A is building the capacity of
our SLTT/PS security partners to react to and prevent threats from
developing, and as such we strive to publish intelligence on this
critical threat at the SECRET level and below; indeed, with regard to
many of the threat vectors I will discuss, we have been successful
publishing at the UNCLASSIFIED level to maximize readership of our
intelligence.
cyber
Our Cyber Intelligence Center routinely works with the Department's
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) to publish
intelligence on the cyber threat from Iran, which continues to pose a
threat to U.S. systems, networks, and information. Iranian government
cyber actors employ a variety of tactics, techniques, and procedures--
including social engineering, using easily accessible scanning and
computer hacking tools, and exploiting publicly-known software and
hardware vulnerabilities--to conduct cyber espionage operations
targeting the U.S. Government and the defense industry, and to disrupt
critical infrastructure.
The Israel-HAMAS conflict shows how Iran uses cyber operations to
respond to geopolitical events while attempting to maintain plausible
deniability. For example, in November 2023, Iranian Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC)-affiliated cyber actors--ostensibly
posing as a criminal hacktivist group called the ``Cyber Av3ngers''--
defaced Israeli-manufactured operational technology devices in the
United States, specifically devices in water and wastewater systems and
other critical infrastructure sector entities (energy, food and
beverage manufacturing, and health care). The IRGC-affiliated actors
left a defacement image on the devices stating, ``You have been hacked,
down with Israel. Every equipment `made in Israel' is CyberAv3ngers
legal target.'' While the attacks did not result in disruption of
services or impact public health, they are demonstrative of the Iranian
regime's and its proxies' desires to target our citizens here in the
United States.
iran's transnational repression efforts in the homeland
Our Nation-State Threats Center works with our interagency partners
to produce intelligence on Iran's efforts to target dissidents. Iran
continues to conduct transnational repression activities within the
homeland against anti-regime critics. Tactics used in the past to
target dissidents and critics of the regime include assassination
attempts, digital threats and harassment, family intimidation, mobility
controls, spyware, and unlawful detention.
Iran has targeted Iranian dissidents in the United States to
suppress anti-regime protests and calls for social and political reform
in Iran. In January 2024, the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) indicted
1 Iranian and 2 Canadian nationals in a murder-for-hire scheme
targeting 2 U.S. residents.
DHS I&A has not observed Iranian transnational repression
activities against the United States in relation to the Israel-HAMAS
conflict. However, Iran has previously targeted outspoken critics, and
could target individuals critical of Iran's role in the conflict should
it perceive them as a threat.
terrorism
Finally, I&A works regularly with our partners at the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the National Counterterrorism Center
(NCTC), and other interagency partners to assess the counterterrorism
threat from Iran and its proxies, including Lebanese Hizballah. I&A
assesses that Iran will remain the primary state sponsor of terrorism
and continue its efforts to advance plots against individuals in the
United States. Specifically, Iran maintains its intent to plot attacks
against current and former U.S. Government officials in retaliation for
the 2020 death of IRGC-Qods Force (IRGC-QF) Commander Qassem Soleimani.
Iran relies on individuals with pre-existing access to the United
States for surveillance and lethal plotting--having previously used
dual nationals, members of criminal networks, and private
investigators--and has attempted plots that do not require
international travel for operatives.

In August 2022, the DOJ indicted an IRGC-QF member for
allegedly conspiring to assassinate a former U.S. National
Security Advisor between late 2021 to mid-2022.
With regard to Lebanese Hizballah, DHS I&A does not have any
indication that Hizballah is pursuing attacks in the homeland directly
in response to the Israel-HAMAS conflict. We most commonly see
individuals involved in financial facilitation to support Hizballah,
through money laundering, although Hizballah-affiliated individuals
have also been involved in attack plotting.

The most recently disrupted homeland plot was in 2017 when
an individual affiliated with Hizballah was arrested for
surveilling potential government and military targets in New
York City. The individual, a naturalized U.S. citizen from
Lebanon, received weapons training in Lebanon before allegedly
being tasked to conduct surveillance of the government and
military facilities. The individual also allegedly collected
intelligence on former members of the Israel Defense Forces as
well as New York's LaGuardia Airport.
DHS I&A believes that lone offenders inspired by, or reacting to,
the Israel-HAMAS conflict pose the most likely threat to the homeland
compared to Iranian-directed or -supported attacks in the homeland.
Since the conflict began, leaders from the IRGC, Hizballah, and Iran-
aligned militant groups have issued strong statements of support for
HAMAS's attack on Israel, although we have not seen this translate to
operations in the homeland directly in response to the conflict. We
believe that Iran-backed militant groups and proxies such as the
Houthis are regionally focused and do not have the intent or capability
to target the homeland.
HAMAS itself has not conducted attacks in the United States, as the
group historically has been focused on opposition to Israel rather than
supporting or directing attacks in the West. However, in recent years,
a small number of individuals in the United States have been arrested
and convicted for attempting to provide material support to HAMAS.

In September 2020, the FBI arrested two individuals who
allegedly sought to overthrow the U.S. Government and enact
violence against police officers, among other targets, whose
claimed motivation was Boogaloo ideology. Although they
possessed no direct ties to HAMAS, the individuals believed
they could act as mercenaries for the group, who they believed
shared and could help advance their anti-U.S. Government goals.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to appear here today and I
look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Dunlap.
I now recognize Mr. Wells for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT WELLS, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR, COUNTERTERRORISM
DIVISION, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (FBI)

Mr. Wells. Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the committee. I'm
honored to represent thousands of men and women in the FBI who
tackle some of the most complex terrorism threats here in the
United States and throughout the world.
Thank you for inviting me to join you this morning. I
appreciate the opportunity to speak with you about our current
threat environment, specifically as it relates to Iran and its
proxies.
As I am sure you've heard from Director Wray, we are
currently in a heightened terrorism threat environment. Since
the Hamas attack against Israel, we've seen almost every major
terrorist organization in the world, including al-Qaeda, AQAP,
and ISIS, call for terrorist attacks against the United States.
We've also seen an uptick in threats against the Jewish
community here in the United States and abroad.
We remain concerned about threats from lone actors or small
cells radicalized to violence on-line. In addition, we are very
focused on the threat posed by the more traditional foreign
terrorist organizations and the state-sponsored terrorism
threat from Iran.
Iran continues to plot attacks against former Government
officials in retaliation for the death of IRGC Quds Force
Commander Qasem Soleimani. They also have continued to provide
support to their proxies and terrorist organizations throughout
the world, to include Lebanese Hezbollah.
The FBI believes Iran is capable of a variety of attack
options against U.S. targets, to include cyber operations
intended to sabotage public and private infrastructure and
targeted assassinations of individuals who are deemed to be a
threat to the regime or its stability.
The FBI continues to use intelligence to identify threats
related to Iran's lethal capabilities targeting U.S. persons.
We work closely with other U.S. Government agencies and foreign
partners to address the threat to U.S. interests from Iran and
its proxies.
There have been several examples of Iran's intention to
carry out lethal attacks in the United States.
In 2022, an Iranian Quds Force officer, Shahram Poursafi,
was charged related to his attempt to arrange the murder of
former National Security Advisor John Bolton.
Poursafi attempted to pay individuals in the United States
$300,000 to carry out the murder in the Washington, DC area.
Thankfully, Poursafi attempted to pay one of our
confidential human sources to carry out the attack.
This incredible investigative work by our Washington Field
Office resulted in charges against Poursafi.
Even though Poursafi remains at large abroad, this
investigation highlighted Iran's incredibly bold plot to murder
a former U.S. Government official.
In 2023, 3 members of an Eastern European criminal
organization were charged for plotting the murder of a U.S.
citizen who has been targeted by the Government of Iran for
speaking out against the regime's human rights abuses. The
victim was targeted for exercising the rights to which every
American citizen is entitled.
An attempted assassination on U.S. soil shows how far
Iranian actors are willing to go to silence their critics.
These brazen attempted attacks by Iran are not new. You may
also recall that in September 2011, Mansour Arbabsiar was
arrested for plotting to murder the Saudi Ambassador to the
United States on U.S. soil. This plot was directed and approved
by the IRGC Quds Force.
As I just described, it is clear the Iranians are
determined to carry out attacks in the United States, whether
it be to avenge the death of Soleimani, to silence one of their
critics, or to kill the ambassador of an ally nation.
I would also like to highlight an example of Iranian
efforts to support terrorist activities overseas.
In February 2024, 4 foreign nationals were intercepted by a
U.S. military vessel during their alleged transportation of
suspected Iranian-made weapons parts to Houthi rebel forces in
Yemen.
These individuals were recently brought to the United
States to face charges. Tragically, 2 Navy SEALs lost their
lives in the pursuit of this mission.
The disruption of these individuals prevented Iranian-made
weapons parts from getting into the hands of the Houthis who
could have used these weapons to target U.S. forces.
The persistent threat from Iran came into sharper focus
following the October 7 Hamas attack. Despite their praise for
the attack and threat to join the conflict should Israel invade
Gaza, Iran will likely still rely on their proxy networks to
action retaliatory attacks focused in the region. We also
assess that the Iran IRGC will continue to provide training,
weapons, and financial support to Hamas.
The FBI remains concerned that Hezbollah, Iran's primary
strategic partner, could conduct retaliatory attacks against
former U.S. officials, not only overseas but also in the United
States.
Since its inception in 1982, Hezbollah has been involved in
numerous anti-U.S. terrorist attacks. Historically, they have
sent operatives to build terrorist infrastructure world-wide
and are likely to continue conducting intelligence collection,
financial activities, and procurement efforts.
In summary, the threat from Iran and its proxies remains
persistent, and the FBI continues to engage with our partners
to ensure protection of the American people and U.S. interests,
both at home and abroad.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today, and
I look forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wells follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Wells
March 20, 2024
Good morning Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and
distinguished Members of the committee. My name is Robert Wells and I
am the assistant director for the FBI's Counterterrorism Division. I am
honored to be here representing the FBI's counterterrorism personnel
who tackle some of the most complex terrorism threats here in the
United States and throughout the world.
Thank you for inviting me to join you this morning. I appreciate
the opportunity to speak with you about our current threat environment,
specifically as it relates to Iran and its proxies.
terrorism threat assessment
As I'm sure you've heard from Director Wray, we are currently in a
heightened terrorism threat environment. Since the HAMAS attack against
Israel, we've seen almost every major terrorist organization in the
world, including al-Qaeda, AQAP, and ISIS, call for terrorist attacks
against the United States. We've also seen an uptick in threats against
the Jewish community here in the United States and abroad. We remain
concerned about threats from lone actors or small cells radicalized to
violence on-line. In addition, we are very focused on the threat posed
by the more traditional foreign terrorist organizations and the state-
sponsored terrorism threat from Iran.
iran threat overview
Iran continues to plot attacks against former government officials
in retaliation for the death of IRGC-QF, Commander Qassem Soleimani.
They also have continued to provide support to their proxies and
terrorist organizations throughout the world, to include Lebanese
Hizballah.
The FBI believes Iran is capable of a variety of attack options
against U.S. targets, to include cyber operations intended to sabotage
public and private infrastructure, and targeted assassinations of
individuals who are deemed to be a threat to the regime or its
stability.
The FBI continues to use intelligence to identify threats related
to Iran's lethal capabilities targeting U.S. persons. We work closely
with other U.S. Government agencies and foreign partners to address the
threat to U.S. interests from Iran and its proxies.
There have been several examples of Iran's intention to carry out
lethal attacks in the United States. For instance, in 2022, an Iranian
IRGC-QF Officer, Shahram Poursafi was charged related to his attempt to
arrange the murder of former National Security Advisor, John Bolton.
Poursafi attempted to pay individuals in the United States $300,000 to
carry out the murder in the Washington, DC area. Thankfully, Poursafi
attempted to pay one of our confidential human sources to carry out the
attack. This incredible investigative work by our Washington Field
office resulted in charges against Poursafi. Even though Poursafi
remains at large abroad, this investigation highlighted Iran's
incredibly bold plot to murder a former U.S. Government official.
In 2023, 3 members of an Eastern European criminal organization
were charged for plotting the murder of a U.S. citizen, who has been
targeted by the government of Iran for speaking out against the
regime's human rights abuses. The victim was targeted for exercising
the rights to which every American citizen is entitled. An attempted
assassination on U.S. soil shows how far Iranian actors are willing to
go to silence their critics.
These brazen attempted attacks on U.S. soil by Iran are not new.
You may also recall that in September 2011, Mansour Arbabsiar was
arrested for plotting to murder the Saudi Ambassador to the United
States on U.S. soil. This plot was directed and approved by the IRGC-
QF.
Based on the examples I just described, it's clear the Iranians are
determined to carry out attacks in the United States, whether it be to
avenge the death of Soleimani, to silence one of their critics, or to
kill the Ambassador of an ally nation. The FBI's mission is to work
with our partners in the United States and throughout the world to
prevent attacks like this.
In January 2024, 14 foreign nationals were intercepted by a U.S.
military vessel during their alleged transportation of suspected
Iranian-made weapon parts to Houthi rebel forces in Yemen. Four of
these individuals were recently brought to the United States to face
charges outlined in a criminal complaint unsealed in February.
Tragically, 2 Navy SEALS lost their lives in the pursuit of this
mission. The disruption of these individuals prevented Iranian-made
weapon parts from getting into the hands of the Houthis, who could have
used the weapons to target U.S. forces.
post-october 7--iran & hamas
The persistent threat from Iran came into sharper focus following
the October 7 HAMAS attack against Israel. Despite their praise for the
attack and threat to join the conflict should Israel invade Gaza, Iran
will likely still rely on their proxy networks to action retaliatory
attacks focused in the region, in the near term. We assess that Iran
IRGC will continue to provide training, weapons, and financial support
to HAMAS.
hizballah
The FBI remains concerned Hizballah, Iran's primary strategic
partner, could conduct retaliatory attacks against former U.S.
officials, not only overseas but also within the United States.
Since its inception in 1982, Hizballah has been involved in
numerous anti-U.S. terrorist attacks. Historically, Hizballah has sent
operatives to build terrorist infrastructures world-wide, and are
likely to continue conducting intelligence collection, financial
activities, and procurement efforts world-wide to support their
terrorist capabilities.
conclusion
In summary, the threat from Iran and its proxies remains persistent
and the FBI continues to engage with our partners to ensure protection
of the American people and U.S. interests, both at home and abroad.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today and I look
forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Wells.
We are now going to do that vote that we spoke about.
I now recognize the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Guest,
for the purpose of offering a motion.
Mr. Guest. Mr. Chairman, I move that the hearing be closed
to the public under Rule XI, clause 2(g), for Member
questioning, because disclosure of testimony, evidence, or
other matters would endanger national security or compromise
sensitive law enforcement information.
Chairman Green. The motion is nondebatable and a recorded
vote is mandatory under the rule. The clerk will call the roll.
[Disturbance in hearing room.]
Chairman Green. The Chair would like to remind our guests
that verbal outbursts are a violation of House rules.
Call the roll.
The Clerk. Mr. McCaul.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Higgins.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Guest.
Mr. Guest. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Guest votes aye.
Mr. Bishop.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Gimenez votes aye.
Mr. Pfluger.
Mr. Pfluger. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Pfluger votes aye.
Mr. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Garbarino votes aye.
Ms. Greene.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Gonzales.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. LaLota.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Ezell.
Mr. Ezell. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Ezell votes aye.
Mr. D'Esposito.
Mr. D'Esposito. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. D'Esposito votes aye.
Ms. Lee.
Ms. Lee. Aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Lee votes aye.
Mr. Luttrell.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Strong.
Mr. Strong. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Strong votes aye.
Mr. Brecheen.
Mr. Brecheen. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Brecheen votes aye.
Mr. Crane.
Mr. Crane. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Crane votes aye.
Ranking Member Thompson.
Mr. Thompson of Mississippi. Aye.
The Clerk. Ranking Member Thompson votes aye.
Ms. Jackson Lee.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Payne.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Swalwell.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Correa.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Carter.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Thanedar votes aye.
Mr. Magaziner.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Ivey.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Goldman.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Garcia.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mrs. Ramirez.
[No response.]
The Clerk. Mr. Menendez.
Mr. Menendez. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Menendez votes aye.
Mr. Suozzi.
Mr. Suozzi. Aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Suozzi votes aye.
Ms. Clarke.
[No response.]
Mr. Higgins. How is Higgins recorded?
The Clerk. Mr. Higgins is not recorded.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Higgins votes aye.
The Clerk. Mr. Higgins votes aye.
[Pause.]
Chairman Green. For the Members wondering what we're doing
with the pause, we're waiting for one more vote that is en
route. We have to have a majority for this rule to work. So for
those of you who are wondering why there's a pause right now.
And, no, you can't vote again.
[Pause.]
Chairman Green. While we're waiting, Ms. Thompson and
Ambassador Richard, you'll give your testimony here as soon as
this vote is completed and then we'll go into Classified
session.
[Pause.]
Chairman Green. Are there any other Members who wish to
record their vote?
Always playing the pivotal role.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Please, Chairman, Ranking Member, forgive
me for being delayed. I was at another meeting. But I vote aye.
The Clerk. Ms. Jackson Lee votes aye.
Chairman Green. How is the Chair recorded?
The Clerk. The Chair is not recorded.
Chairman Green. The Chair votes aye.
The Clerk. Chairman Green votes aye.
Chairman Green. The clerk report the tally.
The Clerk. On that vote, Mr. Chairman, there were 17 ayes
and zero noes.
Chairman Green. The motion is agreed to.
Without objection, the motion to reconsider is laid upon
the table.
We'll now go back into our open session. I ask the clerks
to reset the desks for our witnesses.
[Pause.]
Chairman Green. I now recognize Ms. Thompson for 5 minutes
to summarize her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CARRIE THOMPSON, CHIEF OF INTELLIGENCE, DRUG
ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION (DEA)

Ms. Thompson. Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the committee.
On behalf of the Department of Justice, and in particular
the more than 9,000 employees of the Drug Enforcement
Administration, it is my honor to appear before you today.
Today's hearing comes at a critical moment in our country's
history. I thank the committee for bringing attention to this
important topic.
I have had the privilege of being a DEA intelligence
research specialist for nearly 26 years. I started my DEA
career in Detroit, Michigan, and have worked in multiple DEA
foreign offices, including Bogota, Colombia, and Islamabad,
Pakistan.
I have also served as the field intelligence manager for
Europe and Africa responsible for DEA intelligence collection,
analysis, and dissemination across those two continents.
I can assure you that the drug-poisoning epidemic that our
country is facing today is unprecedented. Last year our country
lost more than 110,000 people to drug poisonings.
These needless deaths were caused by synthetic drugs like
fentanyl and methamphetamine, which we view as a game changer
for drug cartels. Unlike plant-based drugs, which require large
amounts of land, extensive manual labor, and are dependent on
weather conditions, synthetic drugs only need the right
chemicals, a small room, and someone who knows how to mix them.
The only limitation on the amount of fentanyl that can be
produced is the amount of chemicals that can be purchased.
There is a nexus between the expanding synthetic drug trade
and the financing of terrorist organizations and rogue state
actors, which includes the Iranian regime.
Cartels and traffickers partner with these regimes and
their proxies--whether it's Hezbollah or the Assad regime in
Syria or the Taliban in Afghanistan--to spread their deadly
poisons through the world.
Hezbollah, in particular, has been identified by DEA as
operating a global criminal network.
To counter this threat, DEA formed Project Cassandra to
disrupt and dismantle Hezbollah's global criminal network by
targeting drug-terror convergence targets through indictments,
arrests, extraditions, seizures, and coordinated OFAC
designations in order to degrade Hezbollah's illicit revenue
stream.
Furthermore, last month the Department of Justice indicted
Takeshi Ebisawa, an alleged leader of the Yakuza, a Japanese
international criminal organization, for trafficking weapons-
grade nuclear material and lethal narcotics from Burma. Ebisawa
allegedly sought to traffic material containing uranium and
weapons-grade plutonium into Iran, fully aware the materials
would be used to produce nuclear weapons for the Iranian
regime.
Through the hard work of DEA and its international
partners, DEA was able to seize samples of this material, which
contributed to building the case against Ebisawa, who is now in
Federal custody.
To save lives and defeat these deadly global criminal
enterprises, the DEA has created 3 counter-threat teams, one
for the Sinaloa Cartel, one for the Jalisco Cartel, and one
team to focus on the illicit finances that fuel the cartels'
activities.
These teams synthesize DEA intelligence for a data-driven
approach to map and strategically target the cartels' entire
network, supply chain, and infrastructure to identify key nodes
that can be exploited.
With our interagency partners throughout the last year,
we've had some successes against these cartels by focusing on
their entire network and supply chain, from China, to Mexico,
to Main Street.
We've charged 12 Chinese companies and 24 Chinese nationals
with conspiracy to manufacture and import fentanyl into the
United States. We've also charged 28 leaders and members of the
Sinaloa Cartel during a single investigation. We've seized more
than $104 million in cash and assets from the cartels and took
more than 8,100 guns off of the American streets during our
year-long effort targeting the cartels' domestic distributors.
While we've had some successes, there is clearly more work
to do. The men and women of DEA are committed to saving lives,
increasing public awareness of the unprecedented drug threat we
are facing, and defeating criminal organizations throughout the
world.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
on this important issue, and I look forward to answering your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Thompson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carrie Thompson
March 20, 2024
Chair Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members of
the committee: On behalf of the Department of Justice (Department), and
in particular the nearly 10,000 employees working at the Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA), thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to discuss DEA's work to save lives and defeat
the cartels that are responsible for the deadly drug poisoning epidemic
in our country.
Americans today are experiencing the most devastating drug crisis
in our Nation's history. This is because one drug--fentanyl--has
transformed the criminal landscape. Fentanyl is exceptionally cheap to
make, exceptionally easy to disguise, and exceptionally deadly to those
who take it. It is the leading cause of death for Americans between the
ages of 18 to 45, and it kills Americans from all walks of life, in
every State and community in this country. The criminal organizations
responsible for bringing fentanyl into this country are modern,
sophisticated, and extremely violent enterprises that rely on a global
supply chain to manufacture, transport, and sell fentanyl, and rely on
a global illicit financial network to pocket the billions of dollars in
revenue from those sales.
DEA has been hard at work to undertake a transformation of its own
to meet this moment. DEA has acted with urgency to set a new vision,
target the global criminal networks most responsible for the influx of
fentanyl into the United States, and raise public awareness about how
just one pill can kill. We have transformed our vision by focusing on
fentanyl--the drug killing the most Americans--and the criminal
organizations responsible for flooding fentanyl into our communities--
the Sinaloa Cartel and the Jalisco New Generation (Jalisco) Cartel. We
have transformed our plan by building an entirely new strategic layer--
our counterthreat teams for the Sinaloa Cartel and the Jalisco Cartel
and their illicit finance networks--that map the cartels, analyze their
networks, and develop targeting information on the members of those
networks wherever they operate around the globe. We have transformed
our execution by providing that targeting information to our 334
offices world-wide, drawing from our global intelligence and law
enforcement teams here and abroad, and working as One DEA to take the
networks down.
Our efforts are yielding results. In the last year alone, our
investigations have led to the indictment of 28 members and associates
of the Chapitos network of the Sinaloa Cartel and the extradition of
Ovidio Guzman Lopez; the arrest of 3,337 associates of the Sinaloa and
Jalisco Cartels in the United States responsible for the last mile of
fentanyl and methamphetamine distribution on our streets and through
social media; and, charges against 12 companies and 24 individuals in
the People's Republic of China, for providing customers in the United
States and Mexico with the precursor chemicals and scientific know-how
necessary to make fentanyl and other dangerous drugs.
But, we are just beginning. The nearly 10,000 employees that I have
the privilege of working with at DEA are the most committed and
mission-driven people in Federal law enforcement. We are laser-focused
on one goal--to save American lives.
the drug poisoning epidemic
In 2022, more than 110,000 people in the United States lost their
lives to drug poisonings. Countless more people are poisoned and
survive. These drug poisonings are a national crisis.
A majority of the drug poisoning deaths in the United States
involve synthetic opioids, such as fentanyl, that are being distributed
in new forms. Fentanyl is being hidden in and being mixed with other
illicit drugs such as cocaine, heroin, and methamphetamine. Drug
traffickers are also flooding our communities with fentanyl disguised
in the form of fake prescription pills. These fake pills often are made
to appear legitimate using pill presses and marketed by drug
traffickers to deceive Americans into thinking that they are real,
diverted prescription medications. In reality, these fake pills are not
made by pharmaceutical companies but by drug trafficking organizations,
and they are highly addictive and potentially deadly. DEA lab testing
reveals that today 7 out of 10 of these fentanyl-laced fake
prescription pills contain a potentially lethal dose.
The availability of fentanyl throughout the United States has
reached unprecedented heights. DEA seized more than 79 million fake
pills containing fentanyl in 2023 and nearly 12,000 pounds of fentanyl
powder. Together, that is more than 380 million deadly doses of
fentanyl seized in 2023.
the drug enforcement administration
Mission
As the single mission agency tasked with enforcing our Nation's
drug laws, DEA's top operational priority is to relentlessly pursue and
defeat the 2 Mexican drug cartels--the Sinaloa Cartel and the Jalisco
Cartel--that are primarily responsible for driving the current fentanyl
and drug poisoning epidemic in the United States.
DEA is the lead agency on the law enforcement elements in the
administration's whole-of-Government response to defeat the cartels and
combat the drug poisoning epidemic in our communities. DEA's role in
leading the law enforcement response to the fentanyl epidemic protects
the safety of agents, officers, and sources. Importantly, a unified
response to the fentanyl epidemic ensures that the whole of Government
is moving in one direction that protects the safety and health of
Americans.
DEA operates 30 field divisions with 241 domestic offices, 93
foreign offices in 69 countries, and 9 forensic labs. DEA's robust
domestic and international presence allows it to map and target the
entire Sinaloa Cartel and Jalisco Cartel networks.
Counter-threat Teams
In addition, DEA has launched 3 cross-agency counterthreat teams to
execute a network-focused operational strategy to defeat the Sinaloa
and Jalisco Cartels and their illicit finance networks. These teams are
mapping, analyzing, and targeting the cartels' entire criminal
networks. The teams are composed of special agents, intelligence
analysts, targeters, program analysts, data scientists, and digital
specialists. This network-focused strategy is critical to defeating the
Sinaloa and Jalisco Cartels.
As part of the network-focused strategy, DEA investigations
resulted in charges against 28 members and associates of the Chapitos
network of the Sinaloa Cartel, including leaders, suppliers, brokers,
smugglers, and money launderers in multiple countries, for operating
the global criminal enterprise that manufactures and traffics most of
the fentanyl that comes into the United States.
Operation Overdrive
DEA is simultaneously focused on American communities. We are
targeting the drug-trafficking organizations and violent gangs located
in the United States that are responsible for the greatest number of
drug-related deaths and violence. DEA's Operation Overdrive uses a
data-driven, intelligence-led approach to identify and dismantle
criminal drug networks operating in areas with the highest rates of
violence and drug poisoning deaths. In each of these locations, DEA is
working with local and State law enforcement officials to conduct
threat assessments identifying the criminal networks and individuals
that are causing the most harm. DEA works with State, local, Tribal,
and Federal law enforcement and prosecutorial partners to pursue
investigations and prosecutions that will reduce drug-related violence
and drug poisonings. Phase One of Operation Overdrive took place in 34
locations across the United States, and Phase Two took place in 57
locations. Phase Three is currently taking place in 32 locations. So
far in Operation Overdrive, DEA and its partners have made over 1,800
arrests, seized over 1,400 firearms, and seized over 13 million
potentially deadly doses of fentanyl.
``One Pill Can Kill''
In 2021, DEA launched the ``One Pill Can Kill'' enforcement effort
and public awareness campaign. Through that, DEA and our law
enforcement partners have seized millions of fake fentanyl-laced
prescription pills and hundreds of pounds of fentanyl powder--equating
to millions of potentially lethal doses of fentanyl, which could have
entered our communities.
Social Media
DEA is combatting the sale of fentanyl on social media. Drug
traffickers are using social media platforms to recruit associates,
find customers, and sell fentanyl and other deadly drugs. In
particular, drug traffickers use social media to deceptively advertise
fake prescription pills--pills that look like oxycodone, Xanax, or
Adderall but actually contain fentanyl--directly to young people and
teenagers. DEA has investigated hundreds of cases directly linked to
the sale of fake pills containing fentanyl on social media, including
on Snapchat, Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok.
Families and Law Enforcement Partners
DEA also works closely with families who have lost loved ones to
drug poisonings. These families are often brave advocates for change,
and help ensure that people in their communities are aware of the
dangers of fentanyl and fake pills.
DEA is working closely with our local, State, Tribal, territorial,
Federal, and international counterparts to target every part of the
illegal drug supply chain and every level of the drug trafficking
organizations that threaten the health and safety of our communities.
To succeed, we must use every tool to combat this substantial threat
that is being driven by the Sinaloa and Jalisco Cartels, as well as the
Chinese-sourced precursor chemicals and global money-laundering
operations that facilitate the cartels' operations.
mexican cartels and drug trafficking
The Sinaloa and Jalisco Cartels are ruthless, violent, criminal
organizations that have associates, facilitators, and brokers in all 50
States and around the world.
The Sinaloa Cartel, the Jalisco Cartel, and their affiliates
control the vast majority of the fentanyl global supply chain, from
manufacture to distribution. The cartels are buying precursor chemicals
in the People's Republic of China (PRC); transporting the precursor
chemicals from the PRC to Mexico; using the precursor chemicals to mass
produce fentanyl; using pill presses to process the fentanyl into fake
prescription pills; and using cars, trucks, and other routes to
transport the drugs from Mexico into the United States for
distribution. It costs the cartels as little as 10 cents to produce a
fentanyl-laced fake prescription pill that is sold in the United States
for as much as $10 to $30 per pill. As a result, the cartels make
billions of dollars from trafficking fentanyl into the United States.
The business model used by the Sinaloa and Jalisco Cartels is to
grow at all costs, no matter how many people die in the process. The
cartels are engaging in deliberate, calculated treachery to deceive
Americans and drive addiction to achieve higher profits.
The Sinaloa Cartel
The Sinaloa Cartel, based in the Mexican state of Sinaloa, is one
of the oldest drug-trafficking organizations in Mexico. The Sinaloa
Cartel controls drug-trafficking activity in various regions in Mexico,
particularly along the Pacific Coast. Additionally, it maintains the
most expansive international footprint of the Mexican cartels. The
Sinaloa Cartel exports and distributes wholesale amounts of fentanyl,
methamphetamine, heroin, and cocaine in the United States by
maintaining distribution hubs in cities that include Phoenix, Los
Angeles, Denver, and Chicago. Illicit drugs distributed by the Sinaloa
Cartel are primarily smuggled into the United States through crossing
points located along Mexico's border with California, Arizona, New
Mexico, and Texas. The Sinaloa Cartel reportedly has a presence in 19
of the 32 Mexican states.
The Jalisco Cartel
The Jalisco Cartel is based in the city of Guadalajara in the
Mexican state of Jalisco, and was originally formed as a spin-off from
the Milenio Cartel, a subordinate to the Sinaloa Cartel. The Jalisco
Cartel maintains illicit drug distribution hubs in Los Angeles,
Seattle, Charlotte, Chicago, and Atlanta. Internationally, the Jalisco
Cartel has a presence and influence through associates, facilitators,
and brokers in countries around the world. The Jalisco Cartel smuggles
illicit drugs such as fentanyl, methamphetamine, heroin, and cocaine
into the United States by accessing various trafficking corridors along
the Southwest Border that include Tijuana, Mexicali, Ciudad Juarez,
Matamoros, and Nuevo Laredo. The Jalisco Cartel's rapid expansion of
its drug-trafficking activities is characterized by the organization's
willingness to engage in violent confrontations with Mexican government
security forces and rival cartels. The Jalisco Cartel reportedly has a
presence in 21 of the 32 Mexican states.
people's republic of china and precursor chemicals
Chemical companies within the PRC produce and sell the majority of
precursor chemicals that are used today by the Sinaloa and Jalisco
Cartels to manufacture fentanyl. These precursor chemicals from
companies within the PRC are the building blocks for the fentanyl that
is manufactured and transported from Mexico into the United States, and
that is causing tens of thousands of drug-related deaths in our
country.
chinese money-laundering operations and the cartels
The Sinaloa and Jalisco Cartels increasingly utilize Chinese Money-
Laundering Organizations (CMLOs) in the United States and around the
world to facilitate laundering drug proceeds. CMLOs use mirror
transfers, trade-based money laundering, and bulk cash movement to
facilitate the exchange of foreign currency. The use of CMLOs has made
the money-laundering process less expensive--and drug trafficking more
profitable--for the cartels.
These money-laundering schemes are designed to remedy two separate
issues: (1) the desire of Mexican cartels to repatriate drug proceeds
from the United States into Mexico, and (2) the desire of wealthy
Chinese nationals to repatriate restricted funds from China into the
United States. The CMLOs aid both groups by providing U.S. dollars held
by Mexican cartels in the United States to PRC-based customers who need
funds in the United States.
the nexus between drug trafficking and terrorist organizations
There is a clear connection between the drug trade and the
financing of terrorist organizations and rogue state actors, including
the Iranian regime. Members and affiliates of Hezbollah's money-
laundering network have been known to collaborate with South American
drug cartels, particularly in the tri-border area of Argentina, Brazil,
and Paraguay, to facilitate the smuggling of drugs into Europe and the
Middle East. The Taliban in Afghanistan has been heavily involved in
the production and trafficking of opium and heroin, where they have
used the profits to fund their insurgency and terrorist activities. The
Assad regime in Syria has been associated with the production and
trafficking of a synthetic drug called Captagon, known for its
stimulant and euphoric effects.
recent enforcement actions against the sinaloa and jalisco cartels and
prc-based chemical suppliers
The Chapitos Network of the Sinaloa Cartel
On April 14, 2023, Attorney General Merrick Garland, Deputy
Attorney General Lisa Monaco, DEA Administrator Milgram and 3 U.S.
Attorneys announced indictments against the Chapitos--the leaders of
the Sinaloa Cartel--and their criminal network.
The Sinaloa Cartel supplies the majority of the fentanyl trafficked
into the United States, which has resulted in the United States'
unprecedented fentanyl epidemic. The Chapitos, the sons of the cartel's
notorious former leader Joaquin ``El Chapo'' Guzman, currently lead the
most violent faction of the Sinaloa Cartel. El Chapo was once the
world's most dangerous and prolific drug trafficker. Now his sons have
stepped in to fill their father's void by flooding the United States
with deadly fentanyl and leaving a wake of destruction across families
and communities throughout the United States.
Following their father's arrest by Mexican authorities and
subsequent extradition and conviction, we allege that the Chapitos
expanded their enterprise with sophisticated fentanyl laboratories in
Culiacan, Mexico. We allege that the Chapitos run the largest, most
violent, and most prolific fentanyl trafficking operation in the world.
The cartel is highly organized and sophisticated, employing military-
grade weapons and vehicles and hundreds of people who protect the
cartel and its leadership at all costs. In addition, we allege that the
Chapitos use extreme violence and intimidation, including murder,
torture, and kidnapping, to ensure dominance and expand their
territory.
The Chapitos are responsible for the massive influx of fentanyl
into the United States in recent years. The Chapitos oversee and
control every step in their fentanyl trafficking process: From
procuring fentanyl precursors from illicit sources of supply in the
PRC; to distribution in the United States, and, ultimately, reaching
the hands of Americans; to the repatriation of massive proceeds through
money launderers to avoid detection.
The indictments charged 28 members of the Chapitos network. These
include suppliers of fentanyl precursor chemicals based in the PRC, a
broker based in Guatemala assisting with the transport of those
chemicals from the PRC to Mexico, managers of clandestine fentanyl
laboratories based in Mexico converting the precursor chemicals into
fentanyl pills and powder, weapons traffickers and assassins
perpetuating extreme violence in Mexico to protect and expand the
fentanyl production operation, smugglers transporting the fentanyl from
Mexico into the United States, and illicit financiers laundering the
proceeds of fentanyl sales from the United States back to Mexico
through bulk cash smuggling, trade-based money laundering, and
cryptocurrency.
These indictments reflect the work of 32 DEA offices in the United
States and abroad, as well as our law enforcement partners and other
Department of Justice components. As part of the investigation, the DEA
conducted joint operations in 10 countries and seized staggering
amounts of illicit materials, including 2,557,000 fentanyl-laced pills,
105 kilograms of fentanyl powder, and 37 kilograms of fentanyl
precursor chemicals, amounting to 22,747,441 potentially lethal doses
of fentanyl. Ten defendants have been arrested to date with the
assistance of DEA's law enforcement partners in the United States and
abroad. In particular, Mexican military officials arrested Ovidio
Guzman-Lopez and extradited him to the United States on September 15,
2023. We are greatly appreciative of Mexican authorities' efforts to
bring Guzman-Lopez to justice, as the 10 members of the Mexican
military heroically gave their lives during the operation to capture
him.
At the same time as the announcement of these indictments, the
Department of State announced up to nearly $50 million in monetary
rewards for information leading to the capture of the defendants who
remained at large, and the Department of the Treasury Office of Foreign
Assets Control announced sanctions against 2 chemical companies that
operate in the PRC, and 5 individuals associated with those companies,
for supplying precursor chemicals to drug cartels in Mexico for the
production of illicit fentanyl intended for U.S. markets.
Operation Killer Chemicals
On June 23, 2023, DEA Administrator Anne Milgram joined Attorney
General Merrick Garland, Deputy Attorney General Lisa Monaco, and U.S.
Attorney for the Eastern District of New York Breon Peace and U.S.
Attorney for the Southern District of New York Damian Williams to
announce indictments of 4 chemical companies and 8 individuals--all
based in the PRC--for knowingly providing customers in the United
States and Mexico with the precursor chemicals and scientific know-how
to manufacture fentanyl. These indictments were the first-ever charges
against fentanyl precursor chemical companies. Two PRC nationals were
taken into custody pursuant to the investigation. DEA also seized more
than 200 kilograms of precursors in these investigations alone, enough
to make millions of deadly doses of fentanyl.
As alleged, these Chinese chemical companies, and the individuals
working for them, not only provided customers with the ingredients for
fentanyl, they also gave advice on how to mix and substitute
ingredients to more efficiently make fentanyl, and employed chemists to
troubleshoot and provide expert advice when customers had questions.
The individuals also spoke freely about having clients in the United
States and Mexico and, specifically, in Sinaloa, Mexico, where the
Sinaloa Cartel is based.
The companies went to great lengths to conceal the chemicals during
transport. They falsified shipping labels and customs paperwork,
claiming the shipments were ``dog food'' or ``raw cosmetic materials''
rather than fentanyl precursors. They even disguised the chemicals at a
molecular level--adding a molecule to ``mask'' the precursors so they
would not be detected as banned substances during transport, and
teaching their customers how to remove that molecule after receipt.
Operation Killer Chemicals made clear that fentanyl precursors are
exceptionally cheap. Fentanyl precursors cost less than 1 cent per
deadly dose of fentanyl. In just one example, a defendant sold 2
kilograms of fentanyl precursors for approximately $1,000, which can
make 1.75 million lethal doses of fentanyl. The amount of fentanyl that
can be made depends only on the amount of chemicals that can be
purchased.
The Operation also showed that fentanyl precursors are easily
bought on-line. Although based in the PRC, the chemical companies and
individuals reached customers across the world because they advertised
fentanyl precursors on social media (on Facebook and LinkedIn), used
encrypted applications like WhatsApp to speak with customers and
coordinate shipments, and took payment in Bitcoin and other
cryptocurrencies.
Operation Chem Capture
On October 3, 2023, Attorney General Merrick Garland, Homeland
Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas, Deputy Attorney General Lisa
Monaco, Deputy Treasury Secretary Wally Adeyemo, DEA Administrator Anne
Milgram, and Chief Postal Inspector Gary Barksdale announced 8
indictments charging 8 companies and 12 individuals. These companies
and individuals--all based in the PRC--were charged with crimes
relating to fentanyl and methamphetamine production, distribution of
synthetic opioids known as nitazenes, and sales resulting from
precursor chemicals. In addition, according to the indictment, one
company exported to the United States and Mexico large quantities of
fentanyl precursors and non-opioid additives, like the animal
tranquilizer xylazine. These additives make the deadliest drug we have
ever faced even deadlier. The indictments marked the second set of
prosecutions to charge China-based chemical manufacturing companies and
nationals of the PRC for trafficking fentanyl precursor chemicals into
the United States. During this multi-agency operation, DEA seized more
than 80 kilograms of synthetic chemicals, enough to make more than 48
million potentially lethal doses.
Operation Chem Capture once again showed that these synthetical
chemicals are cheap--a deadly dose costs mere cents--and sold on-line
on public websites and through encrypted applications like WhatsApp,
WeChat, and Wickr. The chemicals were shipped through common carriers,
by air and by ground through the U.S. Postal Service, UPS, and FedEx,
and were carefully packaged to deceive customs inspectors. The PRC-
based companies accepted payment in every form--Western Union,
MoneyGram, PayPal, Alibaba, bank transfers, Bitcoin, and other
cryptocurrencies.
conclusion
DEA will continue our relentless pursuit of the Sinaloa and Jalisco
Cartels--the criminal networks most responsible for fentanyl-related
deaths in our country--and we will continue to work tirelessly with our
interagency and international partners to defeat these cartels and
dismantle every part of their global supply chain, in order to protect
the American people. Thank you again for the opportunity to appear
before you today. I look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Ms. Thompson.
I now recognize Ambassador Richard for 5 minutes to
summarize her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ELIZABETH RICHARD, AMBASSADOR-AT-LARGE,
COORDINATOR FOR COUNTERTERRORISM, BUREAU OF COUNTERTERRORISM,
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ambassador Richard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the committee. Good
morning to everyone and thank you for the opportunity to
testify on the critical issue of countering Iran and Iranian-
backed threats to the United States.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has been designated a state
sponsor of terrorism for 40 years. The threats posed by
Iranian-backed terrorism are among the most pressing challenges
we face to international peace and security.
I'm looking forward today, we can discuss how the
Department of State's Bureau of Counterterrorism addresses the
multifaceted threats posed by Iran and by its terrorist
networks to our homeland and to U.S. personnel and facilities
overseas.
For decades, Iran's own Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
Quds Force has engaged in assassination attempts, terrorist
plots, and other violence targeting U.S. personnel and
interests. In the past few years in particular, we've seen a
rise in these threats, including, as my colleagues have pointed
out, a disrupted plot targeting a former National Security
Advisor.
Iran also continues to support a range of terrorist groups
who pose a threat to the U.S. homeland and to U.S. personnel
and facilities in the Middle East and beyond.
Hamas' terrorist attack on Israel on October 7 was a
sobering reminder of the enduring threat of terrorism enabled
by Iran. Hamas would not have been able to carry out its
horrific attack without Iran's long-time assistance, funding,
and training.
On that day, Hamas killed more than 1,200 people, including
approximately 3 dozen American citizens, and of the hundreds
taken hostage, a number are also American citizens.
We're doing everything in our power to ensure that they are
returned to their families.
For decades, Iran's support for terrorist groups such as
Hezbollah, various Iranian-aligned militia groups in Iraq and
Syria, and now the Houthis in Yemen, have resulted in repeated
assaults against U.S. personnel and interests in the Middle
East, from the bombing of the Marine Corps barracks in Beirut
almost 40 years ago, to the death of 3 American service members
and the wounding of dozens more in Jordan just this past
January.
Countering threats posed by Iran to the United States
homeland and U.S. personnel and facilities abroad requires a
comprehensive strategy, integrating diplomatic, financial,
military, and informational tools.
Importantly, our defense of the homeland does not start at
our physical border. We must look outward.
Our approach focuses on 4 key factors.
First, we counter Iran by strengthening our network of
partnerships and alliances so that we all present a united
front against Iran's aggressive actions.
Particularly over the past several years, we've succeeded
in convincing other governments to sanction, ban, or otherwise
limit the ability of Hamas and Hezbollah particularly to access
funding and move people and materiel.
Second, we use a variety of sanctions to constrain Iran's
own finances and support networks. For example, the Biden
administration recently sanctioned individuals who were part of
a criminal network directed by Iran's Ministry of Intelligence
and Security that attempted to assassinate U.S.-based opponents
of the Iranian regime.
Third, we help build the counterterrorism capabilities of
our allies and partners. We've provided new technologies and
training to improve their border security and have expanded our
information sharing and global watch-listing.
Fourth, we expose and counter Iranian disinformation
campaigns aimed at undermining the United States and inspiring
attacks against us and our personnel and installations around
the world.
These and other efforts help us identify and neutralize the
terrorist threats before they reach our borders, including
threats from Iran and Iran-backed terrorists.
To conclude, I will emphasize that our counter-Iran efforts
will endure as long as this threat endures, and as always,
there's a great deal at stake.
I thank you again for this hearing this morning and look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ambassador Richard follows:]
Prepared Statement of Elizabeth Richard
Wednesday, March 20, 2024
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, distinguished Members of
the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on the critical
issue of countering Iran and Iran-backed threats to the United States.
The Department of State is actively engaged in a comprehensive effort
to address the multifaceted threats posed by the Islamic Republic of
Iran to the United States homeland and to U.S. personnel and
facilities.
iran-backed threats to the united states
The threats posed by Iran-backed terrorism are among the most
pressing challenges we face to international peace and security. Today,
I will focus on Iran-supported terrorism against the U.S. homeland or
U.S. personnel and facilities abroad and how the Bureau of
Counterterrorism addresses those threats.
Iran has been designated as a State Sponsor of Terrorism since 1984
and has long been directly involved in attack plotting against the U.S.
homeland and U.S. personnel and activities, mainly but not exclusively
via Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps' (IRGC) Quds Force. For
decades, the Quds Force has engaged in many assassination attempts,
terrorist plots, and other violence against those whom the Iranian
regime views as enemies, including through on-going plots against U.S.
citizens and former United States Government officials. In the past few
years, we have seen a rise in plotting attacks against American
citizens or on American soil, including a disrupted plot targeting a
former U.S. National Security Advisor in 2022.
Iran also continues to support a range of proxies, who are engaged
in terrorist plots and activities in the Middle East and beyond. Hamas
would not have been able to carry out its devastating October 7
terrorist attack without Iran's long-time assistance, funding, and
training. Hamas' terrorist attack on Israel was a sobering reminder of
the enduring threat of terrorism enabled by Iran and our imperative to
protect American citizens, as well as our partners and allies, from
this threat. Approximately 1,200 people were killed and over 3,400
wounded by Hamas during its October 7 attack, including approximately 3
dozen American citizens. And among the hundreds taken hostage by Hamas,
a handful are also American, and we are doing everything in our power
to ensure that they are returned.
In addition to Hamas, Iran's support for terrorist groups, such as
Hizballah, various Iran-aligned militia groups in Iraq and Syria, and
the Houthis in Yemen, resulted in repeated attacks and hostage taking
against U.S. personnel and facilities in the Middle East--from the
Marine Corps barracks bombing in Beirut over 40 years ago to the death
of 3 American servicemen and the wounding of dozens more in Jordan this
past January. Iran-backed groups not only directly threaten the U.S.
homeland and American personnel and facilities, but as we have seen in
the past few months, also destabilize global commerce. We must remain
vigilant against and disrupt this plotting and destabilizing activity.
As Secretary Blinken stated at a United Nations Security Council
Ministerial Meeting last October regarding Hamas, we know where Iran-
backed terrorism leads to--death, destruction, suffering, and darkness.
In addition to Iran-backed attacks, Iran's development,
procurement, and proliferation of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
missiles and missile-related technology remains one of the greatest
challenges to international peace and security. We see the horrific
impact of Iran's provision of missiles and UAVs to designated terrorist
organizations and militant proxies that directly threaten the security
of U.S. personnel and installations as well as our allies, partners,
and interests. We see the destructive result of Iran's transfer of
lethal UAVs to Russia that have been used in Russia's war, striking
civilian infrastructure, and killing civilians in Ukraine.
The Hamas attack on October 7, enabled by Iran, has also triggered
a wave of reported anti-Semitic and Islamophobic attacks around the
world. In Senate testimony earlier this month, Avril Haines, the
director of national intelligence, highlighted the ``generational
impact'' that the Gaza conflict, instigated by Hamas, will have on
terrorism. She stated that both al-Qaeda and ISIS, inspired by Hamas,
``have directed supporters to conduct attacks against Israeli and U.S.
interests.'' Furthermore, she emphasized the Hamas attack ``is
inspiring acts of antisemitism and Islamophobic terror world-wide.''
In the face of these challenges, it is crucial that we take a
strong stance against hate and violent extremism. We must ensure that
the conflict in Gaza does not expand further, because Iran and its
terrorist proxies would benefit from global instability. As we navigate
complex global threats, addressing these issues remains a critical
priority for our broader efforts to preserve a rules-based
international order.
countering iran-backed terrorist threats to the united states
Countering threats posed by Iran to the United States homeland and
U.S. personnel and facilities abroad requires a comprehensive strategy,
integrating diplomatic, financial, and informational tools to disrupt
Iran-backed threats. To counter Iranian and Iran-backed threats, the
Department of State is taking a multi-pronged approach, including:
1. Strengthening Alliances and Partnerships
Working closely with our allies and partners in the Middle East and
beyond to present a united front against Iran's aggressive actions.
This includes security assistance, joint military exercises, and
intelligence sharing to counteract Iranian influence and threats. At
the forefront of our strategy is the reinforcement of diplomatic
engagements and alliances. We are working closely with our partners
around the globe to isolate Iran multilaterally and diplomatically
until it ceases its support for terrorism. Through the Countering
Transnational Terrorism Forum, at the United Nations, and elsewhere, we
advocate for stringent sanctions against Iranian entities involved in
terrorist activities, aiming to cut off the financial and material
support that fuels these groups.
The State Department has been leading diplomatic campaigns to press
other governments to take action to crack down on Iran-backed
terrorism. We have achieved some good results and will continue the
effort. Over the past several years, 16 countries have designated,
banned, or restricted Hizballah, which is not only an important
symbolic declaration, but also constrains Hizballah's ability to
operate freely in these locales. Since October 7, a number of
governments have designated both Hamas and individual leaders and other
members as terrorists--an important step in ensuring that Hamas is held
responsible for the October 7 attacks.
2. Economic Sanctions
Sanctions are another powerful tool to constrain Iran's finances
and support networks. The State Department implements and enforces
stringent economic sanctions against the Iranian government, IRGC, and
affiliated entities to limit their access to the financial resources
needed to fund their malign activities. Our targeted sanctions are
designed to dismantle the complex financial networks that underpin
Iran's support for terrorism. The Department of State, in coordination
with the Treasury Department, continuously works to identify and
disrupt individuals, entities, and countries that facilitate the
funding of terrorism.
For example, the administration has recently sanctioned individuals
who were part of a criminal network that attempted to assassinate U.S.-
based dissidents and Iranian regime opponents at the behest of Iran's
Ministry of Intelligence and Security. Additionally, under
counterterrorism authority Executive Order (E.O.) 13224, the
administration designated a procurement network facilitating the
illegal export of U.S. goods and technology to end-users in Iran,
including the Central Bank of Iran; the IRGC-Quds Force deputy
commander; and companies involved in shipping over $100 million in
Iranian commodities on behalf of Iran's Ministry of Defense and Armed
Forces Logistics.
3. Supporting Counterterrorism Capacities Globally
Our defense of the U.S. homeland does not stop at our own physical
border. Recognizing that no country can face its terrorism challenges
alone, the United States is committed to enhancing the counterterrorism
capabilities of our allies and partners. Through training, joint
exercises, and the provision of counterterrorism equipment, we help
build the resilience of partner nations, enabling them to better
prevent and respond to terrorist threats. This collaborative approach
not only strengthens our collective security but also sends a clear
message that we stand united against the forces of terror. For years,
the Bureau of Counterterrorism has dedicated funding to counter Iran-
backed terrorism. We have used this funding to bolster our partners'
ability to address the Iranian terrorist threat in the Middle East,
Europe, South America, and elsewhere.
The Bureau of Counterterrorism is also working to improve border
security abroad and counter-terrorist travel by encouraging and
assisting our foreign partners to employ effective threat-based
security systems, expand information sharing on terrorist threats, and
strengthen transportation and traveler screening procedures. By
enhancing the U.S. Government's understanding of the terrorist threat
and adding layers to our shared defenses against terrorism we are
identifying and neutralizing terrorist threats before they reach our
borders.
4. Countering Disinformation
We also must expose and counter Iran's disinformation campaigns
aimed at undermining the United States, destabilizing the Middle East,
and inspiring attacks in the United States and against U.S. personnel
and installations around the world. In the age of information, the
battle against terrorism extends into the digital realm. Iran-backed
groups often exploit social media and the internet to spread
propaganda, recruit followers, and incite violence. In response, we
have bolstered our efforts to counter these narratives. Through
strategic communications and public diplomacy, we aim to discredit the
violent ideologies that feed terrorism, offering instead a narrative of
peace, stability, and mutual respect among nations.
conclusion
The threats posed by Iran are complex and evolving, requiring a
dynamic and multifaceted response from the United States and our
allies. Through a combination of diplomatic, economic, and military
strategies, we are committed to countering Iran's aggressive actions
and ensuring the safety and security of the United States. Protecting
the United States homeland and U.S. personnel and facilities abroad
against terrorist threats is our top priority. Thank you again, I look
forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Ambassador, for your testimony,
and I know you guys have been working overtime since October.
Appreciate your efforts.
I also would like to ask a favor. Would you please tell
Ambassador Roger Carstens, my West Point classmate, that I said
hello?
Ambassador Richard. Absolutely.
Chairman Green. The committee stands in recess, and we will
reconvene in executive session in HVC-301.
[Whereupon, at 11:01 a.m., the committee recessed, to
proceed in executive session.]

[all]
