- A SECURITY SPRINT: ASSESSING THE U.S. HOMELAND'S VULNERABILITIES TO CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY AGGRESSION

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A SECURITY SPRINT: ASSESSING THE U.S. HOME-
LAND'S VULNERABILITIES TO CHINESE COM-
MUNIST PARTY AGGRESSION

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COUNTERTERRORISM,
LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND
INTELLIGENCE

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

MAY 23, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-14

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-073 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
Sean Jones, Legislative Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COUNTERTERRORISM, LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND INTELLIGENCE

August Pfluger, Texas, Chairman
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island,
Tony Gonzales, Texas                     Ranking Member
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         J. Luis Correa, California
Elijah Crane, Arizona                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Dina Titus, Nevada
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Michael Koren, Subcommittee Staff Director
Brittany Carr, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
Alice Hayes, Subcommittee Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Seth Magaziner, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Rhode Island, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Ms. Jill M. Murphy, Deputy Assistant Director of
Counterintelligence, Federal Bureau of Investigation:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Iranga Kahangama, Assistant Secretary for Cyber,
Infrastructure, Risk and Resilience, Office of Strategy,
Policy, and Plans, Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    15
Mr. Tyrone Durham, Acting Director, Nation State Threats Center,
Office of Intelligence and Analysis, Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    15

For the Record

The Honorable August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Letter, April 17...............................................    31
The Honorable Dan Bishop, a Representative in Congress From the
State of North Carolina:
Article, NY Post, May 18, 2023.................................    48

Appendix

Questions From Chairman August Pfluger for Jill M. Murphy........    51
Questions From Chairman August Pfluger for Iranga Kahangama......    52
Questions From Honorable Dina Titus for Iranga Kahangama.........    53
Questions From Chairman August Pfluger for Tyrone Durham.........    53
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Tyrone Durham.............    54

A SECURITY SPRINT: ASSESSING THE U.S. HOMELAND'S VULNERABILITIES TO
CHINESE COMMUNIST PARTY AGGRESSION

----------

Tuesday, May 23, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism,
Law Enforcement, and Intelligence,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:23 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. August Pfluger
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Pfluger, Bishop, Crane, Magaziner,
Correa, and Goldman.
Also present: Representatives Greene, and Jackson Lee.
Chairman Pfluger. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and
Intelligence will come to order.
This hearing is this subcommittee's second hearing focusing
on the threats that the Chinese Communist Party poses to the
U.S. homeland. The purpose of this hearing is to better
understand how the Federal Government is responding to the
numerous threats posed by the CCP that impact the U.S. homeland
and to identify vulnerabilities that must be resolved in the
Federal Government's approach to mitigating these threats.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Well, good afternoon and welcome to the Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence second
hearing exploring the threats the Chinese Communist Party poses
to the U.S. homeland. I would like to thank all of our
witnesses for testifying today.
In March of this year, this subcommittee convened a hearing
entitled ``Confronting Threats Posed by the Chinese Communist
Party to the U.S. Homeland''. During that hearing, with the
support of testimony from national security experts, Members
learned about the many ways in which the CCP is deceiving and
manipulating the United States to commit espionage in the
homeland and to overturn a global rules-based order. We also
discussed the CCP's aggressive strategy of military civil
fusion and how it manifests as threats to our homeland. The
subcommittee heard how the CCP is leveraging Confucius
Institutes, programs the CCP claims are meant for language
learning and cultural exchange, at U.S. universities and
colleges to recruit American scientists and researchers to
promote military civil fusion and suppress Chinese dissidents
who are studying on American campuses. There is even evidence
that the CCP is utilizing nontraditional intelligence
collectors, such as Chinese academic researchers, to commit
espionage in the U.S. homeland. We learned that the CCP has
orchestrated the theft of anywhere between $225- and $600
billion in intellectual property annually, according to the
Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property.
One of the witnesses, Bill Evanina, the former director of
National Counterintelligence and Security Center, put this into
perspective for us, explaining that that equates to nearly
$4,000 to $6,000 per American family of four after taxes.
The subcommittee discussed the imminent threats the CCP
poses to U.S cybersecurity and critical infrastructure, as well
as its efforts to undermine American economic security.
Furthermore, we heard how the CCP is refusing to cooperate in
international counter-narcotics efforts, tacitly approving of
the traffic of illicit fentanyl and related precursor chemicals
needed to produce fentanyl from China to Mexico, fueling the
American opioid crisis.
Today, we will revisit all of these pressing issues and
more. The committee will hear from the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the FBI, the Department of Homeland Security
regarding the role that each of those agencies play in
mitigating CCP threats to the U.S. homeland.
During this committee's Worldwide Threats hearing in
November 2022, FBI Director Wray stated that the greatest long-
term threat to our Nation's ideas, innovation, and economic
security is the foreign intelligence and economic espionage
threat from China. The FBI has investigated many cases of CCP
intrusions, including making critical arrests surrounding the
illegal Chinese police station operating in Manhattan, New
York, arrests the committee asked DHS and FBI about in an April
24 letter that remains unanswered at this point in time, and
bringing those involved in the CCP's brazen cyber intrusions to
justice.
At the same time, DHS has begun to prioritize the threats
posed by the CCP by crafting an unrealistic 90-day sprint that
focuses on defending critical infrastructure, disrupting the
global fentanyl supply chain, bolstering screening and vetting
for illicit travelers from the People's Republic of China,
mitigating PRC malign economic influence, securing the Arctic
Region, and mitigating counterintelligence threats posed by the
PRC. While these efforts from both the FBI and DHS are
necessary steps in the right direction, we must ensure
countering the CCP as the highest priority for all entities
involved in the homeland security enterprise.
Unlike the Biden administration, previous administrations,
including the Trump administration, acknowledged the threat
posed by the CCP at a time when it was not popular to do so.
For example, in November 2018, the Department of Justice under
the Trump administration launched the China Initiative to raise
awareness and to identify and prosecute CCP trade secret theft
and economic espionage and to protect American critical
infrastructure and supply chains from CCP's malign influence.
In February 2022, the DOJ ended the China Initiative, in
which they said was in favor of a broader approach to
countering nation-state threats. However, it appears the
decision was motivated by nothing more than identity politics,
fueled by unfounded accusations that investigations under the
initiative were excessive or racially biased. In fact,
Assistant Attorney General Matthew Olsen admitted that he had
not seen any indication of bias or prejudice in decision making
by the Department of Justice in the related cases, and that
actions ``were driven by genuine national security concerns''.
Following the scuttling of the China Initiative, security
experts warned that the motion emboldened China to increase its
spying on the United States.
In a similar fashion, on January 12, 2021, in the final
days of the Trump administration, DHS published the DHS
Strategic Action Plan to Counter the Threat Posed by the
People's Republic of China--again January 12, 2021. This
comprehensive plan laid out four critical areas of focus for
DHS to counter CCP malign efforts. They included border
security and immigration, trade and economic security,
cybersecurity and critical infrastructure, and maritime
security. Following the transition to the Biden administration,
DHS continued to work consistently on mitigating CCP threats
from the component level. However, there was not a clear
message regarding DHS headquarters priorities in the issue
space until recently.
On April 20, 2023, Secretary Mayorkas issued the 90-day
People's Republic of China Threats Sprint, displaying an
encouraging shift in the Department's focus to threats
emanating from the CCP. However, 90 days is not sufficient to
undo the CCP's 73-year-long campaign to undermine the United
States and our national security interest. China has been
racing ahead for decades while we sprint to catch up, we must
do more. Both DHS and the FBI need to form long-term strategic
plans like the ones established under the Trump administration
that can counter evolving threats from the CCP now and into the
future.
I want to reiterate what I said when the subcommittee met
for its first hearing this Congress. This conflict is not with
the individual citizens of the PRC, this conflict is with the
CCP, an authoritarian regime that commits genocide against its
own people, censors free speech across the globe, and aims to
end democracy as we know it. We must ensure we are enacting
common-sense policy and strategy that can mitigate CCP
aggression in the homeland. We need to rise above personal
politics and confront the grave security threat posed by the
CCP together.
I hope that during this discussion we can have a bipartisan
hearing that talks about the threats, that gets rid of the
distractions that I think have captured the politics over the
last 2 years, and really focus on what is happening from the
CCP as it affects our own homeland.
[The statement of Chairman Pfluger follows:]
Statement of Chairman August Pfluger
May 23, 2023
Good morning, and welcome to the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism,
Law Enforcement, and Intelligence's second hearing exploring the
threats the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) poses to the U.S. homeland. I
would like to thank all our witnesses for testifying today.
In March of this year, this subcommittee convened a hearing
entitled, ``Confronting Threats Posed by the Chinese Communist Party to
the U.S. Homeland.''
During that hearing, with the support of testimony from national
security experts, Members learned about the many ways in which the CCP
is deceiving and manipulating the United States to commit espionage in
the homeland and overturn global rules-based order. We also discussed
the CCP's aggressive strategy of Military-Civil Fusion and how it
manifests as threats to our homeland.
The subcommittee heard how the CCP is leveraging Confucius
Institutes, programs the CCP claims are meant for language learning and
cultural exchange, at U.S. universities and colleges to recruit
American scientists and researchers to promote Military-Civil Fusion
and suppress Chinese dissidents who are studying on American campuses.
There is even evidence that the CCP is utilizing ``non-
traditional'' intelligence collectors, such as Chinese academic
researchers, to commit espionage in the U.S. homeland.
We learned that the CCP has orchestrated the theft of anywhere from
$225 to $600 billion in Intellectual Property annually according to the
Commission on the Theft of American Intellectual Property.
One of the witnesses, Bill Evanina, the former director of the
National Counterintelligence and Security Center, put this into
perspective for us, explaining that equates to nearly $4,000 to $6,000
per American family of four after taxes.
The subcommittee discussed the imminent threats the CCP poses to
U.S. cybersecurity and critical infrastructure as well as its efforts
to undermine American economic security.
Furthermore, we heard how the CCP is refusing to cooperate in
international counter-narcotics efforts, tacitly approving of the
traffic of illicit fentanyl and related precursor chemicals needed to
produce fentanyl from China to Mexico, fueling the American opioid
crisis. Today, we will revisit all these pressing issues and more.
The committee will hear from the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) regarding the role
they each play in mitigating CCP threats to the U.S. homeland.
During this committee's Worldwide Threats hearing in November 2022,
FBI Director Wray stated that, ``the greatest long-term threat to our
Nation's ideas, innovation, and economic security is the foreign
intelligence and economic espionage threat from China.''
The FBI has investigated many cases of CCP intrusions, including
making critical arrests surrounding the illegal Chinese police station
operating in Manhattan, New York--arrests the committee asked DHS and
FBI about in an April 24th letter that remains unanswered to this day--
and bringing those involved in the CCP's brazen cyber intrusions to
justice.
At the same time, DHS has begun to prioritize the threats posed by
the CCP by crafting an unrealistic 90-day sprint that focuses on
defending critical infrastructure, disrupting the global fentanyl
supply chain, bolstering screening and vetting for illicit travelers
from the People's Republic of China (PRC), mitigating PRC malign
economic influence, securing the Arctic region, and mitigating
counterintelligence threats posed by the PRC.
While these efforts from both the FBI and DHS are necessary steps
in the right direction, we must ensure countering the CCP is the
highest priority for all entities involved in homeland security.
Unlike the Biden administration, the Trump administration
acknowledged the threat posed by the CCP at a time when it was not
popular to do so.
For example, in November 2018, the Department of Justice (DOJ),
under the Trump administration, launched the China Initiative to raise
awareness, and to identify and prosecute CCP trade secret theft and
economic espionage, and to protect American critical infrastructure and
supply chains from CCP's malign influence.
In February 2022, the DOJ ended the China Initiative, in which they
said was ``in favor of a broader approach to countering nation-state
threats.''
However, it appears the decision was motivated by nothing more than
identity politics fueled by unfounded accusations that the
investigations under the initiative were excessive or racially biased.
In fact, Assistant Attorney General Matthew Olsen admitted that he had
not seen any indication of bias or prejudice in decision making by the
Department of Justice in the related cases and that actions were
``driven by genuine national security concerns.''
Following the scuttling of the China Initiative, security experts
warned that the action emboldened China to increase its spying on the
United States.
In a similar fashion, on January 12, 2021, in the final days of the
Trump administration, DHS published the ``DHS Strategic Action Plan to
Counter the Threat Posed by the People's Republic of China.''
This comprehensive plan laid out four critical areas of focus for
DHS to counter CCP malign efforts: border security and immigration;
trade and economic security; cybersecurity and critical infrastructure;
and maritime security.
Following the transition to the Biden administration, DHS continued
to work consistently on mitigating CCP threats from the component
level; however, there was not a clear message regarding DHS
Headquarters' priorities in the issue space until recently.
On April 20, 2023, Secretary Mayorkas issued the ``90-Day People's
Republic of China Threats Sprint,'' displaying an encouraging shift in
the Department's focus to threats emanating from the CCP. However, 90
days is not sufficient to undo the CCP's 73-year-long campaign to
undermine the United States. China has been racing ahead for decades,
while we ``sprint'' to catch up. We must do more.
Both DHS and the FBI need to form long-term strategic plans, like
the ones established under the Trump administration, that can counter
evolving threats from the CCP now and into the future.
I want to reiterate what I said when the subcommittee met for its
first hearing this Congress: This conflict is not with individual
citizens of the PRC--this conflict is with the CCP, an authoritarian
regime that commits genocide against its own people, censors free
speech across the globe, and aims to end democracy as we know it.
We must ensure we are enacting common-sense policy and strategy
that can mitigate CCP aggression in the homeland.
We need to rise above personal politics and confront the grave
security threat posed by the CCP together. I continue to look forward
to bipartisan cooperation on this important topic, and I am eager to
hear the testimony we will receive today.

Chairman Pfluger. Now, I would like to recognize the
Ranking Member, the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr. Magaziner,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman, for calling today's
hearing. Thank you to our witnesses for appearing today.
It is indisputable that the Chinese Communist Party is the
United States' greatest competitor on the world stage. It is
also indisputable that the CCP is actively trying to undermine
the economy and security of the United States.
As I noted in our hearing on the topic in March, it is
important to be clear here that our adversary is the CCP as
they have become more aggressive in trying to undermine U.S.
interests, not the Chinese people or people of Chinese descent
living and working in the United States. Anyone who targets
individuals based on their race or national origin must be
condemned and must be prosecuted appropriately.
Now, it is important to highlight that this competition we
find ourselves in with the CCP touches on many areas, from
defense to foreign policy to political ideology. But it is
first and foremost an economic competition. That is why the CCP
has aggressively pursued unfair economic practices, like
currency devaluation, the use of weak and inhumane labor
standards, and in particular, intellectual property theft,
targeting both the U.S. Government agencies and United States
companies in their effort to usurp our global economic
leadership. The CCP routinely engages in espionage and cyber
exploitation to steal American intellectual property, trade
secrets, and defense information.
Each year, the CCP's economic espionage against American
businesses costs between $225- and $600 billion, according to
the FBI. In 2020, just one Chinese national stole intellectual
property worth $1 billion dollars from his employer, a United
States petroleum company. One billion dollars stolen by just
one individual. Last year, a Boston-based cybersecurity firm
found that a Chinese state actor had exfiltrated hundreds of
gigabytes of IP in sensitive data from about 30 companies
around the world. The estimated cost of that IP loss runs into
the trillions. But even more alarming is that the intellectual
property stolen by the CCP did not just include commercial
product designs and trademarks for cheap, knockoff, counterfeit
products, it included blueprints for fighter jets, helicopters,
missiles, pharmaceuticals, and large-scale technologies.
These thefts of intellectual property and trade secrets
threaten our national defense and also our economic advantage,
hurting our companies and costing American jobs. The CCP does
not plan to stop. In fact, they have become more assertive. The
CCP's Made in China 2025, or MIC 2025 Initiative, lays out a
broad set of industrial plans to boost China's economic
fortunes by advancing its position in manufacturing and supply
chains. Over the past decade, the CCP has also used foreign
investments through its Belt and Road Initiative to develop
China-centered and -controlled global infrastructure,
transportation, trade, and production networks. But
importantly, this initiative is more than just an economic
challenge. It is expanding China's reach into hundreds of
companies around the world and troublingly building digital
networks that are giving the Chinese Communist Party access to
troves of sensitive data from around the world which can be
used against United States interests.
Now, I am pleased that under the leadership of President
Biden and Secretary Mayorkas, DHS issued the Quadrennial
Homeland Security Review, the first in 9 years, including a
focus on threats related to the CCP. The 2023 review directly
tackles the threat posed by the Chinese Communist Party to our
competitiveness, democratic institutions, and homeland
security. I am also pleased that the Biden administration has
taken the threat of the CCP seriously with the passage of the
CHIPS and Science Act, the establishment of the China House at
the State Department, and the launch of the 90-day Sprint at
DHS.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses about the
broad threats to the United States from the Chinese Communist
Party and in hearing how the DHS and FBI work with Federal
partners across our country to protect American businesses and
Government from CCP espionage.
Finally, I look forward to hearing how DHS is implementing
the Biden administration's Quadrennial Homeland Security Review
and receiving an update on the status of the DHS 90-day Sprint
on China.
Thank you again to our witnesses for being here today, and
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Magaziner follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Seth Magaziner
May 23, 2023
It is indisputable that the Chinese Communist Party is the United
States' greatest competitor on the world stage. And it is indisputable
that the CCP is actively trying to undermine the economy and security
of the United States at home and abroad. As I reiterated in our last
hearing on this topic in March, the threat emanating from China is from
the CCP as they have become more aggressive in trying to undermine U.S.
interests, not the Chinese people.
At the outset, I think it is important to highlight that this
competition we find ourselves in touches upon many areas, from defense
to foreign policy to political ideology, but is first and foremost an
economic competition. That is why the CCP has aggressively pursued
unfair economic practices like currency devaluation, the use of weak
and inhumane labor standards, and in particular intellectual property
theft, targeting both United States Government agencies and U.S.
companies in its effort to usurp our global economic leadership.
The CCP routinely uses espionage and cyber exploitation to steal
American intellectual property, trade secrets, and even defense
information. Each year, China's economic espionage against American
businesses costs between $225 and $600 billion, according to the FBI.
In 2020, just one Chinese national stole intellectual property worth a
billion dollars from his employer, a U.S. petroleum company.
Just. One. Person.
And last year, a Boston-based cybersecurity firm, Cyberreason,
found that a Chinese state actor had exfiltrated hundreds of gigabytes
of IP and sensitive data from about 30 companies around the world. The
estimated cost of that IP loss runs into the trillions.
But even more alarming is that the intellectual property stolen by
China did not just include commercial product designs and trademarks
for cheap, knock-off counterfeit trinkets--it included blueprints for
fighter jets, helicopters, missiles, pharmaceuticals, and large-scale
technologies. These thefts of intellectual property and trade secrets
threaten our national defense, and also reduces the economic advantage
of the United States, hurting our companies and costing American jobs--
and the CCP does not plan to stop.
The CCP has plans to become more assertive. Its ``Made in China
2025,'' or MIC2025, initiative lays out a broad set of industrial plans
that aim to boost China's competitiveness by advancing its position in
manufacturing and supply chains. Over the past decade, the CCP has also
used foreign investments through its Belt and Road Initiative to
develop China-centered and--controlled global infrastructure,
transportation, trade, and production networks. This unprecedented
initiative is more than just an economic challenge to the United
States--it is expanding China's reach into hundreds of countries around
the world and reducing the costs of doing business with China.
Perhaps most troublingly, Belt and Road investments in building
next-generation digital networks world-wide are giving the Chinese
Communist Party access to troves of sensitive data from around the
world, which it can use against the United States. How does the CCP
plan to advance its position? By using every tool at its disposal--
including spycraft--to leapfrog into emerging technologies. U.S.
officials and cybersecurity analysts have described MIC2025 as a
blueprint for the types of companies and industries China will target
through espionage and hacking. FBI Director Christopher Wray put the
CCP threat into perspective when he said, ``[t]he greatest long-term
threat to our Nation's information and intellectual property, and to
our economic vitality, is the counterintelligence and economic
espionage threat from China.''
I am pleased that under the leadership of President Biden and
Secretary Mayorkas, DHS finally issued the Quadrennial Homeland
Security Review--the first in 9 years. The 2023 review directly tackles
the threat posed by the Chinese Communist Party to our competitiveness,
democratic institutions, and homeland security. I am pleased that the
Biden administration has taken the threat of the CCP seriously with the
passage of the Chips and Science Act, the establishment of the China
House at the State Department, and the 90-Day Sprint at DHS.
I look forward to hearing from today's witnesses about the broad
threats the United States faces because of the Chinese Communist Party.
I am particularly interested in hearing how DHS and the FBI work with
Federal partners to protect American businesses and the Government from
CCP espionage. Furthermore, I look forward to hearing how DHS is
implementing the Biden administration's Quadrennial Homeland Security
Review and receiving an update on the status of the DHS 90-Day Sprint
on China.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Ranking Member Magaziner.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 23, 2023
The U.S. Government must communicate to the American people the
CCP's ambitions to expand and modernize its military, develop strategic
technologies and digital infrastructure globally, and to exert its
influence with the aim of undermining our democratic institutions. We
should not demonize the Chinese people, but make no mistake--the CCP
seeks to exploit American openness in order to steal economic secrets
and undermine our security.
This is a strategic competition between U.S. democratic values and
Chinese authoritarianism. It is a contest between U.S. economic
opportunity and the CCP's dependence on market manipulation. It is a
struggle between the First Amendment right of free speech and the
state-controlled Chinese media. And it is a competition between the
values of inclusiveness and civil liberties in America against the
state-sponsored CCP surveillance that violates the human rights of the
Chinese people. Democrats have worked hard to deter the Chinese
Communist Party's security and economic aggression by out-competing
China, investing in innovation and resilience, and promoting democratic
values.
Under the Biden administration and Democratic leadership in
Congress, the United States has made heavy investments in technology,
industry, and supply chains to prevent the CCP from achieving its goal
of undermining the U.S. economy and displacing America as the world's
global leader.
Last year, Democrats passed--and President Biden signed into law--
the CHIPS and Science Act, which invests $280 billion to increase
domestic semiconductor production, strengthen U.S. industry, create
jobs here at home, reduce inflation, and ensure the United States
remains competitive vis-a-vis China on all fronts. Due to the
seriousness of the CCP threat, this effort should have been bipartisan,
but nearly 90 percent of House Republicans voted against the bill and
therefore against standing up to China.
However, given today's hearing I am hopeful that we can work
together to bridge the partisan gap and build on the CHIPS Act
investments. We must unite against the CCP as it pursues its goal of
global dominance. Together, Democrats and Republicans must invest in
American competitiveness to counter expansive Chinese military
ambitions, persistent cyber attacks, and threats to our global supply
chain. I am certain we can come together on this issue, as just last
week this committee united to pass bipartisan legislation to address
cyber intelligence vulnerabilities hidden within Chinese drone
technology. Today, we hope to continue to show bipartisan support for
enhanced cyber security, economic stability, and counterintelligence
efforts.
As I have stated before, as we deliberate on how best to strengthen
the homeland against the Chinese Communist Party's actions, we must
reject anti-Asian rhetoric and condemn violence against Chinese
Americans. It is essential that we celebrate and support our Nation's
diversity and not fall into any CCP-polarization traps as it advances
China's economic and national security agendas. I thank today's
witnesses for lending their expertise.

Chairman Pfluger. Without objection, the gentlewoman from
Georgia, Ms. Marjorie Taylor Greene, is permitted to sit on the
dais and ask questions of the witnesses.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the committee in
recess at any point in time.
I am pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us today on this very important topic, and I ask that
the witnesses please rise and raise their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Pfluger. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative.
I would like, now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Ms. Jill Murphy is the deputy assistant director of the
Federal Bureau of Investigations Counterintelligence Division.
Ms. Murphy began her career with the FBI in 2002. Her initial
work with the FBI included investigations of Asian organized
crime in America and worked with the Joint Terrorism Task Force
to focus on the fight against al-Qaeda and its affiliates. In
2010, Ms. Murphy transitioned to the China Counterintelligence
Division at FBI headquarters. From 2014 to 2016, she served on
the National Security Council as director of
counterintelligence, coordinating counterintelligence policy
and operations. Most recently, Ms. Murphy worked as the CIA's
chief of counterespionage. Welcome.
Next. Mr. Iranga Kahangama is the assistant secretary for
Cyber Infrastructure Risk and Resilience at the Department of
Homeland Security. Previously, he served at the White House and
the National Security Council as director for Cyber Incident
Response. In that role, he oversaw the Federal Government's
response to a wide range of malicious cyber activity, including
the Russia-attributed Solar Winds incident, China's
exploitation of Microsoft Exchange servers, and ransomware
attacks on the Colonial pipeline. Prior to the NSC, he served
as senior policy advisor at the FBI, working on an array of
cyber, internet, and technology policy issues. Welcome.
Finally, Mr. Tyrone Durham currently serves as the acting
director of the Nation State Threat Center in the Department of
Homeland Security's Office of Intelligence and Analysis. In
this role, Mr. Durham oversees the Center's efforts to identify
and assess foreign adversarial threats to the U.S. homeland,
primarily in the areas of counterintelligence, trade, and
supply chain, as well as intellectual property. Before this
role, Mr. Durham was the senior advisor for cyber and senior
subject-matter expert at DHS Cyber Mission Center. Prior to
joining DHS, Mr. Durham served more than 2 decades in
intelligence with the FBI at its New York Field Office and
Headquarters' criminal, counterterrorism, counterintelligence,
and cyber programs. Welcome and thank you. Mr. Durham concluded
his career at the FBI as unit chief in the FBI's
Counterintelligence Division, identifying and assessing threats
from the People's Republic of China.
Welcome.
Mr. Magaziner. Mr. Chairman, before we proceed, I ask
unanimous consent that Ms. Jackson Lee be permitted to sit on
the subcommittee and question the witnesses.
Chairman Pfluger. So ordered.
I would like to thank all the witnesses for being here
today.
I now recognize Ms. Jill Murphy, if you will, Ms. Murphy.
For all the witnesses, I know you have written statements.
Thank you for those. Please do summarize the statements and
stick to 5 minutes. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF JILL M. MURPHY, DEPUTY ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF
COUNTERINTELLIGENCE, FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

Ms. Murphy. Good afternoon. Chairman Pfluger, Ranking
Member Magaziner, and Members of the committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to discuss the FBI's counterintelligence work
against the People's Republic of China and the ways the FBI
works with members of the U.S. intelligence community, public
and private entities, the American people, to protect the U.S.
homeland from the Communist Government of China.
Our Nation faces a wider-than-ever array of challenging
threats. We see nations such as China, Russia, and Iran
becoming more aggressive and more capable in their nefarious
activity than ever before. These nations seek to undermine our
core democratic values, our economic and scientific
institutions. They employ a growing range of tactics to advance
their interests and to harm the United States. Defending
American institutions and values against these threats is a
national security imperative and a priority for the FBI.
With that, the greatest long-term threat to our Nation's
ideas, innovation, and economic security is the foreign
intelligence and economic espionage threat from China. It's a
threat to our economic security and by extension, our national
security. The China government aspires to equal or surpass the
United States as a global superpower and influence the world
with a value system shaped by undemocratic authoritarian ideas.
The pursuit of these goals is often with little regard for
international norms or laws. When it comes to economic
espionage, the Chinese government uses every means at its
disposal against us blending cyber, human diplomacy, corporate
transactions, pressure on U.S. companies operating in China to
achieve its strategic goals to steal our companies'
innovations.
These efforts are consistent with China's express goal to
become a national power, modernizing its military, and creating
innovative, driven economic growth. To pursue this goal, China
not only uses human intelligence officers, co-optees,
nontraditional collectors, as you mentioned, sir, corporate,
corrupt corporate insiders, but also sophisticated cyber
intrusions, pressure on U.S. companies, shell game corporate
transactions, joint venture partnerships that are anything but
a true partnership. There's nothing traditional about the scale
of their theft. It's unprecedented in the history of the FBI.
American workers and companies are facing greater, more complex
danger than they've ever dealt with before. Stolen innovation
means stolen jobs, stolen opportunities for work, and stolen
national power and stolen leadership in these industries.
The Chinese government targets cutting-edge research and
innovation at our universities as well as in private industry.
This is no secret. The Chinese government publicizes the key
technologies they tend to target and acquire. The Made in China
25 Plan, for example, lists ten broad areas spanning industries
like robotics, green energy production, agricultural equipment,
aerospace, and biopharma. The governor of China's 14th 5-year
plan targets things like AI, quantum, semiconductors, brain
science, smart manufacturing, robotics. The government of China
is willing to lie, cheat, and steal their way into unfairly
dominating entire tech sectors, putting competing U.S.
companies out of business.
They aren't just interested in technology. The Chinese
government is interested in cost and pricing information,
internal strategy documents, bulk, PII, anything that can give
them a competitive advantage. The Chinese government is
fighting a generational fight to surpass our country in
economic and technological leadership, but not through
legitimate innovation, not through fair and lawful competition,
and not by giving their citizens the freedom of thought and
speech and creativity that we treasure here in the United
States.
The Chinese government makes American ventures operating in
China establish Chinese community party cells within their
companies. The companies operating in China are susceptible to
the laws and regulations of the Chinese government, which
enables the stealing of U.S. information and technology. The
American people and businesses should know if you are an owner,
a security official, an employee of a U.S. business, no matter
the size, and you create cutting-edge technology and the
semiconductor, quantum computing, AI, machine learning, new
energy, biotech, aerospace, robotics, the list goes on, or you
create a widget or a software component that contributes to the
manufacturing process of one of these technologies, your
company's intellectual property and employees are targets of
sophisticated nation-state actors like China, both here in the
United States and abroad.
To be clear, this is not about the Chinese people as a
whole or Chinese Americans, this is about a threat emanating
from the Chinese Communist Party, which controls the Chinese
government.
Finally, the strength of any organization is its people.
The threats we face as a Nation have never been greater or more
diverse, and the expectations on the FBI have never been
higher. Our fellow citizens look to the FBI to protect the
United States from all threats, and the people of the FBI
continue to meet and exceed those expectations every day. I
want to thank them for their dedicated service.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to the questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Murphy follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jill M. Murphy
May 23, 2023
Good morning, Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and
Members of the committee. Today, I am honored to be here, representing
the people of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (``FBI''), who tackle
some of the most complex and most grave threats we face every day with
perseverance, professionalism, and integrity. Sometimes at the greatest
of costs. I am extremely proud of their service and commitment to the
FBI's mission and to ensuring the safety and security of communities
throughout our Nation. On their behalf, I would like to express my
appreciation for the support you have given them in the past and ask
for your continued support in the future.
foreign intelligence threats
Top Threats
We see nations such as China, Russia, and Iran becoming more
aggressive and more capable in their nefarious activity than ever
before. These nations seek to undermine our core democratic, economic,
and scientific institutions. They employ a growing range of tactics to
advance their interests and to harm the United States. Defending
American institutions and values against these threats is a national
security imperative and a priority for the FBI.
With that, the greatest long-term threat to our Nation's ideas,
innovation, and economic security is the foreign intelligence and
economic espionage threat from China. It's a threat to our economic
security--and by extension--to our national security. The Chinese
government aspires to equal or surpass the United States as a global
superpower and influence the world with a value system shaped by
undemocratic authoritarian ideals. The pursuit of these goals is often
with little regard for international norms and laws.
When it comes to economic espionage, the PRC uses every means at
its disposal against us, blending cyber, human intelligence, diplomacy,
corporate transactions, and pressure on U.S. companies operating in
China, to achieve its strategic goals to steal our companies'
innovations. These efforts are consistent with China's expressed goal
to become a national power, modernizing its military and creating
innovative-driven economic growth.
To pursue this goal, China uses not only human intelligence
officers, co-optees, and corrupt corporate insiders, but also
sophisticated cyber intrusions, pressure on U.S. companies in China,
shell-game corporate transactions, and joint-venture ``partnerships''
that are anything but a true partnership. There's also nothing
traditional about the scale of their theft--it's unprecedented in the
history of the FBI. American workers and companies are facing a
greater, more complex danger than they've ever dealt with before.
Stolen innovation means stolen jobs, stolen opportunities for American
workers, stolen national power, and stolen leadership in the
industries.''
National Counterintelligence Task Force (``NCITF'')
As the lead U.S. counterintelligence agency, the FBI is responsible
for detecting and lawfully countering the actions of foreign
intelligence services and organizations as they seek to adversely
affect U.S. national interests. The FBI recognized the need to
coordinate similar efforts across all agencies, and therefore
established the National Counterintelligence Task Force (``NCITF'') to
create a whole-of-Government approach to counterintelligence. The FBI
established the national-level task force, or NCITF, in the National
Capital Region to coordinate, facilitate, and focus these multi-agency
counterintelligence operations, and to programmatically support local
Counterintelligence Task Force (``CITF'') operations. Combining the
authorities and operational capabilities of the U.S. intelligence
community; Federal, State, and local law enforcement; and local CITFs
in each FBI field office, the NCITF coordinates and leads whole-of-
Government efforts to defeat hostile intelligence activities targeting
the United States.
Transnational Repression
In recent years, we have seen a rise in efforts by authoritarian
regimes to interfere with freedom of expression and punish dissidents
abroad. These acts of repression cross national borders, often reaching
into the United States. It's important to note countries like China,
Russia, and Iran, stalk, intimidate, and harass certain people in the
United States. This is called transnational repression.
Transnational repression can occur in different forms, from threats
against family members, to assaults and attempted kidnapping.
Governments use transnational repression tactics to silence the voices
of their citizens, U.S. residents, or non-citizens connected to the
home country. This sort of repressive behavior is antithetical to our
values as Americans. People from all over the world are drawn to the
United States by the promise of living in a free and open society--one
that adheres to the rule of law. To ensure that this promise remains a
reality, we must continue to use all of our tools to block
authoritarian regimes that seek to extend their tactics of repression
beyond their shores.
Foreign Malign Influence
Our Nation is confronting multifaceted foreign threats seeking to
both influence our national policies and public opinion, and cause harm
to our national dialog and debate. The FBI and our interagency partners
remain concerned about, and focused on, foreign malign influence
operations--which include subversive, undeclared, coercive, or criminal
actions used by foreign governments in their attempts to sway U.S.
voters' preferences and perspectives, shift U.S. policies, increase
discord in the United States, and undermine the American people's
confidence in our democratic institutions and processes.
Foreign malign influence is not a new problem, but the
interconnectedness of the modern world, combined with the anonymity of
the internet, have changed the nature of the threat and how the FBI and
its partners must address it. Foreign malign influence operations have
taken many forms and used many tactics over the years. Most widely
reported these days are attempts by adversaries--hoping to reach a wide
swath of Americans covertly from outside the United States--to amplify
existing stories on social media in an attempt to discredit U.S.
individuals and institutions.
The FBI is the lead Federal agency responsible for investigating
foreign malign influence threats. Several years ago, we established the
Foreign Influence Task Force (``FITF'') to identify and counteract
foreign malign influence operations targeting the United States. The
FITF is led by the Counterintelligence Division and comprises agents,
analysts, and professional staff from the Counterintelligence, Cyber,
Counterterrorism, and Criminal Investigative Divisions. It is
specifically charged with identifying and combating foreign malign
influence operations targeting democratic institutions and values
inside the United States. In all instances, the FITF strives to protect
democratic institutions, develop a common operating picture, raise
adversaries' costs, and reduce their overall asymmetric advantage.
The FITF brings the FBI's national security and traditional
criminal investigative expertise under one umbrella to prevent foreign
influence in our elections. This better enables us to frame the threat,
to identify connections across programs, to aggressively investigate as
appropriate, and--importantly--to be more agile. Coordinating closely
with our partners and leveraging relationships we have developed in the
technology sector, we had several instances where we were able to
quickly relay threat indicators that those companies used to take swift
action, blocking budding abuse of their platforms.
Following the 2018 midterm elections, we reviewed the threat and
the effectiveness of our coordination and outreach. As a result of this
review, we further expanded the scope of the FITF. Previously, our
efforts to combat malign foreign influence focused solely on the threat
posed by Russia. Utilizing lessons learned since 2018, the FITF widened
its aperture to confront malign foreign operations of the PRC, Iran,
and other global adversaries. To address this expanding focus and wider
set of adversaries and influence efforts, we have also added resources
to maintain permanent ``surge'' capability on election and foreign
influence threats.
In addition, the domestic counterintelligence environment is more
complex than ever. This Nation faces a persistent and pervasive
national security threat from foreign adversaries, particularly Russia
and China, conducting sophisticated intelligence operations using
coercion, subversion, malign influence, disinformation, cyber and
economic espionage, traditional spying and non-traditional human
intelligence collection. Together, they pose a continuous threat to
U.S. national security and its economy by targeting strategic
technologies, industries, sectors, and critical infrastructures.
Historically, these asymmetric national security threats involved
foreign intelligence service officers seeking U.S. Government and U.S.
intelligence community information. The FBI has observed foreign
adversaries employing a wide range of nontraditional collection
techniques, including the use of human collectors not affiliated with
intelligence services, foreign investment in critical U.S. sectors, and
infiltration of U.S. supply chains. The FBI continues to adjust its CI
priorities and posture to address the evolving and multifaceted threat.
conclusion
Finally, the strength of any organization is its people. The
threats we face as a Nation have never been greater or more diverse and
the expectations placed on the FBI have never been higher. Our fellow
citizens look to the FBI to protect the United States from all threats,
and the people of the FBI continue to meet and exceed those
expectations, every day. I want to thank them for their dedicated
service.
Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today. I am
happy to answer any questions you might have.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Ms. Murphy.
The Chair now recognizes for his opening statement, Mr.
Kahangama.

STATEMENT OF IRANGA KAHANGAMA, ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR CYBER,
INFRASTRUCTURE, RISK AND RESILIENCE, OFFICE OF STRATEGY,
POLICY, AND PLANS, DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Kahangama. Thank you, Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member
Magaziner, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank
you for inviting me here today to testify about threats and
vulnerabilities to the homeland posed by the People's Republic
of China. The Department of Homeland Security shares your
concerns and looks forward to working with you to address these
pressing challenges. The Department is on the front lines of
countering these threats and takes this mission seriously and
with the highest attention.
Today, I will talk to you about the multi-pronged approach
this Department is taking to address our vulnerabilities in the
homeland and perhaps even more importantly, how we are making
our country more resilient.
As the administration's National Security Strategy states
and the National Cybersecurity Strategy reiterates, the PRC is
our only competitor with both the intent to reshape the
international order and, increasingly, the economic,
diplomatic, military, and technological power to do so. In
cyber space our interconnectedness and the technology that
enables it exposes us to a dynamic and evolving threat that
Beijing actively exploits, one that is not contained by borders
or centralized actors. The PRC also routinely engages in
transnational repression, using illegal tactics to surveil,
threaten, and harass targets both in person and digitally
around the globe. Such attempts circumvent established means of
law enforcement cooperation and directly violate our
sovereignty. It highlights that the PRC often lacks a legal
basis for pursuing such targets.
On economic security, the PRC abuses legal avenues such as
foreign investment and international trade, to exploit our open
rules-based system in pursuit of a zero-sum approach to global
competition. This approach seeks to undermine American
leadership, security, prosperity, and competitiveness.
DHS is unwavering in its commitment to countering the PRC's
whole-of-government threat by providing a whole-of--whole-of-
homeland response, whether in cyber space, in defense of our
critical infrastructure, our economic security, or preventing
the assault on democratic values and freedoms.
As Secretary Mayorkas made clear when recently directing
DHS to engage in a 90-day sprint on the PRC threat, Beijing
poses an especially grave threat to the homeland, one that
touches all of our Department's missions. We must ensure that
we are poised to guard against this threat not only today, but
well into the future. We defend against threats to cyber space
and our critical infrastructure through the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency. CISA works to shine a light on
the tactics, techniques, and procedures the PRC uses against
our vulnerable systems, frequently in concert with inter-agency
and international partners.
The private sector, who own and operate most of the
critical infrastructure in this country, are also essential
partners in our collective efforts against PRC threats. CISA
established the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative to bring
together State, local, Tribal, and territorial partners with
private-sector partners to conduct real-time information
sharing.
Our law enforcement components--Secret Service, Homeland
Security Investigations, and Customs and Border Protection--
work with partners to counter PRC intellectual property theft,
goods made by forced labor, and instances of transnational
repression. The Coast Guard is actively ensuring the security
of our ports and maritime sector, including from equipment made
by PRC state-owned enterprises. The Transportation Security
Administration is also on the front lines of securing our
various transportation nodes, be they surface or air.
In addition to addressing these very real homeland security
concerns, the Department also recognizes that these are threats
posed by the PRC government and not the people of China or of
Chinese origin. The Department condemns all forms of anti-Asian
hate and discrimination, and actively works with these
communities to ensure their protection. This is particularly
relevant as I sit here before you today during Asian American,
Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islander Heritage Month.
Chairman Pfluger, by holding this hearing today, it is
clear to this subcommittee that the subcommittee takes
seriously the threat to the homeland posed by the PRC. DHS
knows that we are not alone in this challenge, and we thank you
for your commitment.
I thank you again for the opportunity to testify today and
look forward to taking your questions.
Thank you.
[The joint prepared statement of Mr. Kahangama and Mr.
Durham follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Iranga Kahangama and Tyrone Durham
May 23, 2023
Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to discuss
critical work the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is doing to
combat the wide and multifaceted threat posed by the People's Republic
of China (PRC). As the administration's National Security Strategy
states, and the National Cybersecurity Strategy reiterates, the PRC is
our only competitor with both the intent to reshape the international
order and, increasingly, the economic, diplomatic, military, and
technological power to do it. Consistent with this strategy and its
pillar to invest in our strengths at home, DHS is leading efforts
domestically to counter PRC threats to the homeland. We do this day in
and day out with international, interagency, and private-sector
partners.
We must match our adversaries' determination through a whole-of-
Government response, with DHS playing a leading role on the front lines
of that defense every day. Whether it is our work securing systems in
cyber space, investigating acts of transnational repression and
transnational cyber crime, ensuring goods made from forced labor are
not entering the country, or scrutinizing investments made in our
companies and critical infrastructure, we take this mission seriously
and with the highest attention.
intelligence assessment and responsibilities
The PRC operates globally, using all instruments of national power
to target the United States, and has a broad range of sophisticated
intelligence capabilities. It continues to employ both overt and
clandestine methods to undercut U.S. national security and economic
security interests, such as stealing advanced and sensitive
technologies using traditional and non-traditional collectors,
amplifying narratives that sow doubt in U.S. institutions, and
messaging against U.S. politicians it deems hostile. It also uses
sister-city agreements, and other seemingly benign economic and
cultural outreach to foster exploitable relationships, exert influence,
and strengthen its foothold in the homeland. Recently, the PRC set up
so-called ``police stations'' on U.S. soil to intimidate dissidents and
other perceived adversaries.
Our homeland faces an array of complex threats from the PRC. In
cyber space, our interconnectedness and the technology that enables it
exposes us to a dynamic and evolving threat environment that Beijing
actively exploits, one that is not contained by borders or limited to
centralized actors. The PRC also routinely bypasses law enforcement
cooperation and extradition procedures and instead engages in
transnational repression by using illegal tactics to surveil, threaten,
and harass targets, both in person and digitally, around the globe.
These activities directly violate the sovereignty of the host country
and highlight that the PRC often lacks a legal basis for pursuing such
targets. On economic security, the PRC abuses foreign investment and
international trade by using illicit means to exploit this rules-based
multilateral trading system in pursuit of a zero-sum approach to global
competition that seeks to undermine American global leadership,
national security, prosperity, and competitiveness.
DHS's Office of Intelligence and Analysis (I&A) is increasing
intelligence collection and reporting on a wide range of potential
threats and issues that the PRC poses to the United States, including
threats within cybersecurity, counterintelligence, and transnational
repression in the United States. This intelligence assists our partners
in recognizing this activity, contributing to increased awareness of
these threats by stakeholders who may be best positioned to identify
and mitigate the activities first-hand. I&A also produces strategic
intelligence on threats to U.S. economic competitiveness, including
intellectual property theft, supply chain threats, potentially harmful
foreign investments, and illicit trade.
cybersecurity
The PRC poses a highly advanced cyber threat to the homeland. It
continues to leverage increasingly sophisticated, large-scale cyber
espionage operations against the U.S. Government and a range of
industries, organizations, and dissidents in the United States. The PRC
uses cyber means to illicitly obtain U.S. intellectual property,
personally identifiable information, and export-controlled information.
PRC-backed malicious hackers, including those within the People's
Liberation Army and the Ministry of State Security, are among the most
active groups targeting governments and critical infrastructure, and
the most active group targeting businesses around the globe. One PRC
malicious hacking group, known as Advanced Persistent Threat 41, or
APT41, has stolen intellectual property from at least 30 multinational
companies in the pharmaceutical, energy, and manufacturing sectors,
resulting in hundreds of billions of dollars of lost revenue. In
addition to numerous state-affiliated APT groups, the PRC leverages a
wide-ranging framework of laws to require all organizations operating
in China--including joint ventures with foreign companies--to aid the
regime in national intelligence efforts, with the obstruction of such
efforts punishable under criminal law. This includes mandatory
disclosure laws to compel organizations to report zero-day
vulnerabilities, potentially leading to their exploitation before
patching, and may punish companies when they do not comply.
To meet this challenge, the DHS Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency (CISA) publishes a variety of products to support
organizations. Advisories, Alerts, and Malware Analysis Reports--
frequently released in conjunction with other agencies and increasingly
other countries--provide technical details on tactics, techniques, and
procedures used by PRC state-sponsored cyber actors. For example, in
October 2022, CISA, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and the
National Security Agency (NSA) released a joint-seal advisory outlining
the top Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures used by the PRC since
2020. To mitigate against these types of threats, in October 2022, the
Department released the Cybersecurity Performance Goals (CPGs),
voluntary practices that outline the highest-priority baseline measures
businesses and critical infrastructure owners of all sizes can take to
protect themselves from malicious state actors and improve their
overall defensive posture.
In the wake of PRC-affiliated APT Hafnium conducting broad
exploitation of Microsoft Exchange Servers in 2021, CISA led asset
response and mitigation efforts as part of the Cyber Unified
Coordination Group that was stood up to combat this activity. Not only
did CISA publish guidance to mitigate the group, but it also worked
hand-in-hand with interagency partners and industry to ensure broad-
based awareness and mitigation.
Public-private partnerships are another critical tool DHS uses to
counter cyber threats and improve collective cybersecurity resilience.
The DHS-led Cyber Safety Review Board (CSRB), a group made up of
leading cyber experts in the public and private sectors, raised
concerns about the PRC's mandatory vulnerability disclosure laws in the
context of its review of the log4j vulnerability. Not only did the
Board raise concerns about this law potentially affording the PRC an
exclusive window to take advantage of these vulnerabilities, it also
noted possible sanctions placed on a company in the PRC for responsibly
reporting a vulnerability to the wider cybersecurity community.
Likewise, CISA established the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative
(JCDC) in August 2021, which represents an evolution of the Federal
Government's approach to operational collaboration and public-private
partnerships. The JCDC is comprised of members of the interagency,
private industry, and State, local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT)
representatives to engage as co-equal partners in real-time and
persistent collaboration for operational outcomes. For example, in
February 2022, a JCDC private-sector member leveraged the
Collaborative's operational relationships to alert two foreign
governments that they were targets of novel PRC malware called Daxin.
CISA was able to connect the Government and the private-sector company
to assist in remediation in less than 48 hours, thanks to the strong
public-private relationships of the JCDC.
DHS is also working closely with SLTT and interagency partners to
improve our cybersecurity posture and protect our critical
infrastructure. In July 2021, DHS launched StopRansomware.gov with the
Department of Justice and other Federal partners--the first whole-of-
Government website that pools Federal resources to combat ransomware
and helps private and public organizations of all sizes. In September
2022, CISA and the FBI built on this effort to launch the Joint
Ransomware Task Force (JRTF) to coordinate a whole-of-Government effort
to combat the threat of ransomware. In September 2022, the Department
announced the State and Local Cybersecurity Grant Program (SLCGP) to
help SLTT partners address cybersecurity risks and cybersecurity
threats to information systems. In fiscal year 2022, $185 million was
made available under the SLCGP, with varying funding amounts allocated
over 4 years from the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.
Internationally, DHS is creating enduring partnerships with
partners on cybersecurity, law enforcement, research and development,
emergency management, and resilience. This includes the Secretary's
participation in Singapore Cyber Week in October 2022, where he
highlighted the risks of PRC-affiliated technology, and the signing a
memorandum of cooperation on cybersecurity with Japan in January 2023.
This agreement will allow Japanese agencies to strengthen operational
collaboration with DHS, enhance the security of critical
infrastructure, foster more opportunities for partnership, and continue
sharing best practices with our Indo-Pacific partners. These alliances
not only aid in countering malicious cyber activity from foreign
adversaries, but also criminals who operate globally. For example, in
January 2023, the FBI and the U.S. Secret Service, along with critical
cooperation from international partners in Germany, the Netherlands,
and Europol, were collectively able to dismantle the Hive ransomware
group--a criminal operation that targeted more than 1,500 victims,
including hospitals, schools, and critical infrastructure, across the
globe.
intellectual property rights (ipr) theft
America's global leadership is underpinned by a fair, open, and
competitive economy that cultivates opportunities and innovation at
home and abroad. For too long, the PRC has exploited the rules-based
multilateral trading system in pursuit of a zero-sum approach to global
competition while seeking to undermine American global leadership,
national security, prosperity, and competitiveness. DHS plays an active
role in securing the U.S. economy and its supply chains from PRC-
related threats, through its various investigative authorities. DHS
will continue to lead these efforts across our component missions to
identify and mitigate foreign direct investment and surveillance risk
while preserving the American-led order and ensuring fair and open
global trade.
DHS works closely with interagency partners across several venues
dedicated to protecting our national security and economic security,
both operationally and in the on-going development of national policy.
We participate in robust, risk-based screening of inbound foreign
direct investment via the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United
States (CFIUS); advise the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) on
the national security implications of foreign entities seeking U.S.
licenses to operate communications critical infrastructure via the
Committee for the Assessment of Foreign Participation in the U.S.
Telecommunications Services Sector (known as Team Telecom); support the
Commerce Department in exercising its authorities to assess broad risks
to the information and communications technology supply chain from
foreign adversaries; and lead the U.S. Government's response to stop
global IP theft and enforce trade laws via U.S. Immigration and Customs
Enforcement's Homeland Security Investigations (HSI)-led National
Intellectual Property Rights Coordination Center (IPR Center). These
efforts derive their strength from the interagency approach, which
brings together all relevant U.S. Government expertise on various
technologies, industry sectors, and mission equities. DHS ensures these
collaborative efforts benefit from our unique cybersecurity, critical
infrastructure, and border security expertise.
For example, the United States has implemented carefully tailored
restrictions on the most advanced semiconductor technology exports to
China that are premised on national security concerns. HSI is expanding
its efforts to counter the illicit acquisition of American
microelectronics and other strategically important technology. These
efforts include supporting the newly-established Disruptive Technology
Strike Force.
The Department has leveraged its authority within these interagency
bodies to take significant steps to protect U.S. national and economic
security from malign PRC activity. On October 26, 2021, the FCC revoked
and terminated China Telecom America's (CTA) domestic and international
Section 214 licenses in response to a joint recommendation from DHS and
the Departments of Justice and Defense in their capacity as members of
Team Telecom. This terminated CTA's ability to provide domestic and
international telecommunications services within the United States. In
addition to actions taken against PRC entities' ability to offer
telecommunications services in the United States, the Department
continues to leverage Team Telecom to address national security threats
posed by the deployment of equipment from PRC vendors on critical
telecommunications infrastructure, such as subsea fiber optic cables
that carry most international communications traffic.
forced labor
The PRC's use of government-sponsored forced labor constitutes an
economic threat against the United States and our international
partners and undermines legitimate trade. In recent years, the PRC
carried out what the United States has rightly characterized as a
campaign of genocide against the predominantly Muslim Uyghurs and other
members of ethnic and religious minority groups in the Xinjiang Uyghur
Autonomous Region (Xinjiang) of western China.
The United States has long recognized the PRC's campaign
constitutes a state-sponsored system of repression of these ethnic
groups, and goods mined, produced, or manufactured, wholly or in part,
with forced labor are unfairly traded goods that undermine the rule of
law and threaten the economic security of legitimate businesses and
their workers.
DHS has powerful tools in Section 307 of the Tariff Act of 1930 and
the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act of 2021 to prohibit the
importation of goods made in whole or in part with forced labor. U.S.
Customs and Border Protection is responsible for enforcing these laws,
including by identifying and reviewing high-risk shipments, and
detaining, excluding, or seizing and destroying merchandise determined
to violate any forced labor prohibitions.
In its role as the Chair of the Forced Labor Enforcement Task
Force, DHS leads the implementation and enforcement of these laws,
while collectively leveraging the authorities and expertise of our
sister agencies, including the Departments of State, Labor, Commerce,
Justice, and Treasury, and the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative
to develop initiatives that can support and enhance compliance.
transnational repression
The PRC threat is not limited to the economic or cyber domain.
Operation Fox Hunt, a PRC government effort through which Beijing
targets and seeks to repatriate and prosecute PRC individuals living in
foreign countries whom the PRC alleges are guilty of corruption and
should be returned to the PRC, has been used to target critics and
dissidents living around the globe. Another recent example of the PRC's
efforts to engage in acts of transnational repression is the PRC's
unlawful operation of ``overseas police service stations'' in more than
50 countries, including the United States.\1\ These acts no doubt
represent only the tip of the iceberg of the PRC's transnational
repression efforts in this country.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Safeguard Defenders September Report ``Patrol and
Persuade.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The PRC's repressive activities span far beyond U.S. borders and
involve efforts to manipulate the rules and mechanisms of international
law enforcement cooperation. Uyghur and other PRC diaspora communities
in the United States have highlighted the detrimental impacts of
politically-motivated INTERPOL red notices issued at the request of the
PRC government, which have resulted in the detention of community
members overseas. DHS and its interagency partners have worked together
over the last 2 years to strengthen the actions the U.S. Government is
able to take in support of the internal INTERPOL reforms to prevent
abuse of its critical tools for politically-motivated purposes.
Another important aspect of DHS's strategy to counter transnational
repression is its continuous engagement with targeted communities,
which helps us to better understand the scope of the threat and respond
appropriately. The PRC diaspora--including Uyghurs, Tibetans, and Hong
Kongers--living in the United States often faces virtual harassment,
threats, and attacks, including on social media platforms.
Significantly, their family members in the PRC may face retaliation
such as exit bans, loss of employment, and detention. DHS is working
with members of affected communities to share information on Federal
resources available to support nationals in the United States and to
support those seeking refuge in the United States.
At the Summit for Democracy in March, Secretary Mayorkas outlined
new initiatives to counter the misuse of technology against communities
who are at heightened risk of cyber threat targeting and transnational
repression. CISA's High-Risk Community Protection Initiative, which is
resourced by the JCDC, will focus initially on engaging civil society
organizations to listen and learn about the cybersecurity threats they
are facing, find out what support is most needed, identify positive
work to amplify, and then work through the JCDC and with partners to
fill cybersecurity gaps. Additionally, CISA, in coordination with the
State Department, will cohost a Strategic Dialogue on Cybersecurity of
Civil Society Under Threat of Transnational Repression with the United
Kingdom. At this dialog, DHS will work with international partners from
Australia, Canada, Denmark, Estonia, France, Japan, New Zealand,
Norway, and the United Kingdom to improve the cybersecurity of civil
society organizations, engage in information sharing on the threats
facing high-risk communities, and identify opportunities for greater
collaboration around the world.
conclusion
In summary, the PRC poses a range of threats across different
vectors to the United States and our homeland. However, DHS remains
clear-eyed in our understanding of these multifaceted challenges and
continues to proactively undertake efforts to mitigate risks to our
Nation's security and our democratic way of life. We remain unwavering
in our commitment to counter the PRC's whole-of-Government threat by
providing a whole-of-homeland response, whether in cyber space, in the
defense of critical infrastructure, our economic security, or in
preventing the assault on democratic values and freedoms.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today and we
look forward to taking your questions.

Chairman Pfluger. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes for his opening statement Mr.
Durham.

STATEMENT OF TYRONE DURHAM, ACTING DIRECTOR, NATION STATE
THREATS CENTER, OFFICE OF INTELLIGENCE AND ANALYSIS, DEPARTMENT
OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Durham. Thank you. Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member
Magaziner, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today where my
testimony will provide an overview of the complex threat to the
homeland from the government of the People's Republic of China.
Let me be clear about the intent of my opening statement
and testimony. At no time should anything I communicate be
taken as aspersions against the people of China or against any
Chinese or other Asian Americans in the United States. My
comments and testimony pertains solely to the actions,
policies, practices, and procedures of the Chinese government.
The increasingly aggressive activities of the PRC represent
significant threats to the homeland as the PRC continues to
challenge the United States by using a whole-of-government
approach to undercut our competitiveness and democracy. The PRC
uses an innovative combination of traditional and
nontraditional intelligence tradecraft, cyber espionage, and
predatory economic methods to gain illicit access to U.S.
critical infrastructure and steal American innovation, along
with research, technology, and other intellectual property. The
PRC exploits our academic and scientific communities by
compelling some foreign students, scholars, and researchers to
identify and collect sensitive information and research. It
also uses talent recruitment programs to acquire the technical
know-how to exploit the information at it stole.
The PRC's top-tier cyber espionage and attack capabilities
represent significant on-going threats to the U.S. public and
private-sector interests. The PRC uses cyber means to illicitly
obtain U.S. intellectual property, personally-identifiable
information, and export controlled information. Their push to
develop their own industrial base and to secure access to
critical supply chains for manufacturing, research, and social
stability likely includes investments in the United States
using subversion to gain access to new technologies,
businesses, and research institutions. PRC firms also engage in
various licit and illicit investment strategies to acquire real
estate and other assets and gain proximate access to targets in
the homeland for malign purposes. Moreover, through its
National Security Law, the PRC could compel organizations and
citizens to comply with state intelligence efforts, thereby
expanding its whole-of-government effort to a whole-of-society
effort targeting the homeland.
To meet these challenges, DHS remains committed to sharing
information with our partners to mitigate threats to the
homeland. The Office of Intelligence and Analysis placed
intelligence officers locally in every fusion center across the
Nation to share information related to intelligence threats
from the PRC and other foreign adversaries. The Department
works closely with Homeland Security advisors and the private
sector in every State and territory to increase the resiliency
and preparedness of our communities.
Thank you again for the opportunity to appear before you,
and I look forward to your questions.
Chairman Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Durham.
Members will now be recognized in order of seniority for
their 5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of
questioning may be called after all Members have been
recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I appreciate all of your testimonies, the seriousness with
which you take this threat. I do want to highlight that last
month, the FBI made two arrests related to the secret Chinese
police station operating in New York City and charged dozens
more as part of a larger PRC effort to locate in America pro-
democracy Chinese activists and others who are openly critical
of Beijing's policies and to suppress their speech. On the 24th
of April, Chairman Green and myself sent a letter to both DHS
and to the FBI requesting additional information about this
police station. It has now been over 2 weeks past that deadline
that we asked for, so I would ask you, please, to respond to
that letter in writing and to highlight that. It is very
important that we understand what has happened, but this
Manhattan-based police station was operating as a provincial
branch for the Ministry of Public Security, which belongs to
the Commerce Indie list for its implication in human rights
violations.
My question, and we will start with Ms. Murphy, is how was
the station associated with such a nefarious organization? How
did it pop up in New York City?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you for the question, sir, and I'm happy
to work with the team so we can get you a more fulsome
response, probably in a Classified setting.
As you know and as you remarked in your opening statement,
the threat from China is complex and vast. The way that they
work in the United States, and I imagine in other countries who
are seeing similar threats from the Communist government of
China, is very diversified and layered. So when we talk about
universities or researchers or academics or innovation, China
proliferates all those spaces to include in our communities
where Chinese Americans live, as a way to influence those
communities. We work actively to identify those and investigate
them.
Chairman Pfluger. Would you say that they are using every
available tactic, technique, and procedure to infiltrate
American national security interest and interest writ large?
Ms. Murphy. I would say that their attack surface is large.
Chairman Pfluger. OK.
Ms. Murphy. They are using all the tools in their toolbox
to gather information, whether it's Classified, intellectual
property, sensitive, un-Classified, anything that they consider
of value.
Chairman Pfluger. OK. We will follow up on that a little
bit later.
I would like to go to the well-documented approach that
they have used to acquiring either critical minerals, critical
industries, farmland, ranch land, some of them near military
sites, especially sensitive military sites.
Mr. Kahangama, can you comment on the acquisition of this
farmland? Has DHS or FBI overlaid the flight path of that
Chinese spy balloon that came over the United States several
months ago with acquisition, acquired land, and anything else
that would be of note?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank for the question, Chairman. I would
defer some of those questions to our intelligence colleagues
about specifics about what happened. But what I can mention is
that we do feel that we have tools to address these types of
concerns.
First, to your point about land acquisitions, I think
thanks to Congress as well, real estate purchases are now
included as within the purview of what we call CFIUS, the
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States. So we do
have an ability to look at land purchases when they have a
nexus specifically to military sites or what would be airports
or seaports, and conduct a risk assessment if a foreign
purchase of that is subject to foreign control. So we do feel
that we have some tools against that.
With the balloon specifically, DHS's CISA did track the
flight path of the balloon and critical infrastructure nodes
that were associated with it. I believe CISA conducted about 27
notifications and outreach to State and local and critical
infrastructure entities to help them understand and mitigate
against the risk.
Chairman Pfluger. Did it appear that the overflight path
was actually over acquisitions by CCP-related entities?
Mr. Kahangama. I don't have the information, but I deferred
to my intelligence colleagues.
Chairman Pfluger. OK. I will do a follow-up here for Mr.
Durham.
We have heard about the variety of threats and what Mr.
Kahangama just talked about with the land acquisitions. Could
you speak to the threats of CCP-owned agricultural operations
and the effect that has on our supply chains and our Nation's
food security?
Mr. Durham. Thank you, Chairman, for that question.
I think one of the things we know about the CCP is that
their actions and activities are strategic and long-term. We've
taken a specific set of individuals in the organization and
built a team around PRC activities to better understand exactly
what they're doing in terms of their agricultural purchases and
such. We believe we have information that we could provide to
you in a Classified setting to better elucidate their
activities.
Chairman Pfluger. Thank you. My time has expired. We have
multiple requests out to both of your agencies for those
Classified briefings, and we expect those to be filled.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Magaziner, for his
line of questioning.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman.
There is a lot we could touch on here, but I want to focus
my initial questions on the issue of IP theft.
There is obviously a national security imperative that we
protect the intellectual property and trade secrets of our
defense industry and related industries. But there is also an
economic imperative that we protect American companies and
American jobs from intellectual property theft. When an
American manufacturer or an American agricultural firm has
their intellectual property stolen, that ultimately costs
American jobs.
So I will start with Mr. Kahangama. The 2023 Quadrennial
Homeland Security Review warns that the CCP is seeking to
acquire our intellectual property and sponsoring a relentless
barrage of cyber attacks that threaten our competitiveness. Can
you describe for us how DHS is working with industry partners
and other Federal agencies to shore up our vulnerabilities and
guard against the theft of intellectual property?
Mr. Kahangama. Absolutely. Thank you for that question,
Ranking Member.
This is an utmost priority for the Department. A lot of our
efforts are led through the Homeland Security Investigations
Intellectual Property Rights Center, the IPR Center, and that
is an inter-agency collaboration center where we are able to
have industry come in, provide them threat briefings, conduct
information sharing, and otherwise provide specific threat
information to some of these targeted entities.
I think the cybersecurity angle is very important as well.
Our Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency is
actively working on addressing specific PRC cyber threats
because the best indicator of what is going to be stolen is
what's already been exploited. So we've done things like
publish lists of known vulnerabilities that the PRC has already
exploited and pushed that information out so that industries,
sensitive technology holders, and others can patch those holes
and otherwise protect themselves. We've also conducted a wide
array of briefings, both Classified and un-Classified, to share
this threat with them and continue to engage in real-time
information sharing.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you.
I will ask a similar question to Ms. Murphy. Can you talk
about what the FBI is doing, again with other Federal agencies
and with private-sector partners to help protect American
intellectual property and in so doing, protect American jobs?
Ms. Murphy. Absolutely. This is a top priority for me and
for the FBI. There's a lot of obviously nuance to this threat
and different layers. So let's start with the innovation in
emerging tech society. We've learned through interactions that
venture capitalists are the best at identifying the tech that
is going to actually succeed because their money depends upon
it. So we've done extensive outreach, especially in the San
Francisco area, with venture capitalists to try and identify
what that tech is, to help protect that. But we also know
through our outreach that smaller entrepreneurs don't have the
money to invest in protecting their intellectual property or in
cybersecurity. So we've done a lot of outreach in that space to
try and educate people about intellectual property, and those
efforts are on-going.
When we talk about delivering uncompromised technology to
our war fighters, when there's a place like AFWERX or AFC
that's doing outreach to the emerging tech space, we work
closely with them to try and protect the technologies that
they're bringing in from principal research all the way through
into Classified space and their labs.
So it's a space that we're very focused on and we're doing
a lot of outreach on. I think that will continue and grow.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you.
Just one more question on this topic for any of you. If
there are people watching this hearing from home who may own a
business or run a business or run a local utility or other
piece of critical infrastructure, what can you do for them?
Like, what are the resources for the people who are watching at
home, who want to know what their vulnerabilities are, who want
to know how to protect themselves? Can they reach out to DHS,
can they reach out to the FBI? What services can you offer to
help them protect themselves?
Ms. Murphy. I think both agencies--I'll pass it over to
Iranga, but I think both agencies offer different tools to help
depending on the range of what they're looking at, whether it's
from cybersecurity, educational, protecting intellectual
property, insider threat. I think both agencies have tools, and
I would encourage them to reach out.
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you. If I could just follow up CISA,
specifically at CISA.gov, their website has actual free
services that cost nothing that small and medium businesses can
download and utilize to effectively scan their systems and
understand the threat picture. They can also reach out to CISA
for a little bit more specific and in-depth vulnerability
assessments, but there are a number of free tools on our
website.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you.
For those watching at home, CISA is the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency, C-I-S-A. So we encourage
everybody to take advantage of those services.
I yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina
and the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Murphy, a good bit of your testimony focuses on--I know
this hearing subject matter is the threats from China, and some
of those are covered, but a lot of your written testimony
focuses on the FBI's Foreign Influence Task Force that comes
under the Counterintelligence Division that you are the deputy
director of, correct?
Ms. Murphy. There's three deputy assistant directors in the
counterintelligence division. The Foreign Influence Task Force
actually falls under a different deputy assistant director, but
it is in the Counterintelligence Division.
Mr. Bishop. But in the division. OK. Has the Foreign
Influence Task Force changed its practices any as a result of
the revelations from the Twitter files or from the litigation
undertaken by the Attorneys General for Louisiana and Missouri?
Ms. Murphy. So, sir, I would have to take that question
back to the team and get you an answer. I'm not aware of their
processes or any changes that they've made.
Mr. Bishop. Are you familiar with the work of that--and you
have read the Twitter files, I assume?
Ms. Murphy. I have not.
Mr. Bishop. You have not read any of it?
Ms. Murphy. No.
Mr. Bishop. Interesting. Are you aware that the FBI
regularly meets or met before the 2020 election with the social
media platforms?
Ms. Murphy. I saw the media reporting on that.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Are they still meeting in the same way with
the social media platforms?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I would have to take that question back. I
personally am not meeting with the social media companies in my
role.
Mr. Bishop. OK, and you receive no reporting and you are
otherwise unfamiliar internally with the activities of the
Foreign Influence Task Force insofar as their interactions and
engagement with social media platforms is concerned?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir. That's not part of my role or my
purview and my job.
Mr. Bishop. I see.
Let me ask this question. One of the, perhaps the most
effective operation by the counter foreign malign influence
operation by the FBI in the 2020 election was convincing social
media not to--or to suppress the Hunter Biden laptop story by
preparing them to be on the lookout for hack-and-dump
operations. Did the FBI know at that time the content of the
Hunter Biden laptop, which it had in its possession by means of
a subpoena?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I don't know the answer to that. I'd have
to respectfully refer you to the attorney that's prosecuting
that case.
Mr. Bishop. Who are the other deputy directors in addition
to yourself in the Counterintelligence Division?
Ms. Murphy. Scott Grady is the deputy director of
Intelligence. Right now, we have an acting director, Roman
Roznosky, over Russia and other countries.
Mr. Bishop. Which one supervises the Foreign Influence Task
Force?
Ms. Murphy. Scott Grady.
Mr. Bishop. You have written about foreign malign influence
in your testimony. In fact, of the testimony, which is only
about 3\1/2\ pages, a full page of it is about foreign malign
influence. Actually, page-and-a-half. What do you know
personally about the FBI's actions against foreign malign
influence?
Ms. Murphy. In those instances, sir, it would be things
like the police station and the Chinese influence in the United
States against Chinese Americans living here or Chinese persons
being in the United States that they're trying to repress or
take back.
Mr. Bishop. What about the portion that--see if I can find
something here. What about this part, you said, coordinating
closely with our partners and leveraging relationships we have
developed in the technology sector, we had several instances
where we were able to quickly relay threat indicators that
those companies, speaking of social media companies, used to
take swift action blocking budding abuse of their platforms.
What do you know about that?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, that might be a reference to our work with
forum partners.
Mr. Bishop. Well, this is in your written testimony before
the committee.
Let me give you a fuller context. It says the FITF brings
the FBI's national security and traditional criminal
investigative expertise under one umbrella to prevent foreign
influence in our elections. This better enables us to frame the
threat, to identify connections across programs, to
aggressively investigate as appropriate, and importantly, to be
more agile. Then you talked--and then that last sentence where
I read. So do you personally not have knowledge of that since
you don't actually deal with the FITF?
Ms. Murphy. As I stated, the Foreign Intelligence Task
Force falls under DAD Scott Grady. I've seen, as I mentioned,
the media reports. I know that there's engagements, but those
aren't part of my role and that's not something that I take
part of them.
Mr. Bishop. It is curious that it is included in your
testimony in that case.
I would ask you more, but I guess my time has expired, so I
will yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Goldman.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to our witnesses for being here today.
Mr. Durham, I appreciated very much you saying in your
opening statement that your comments are not directed at
Chinese Americans or AAPI individuals who are in this country,
but at the Chinese government. I have a district that is more
than 20 percent API, much of which is of Chinese descent and
the hateful rhetoric that has come from our former President
and others over the last several years has led to a record
increase in hate crime, especially against those of Chinese
descent.
I want to talk a little bit about the distinction that you
are drawing, which I think is an important one, particularly as
it relates to the so-called police stations that the Chinese
government has set up at various places around the world,
including in our country.
Ms. Murphy, I am sure you are aware, and the Chairman
referenced this case, the two arrests in my district of two
Chinese nationals for operating one of these police stations,
which, so everybody is clear, is really designed to track
Chinese dissidents or Chinese citizens in the United States
essentially as an unsanctioned police station, so to speak.
Now, I am assuming, Ms. Murphy, you are not going to be able to
speak much about that specific prosecution, but can you tell us
more broadly, taking a step out of that prosecution, what the
FBI understands about these police stations and the effort of
the Chinese government to intimidate and threaten Chinese,
either citizens or dissidents, who are living in this country?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you for the question.
As I think the committee is aware, China goes through great
lengths to control the narrative about the country of China.
This is a way that they use influence and intimidation tactics
against people that are in the United States that may have ties
to China or views about China that the Chinese government
doesn't agree with. So it doesn't just happen herein the United
States, it happens in other countries too. We work proactively
to identify and then investigate these instances, whether
they're identified as police stations or liaison bureaus. We
also work with foreign partners when we find information to
share with them and they share back with us.
Mr. Goldman. Can you describe some of the tactics that the
Chinese government uses?
Ms. Murphy. Sure. I think on the same day that the arrest
in New York happened, we also announced an indictment against
MPS for using a----
Mr. Goldman. I am sorry, what is MPS?
Ms. Murphy. The Ministry of Public Security. I think it's
probably better for a Classified session, but they use tactics
such as harassment, threatening relatives overseas, they can
act like they are the arm of the government here, they use, you
know, wide-ranging intimidation tactics.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Kahangama, I am not sure, or Mr. Durham, I
am not sure if either one of you is the specific DHS witness to
address this, but I wanted to ask a little bit about Chinese
governmental efforts to interfere in elections, both in this
country as well as others, including Canada. To the extent that
you can talk about this in an un-Classified setting, where do
things stand with those efforts as we are moving forward toward
2024?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Unfortunately, I will not be able to talk about that in
this session, but I'm more than willing to arrange a Classified
session for you with regard to that question.
Mr. Goldman. I am not surprised, but it is something I
think we are particularly concerned about. I know the Foreign
Influence Task Force, FITF, was created in part to address the
efforts of foreign entities to interfere in our elections and
to try to infiltrate our national security.
So I do hope that we are all of--you three and your
agencies are very much focused on this and making sure that our
election infrastructure is as strong as it can be.
My time is now up. So thank you for the time, and I yield
back.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr.
Crane.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the
panelists who have come here today to share your time.
Ms. Murphy, you work for the FBI, is that correct?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Ms. Murphy, do you know what elite capture is?
Ms. Murphy. Elite capture?
Mr. Crane. Yes, do you know what elite capture is?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir.
Mr. Crane. So, basically, elite capture is used by the CCP
as a form of political warfare that seeks to control the
actions of political, academic, business, and cultural leaders
outside of China to benefit the CCP. The means of control take
a variety of forms, including financial incentives, financial
dependence or compromised business entanglements, offers of
access to opportunities within China, ideological appeal, and
even blackmail. Are you familiar with these techniques, ma'am?
Ms. Murphy. I am familiar with those techniques.
Mr. Crane. Do you have experience with those techniques?
Seeing those techniques in your job?
Ms. Murphy. Experience in seeing the Chinese government use
those techniques?
Mr. Crane. Yes. Or any other nation-state that wants to
compromise U.S. officials?
Ms. Murphy. I don't know that I've seen them personally,
but I'm familiar with those techniques, yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. OK.
Ms. Murphy, are you aware that a Chinese spy balloon just
recently flew over the United States for about a week?
Ms. Murphy. I am.
Mr. Crane. Ms. Murphy, are you aware that the CCP is buying
up U.S. farmland near military bases?
Ms. Murphy. I've heard reports of that. I don't know what
evidence I've seen of it.
Mr. Crane. OK. Ms. Murphy, does it concern you some of the
revelations that have been coming out of the Oversight
Committee about the millions of dollars that have been paid to
the Biden family recently?
Ms. Murphy. I'm not aware of money being paid to the Biden
family.
Mr. Crane. Oh, you are not aware of that at all?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir.
Mr. Crane. That is interesting. You work for the FBI,
right?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir, I do. But I would respectfully refer
you to the investigators over that case. I'm sure we can get
you a brief on that. That is not a case that I handle.
Mr. Crane. Yes, well, I don't need a brief on that, ma'am,
to know that there are nation-states that have paid millions of
dollars to the Biden family. That is one of the reasons that we
are having this hearing, that is one of the reasons that
Americans are so concerned that they see Chinese spy balloons
flying over the United States for an entire week, that is why
they are so concerned that they see these Chinese police
stations being set up here, and they are wondering, how could
this go on, this doesn't make any sense. Yet the son of the
President of the United States is involved and entangled for
many years now in multiple business deals that the President
claims he knows nothing about. You, ma'am, you sit here before
the Homeland Security Committee--our job is to protect the
homeland, and you act as if you don't know anything about it.
Do you understand why the American people are concerned,
ma'am? Yes or no?
Ms. Murphy. I understand why American people should be
concerned about the threat from the Chinese Communist Party.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Do you see any connections with what I
talked about, when I was talking about elite capture? Are you
connecting the dots at all?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir.
Mr. Crane. You don't connect the dots? So your job is to
protect the American people. I just read you what elite capture
is, the summary, the definition of elite capture. Everybody
knows in this town what is going on, everybody knows what is
coming out of these committee hearings right now. It is pretty
sad coming from somebody who, as a young man, wanted to be a
part of your organization because of the reputation that men
and women from the FBI had built up over decades, and now the
American people hardly trust the FBI, they struggle with the
Department of Justice. Quite frankly, generally, they feel as
if you don't have the right politics, you can basically do
whatever you want. The American people, quite honestly, are
wondering why Hunter Biden is still walking the streets.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognizes the gentle lady from Texas, Ms.
Jackson Lee.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Chair and Ranking Member,
as always, for their courtesies.
Let me be as delicate as I can possibly be, and certainly
express my friendship to all of the Members on the other side
of the aisle, but I would offer to say that I have the highest
respect for the FBI as I have worked with the Bureau for over
28 years. I was here in the U.S. Congress after 9/11, during 9/
11, ran for my life from the United States Capitol, went to
Ground Zero during the recovery, watched the pain of
firefighters removing remains, and watched the intensive
investigation that was augmented by the work of the FBI.
We created the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, and I
could not be more proud of the work that the Department have
done. In particular, was key in stopping the potential attack
at the beginning--as a number of terrorist potential came in
after 9/11. We were still concerned about international
terrorism. We now know that, according to the FBI, the No. 1
terrorist act against all of us is domestic terrorism, as
evidenced by January 6.
I am very glad, Mr. Durham, that you made it very clear
that this hearing should not be about Chinese Americans.
Patriots, families, students, teachers, doctors, people in my
community of Houston, Texas, I want them to know that this
hearing--I could not sit in this hearing if this was an attack
on Asian Americans, Chinese Americans. We have seen the rise in
hatred. So, as I noticed that your position deals with nation-
state threats, let us be framed, particularly about what we are
doing herein. I have to respect my friend, but I haven't gotten
one question about Hunter Biden. I haven't seen any association
with Mr. Biden with the President of the United States of
America, short of the fact that as parents, we all have our
children and we love them.
So let me just ask, Ms. Murphy, you indicated you were
getting information, but right now you have not come here to
discuss Hunter Biden, is that correct?
Ms. Murphy. That is correct, ma'am.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Nor you are here to discuss the President
of the United States' connectedness to Hunter Biden other than
your recognition that it is his father?
Ms. Murphy. That's correct.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
Mr. Durham, and I have some questions I need to get to
quickly, but I just want to make sure, am I correct, as you
made your opening remarks, that this hearing--or you did not
come here to attack Chinese Americans who are patriots serving
in respective responsibilities across America in the Asian
American community?
Mr. Durham. That's correct, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You are not here to promote hate based
upon our responsibilities in national security?
Mr. Durham. That's correct, I am not.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
I just wanted to make sure that we were clear on the
responsibilities that we have here today.
Let me just say that as a Member, I have had the Chinese
from the government approach my staff. I have had them approach
me. I am the Congresswoman in the area where the Chinese
council had to be closed down, rightly so by the former
administration. We welcomed that. I am not a stranger, but I
recognize that we must discern in order to be intelligent.
Let me quickly say, in today's testimony, we have heard
extensively about the Chinese Communist Party's illicit use of
transnational repression against its own diaspora. Concerned
about that and the foreign malign influence campaigns directed
the people of the United States, tactics that are repressive,
coercive, and even criminal. What have we learned about these
operations and how do we intend to counter these disinformation
campaigns, protect our homeland, and prevent these attacks from
undermining our free market activities in our democratic
institutions?
Go at it, whichever one is going to answer first.
The last, how can we best prevent these activities from
disrupting our free market activities in our democratic
institutions?
Somebody should comment on the dangers of AI with respect
to the Chinese.
If you could start--you want the FBI to start, Ms. Murphy?
I will yield to Homeland Security. Thank you.
Mr. Kahangama.
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question.
So I think in the remaining time, one program I would like
to highlight is a recently-announced High-Risk Community
Protection Initiative from our Cybersecurity Infrastructure
Security Agency. So it's engaging diaspora, civil society
groups, and communities in the United States, understanding the
threats and then offering them cybersecurity services,
including from things like spyware that may be leveraged to
otherwise undermine them in this country.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Durham----
Chairman Pfluger. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Should he answer the question if my mouth
was moving? Mr. Durham, would you just give a word? The
Chairman is being very kind. He is a fellow Texan and I will
step back and thank him. I will step back.
Mr. Durham. Thank you, Congresswoman.
I say this about the PRC, they are very aggressive in their
activities and they will use every technique, tool, or
procedure within their toolbox to ensure that they accomplish
their goals. They will turn those tools against diaspora
communities as well. It is not uncommon for them to do it. We,
as my colleagues have just said, are working with those
communities to help them understand the threats.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you for your courtesy and Ranking
Member for your courtesy.
Chairman Pfluger. I thank the gentlelady. Her time has
expired.
The Chair will now move into a second round of questioning.
We have other Members who I know will be rejoining at a variety
of points.
The Chair now recognizes myself for an additional 5 minutes
of questioning.
I would like to enter into the record the letter that I
sent on the 17th April about the police station in New York and
the request for that.
So ordered.
[The information follows:]

Chairman Pfluger. Additionally, I would like to reiterate
from the Chair's perspective to reflect my opening statement
today and also in our previous hearing, the very first hearing
that we had on this topic, what many of my colleagues have
asserted, which is this has absolutely everything to do with
the malign influence of the Chinese Communist Party and not of
its people, and especially of those of any sort of Chinese
descent that may live here or in any other diaspora around the
world.
But I think it is fascinating to hear all three of you say
that every tactic, technique, and procedure, as Mr. Durham just
said, that they are very aggressive and every tool will be
used, which I think is why we are here.
I will get into some questions for Ms. Murphy.
Are you aware that in November 2018, DOJ's China Initiative
was established to address some of the most critical threats to
national security posed by the Chinese Communist Party and that
this initiative sought to raise awareness and to identify and
prosecute Chinese trade secret theft and economic espionage, as
well as to protect American critical infrastructure and supply
chains from covert influence?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir, I'm aware of that initiative.
Chairman Pfluger. Do you agree with the former Attorney
General that about 80 percent of all Federal economic espionage
prosecutions have alleged conduct that would benefit the
Chinese state and about 60 percent of all U.S. trade secret
theft cases have had a nexus to China?
Ms. Murphy. I can't confirm nor deny that, but that----
Chairman Pfluger. In general----
Ms. Murphy [continuing]. Wouldn't surprise me.
Chairman Pfluger. You were working in the department at
that time?
Ms. Murphy. At the FBI? Yes, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. Yes. OK. Do you agree in general that the
connections are vast?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, absolutely.
Chairman Pfluger. Do you agree with your boss, FBI Director
Wray, that the greatest long-term threat to our Nation's
information and intellectual property and to our economic
vitality is the counterintelligence and economic espionage
threat from China?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir, absolutely.
Chairman Pfluger. Is it true that the FBI launches a
counterintelligence case into China as often as once every 12
hours?
Ms. Murphy. I don't know the exact numbers, but we have a
lot of Chinese counterintelligence investigations. It's
probably about half of the work that we do in the
counterintelligence to Asia.
Chairman Pfluger. Well, half. About how many on-going
investigations would you say?
Ms. Murphy. I don't know that I can give you in a specific
number, but I'd say over 2,000.
Chairman Pfluger. Over 2,000?
Ms. Murphy. Yes sir.
Chairman Pfluger. Incredible.
Is it true that the director of National Security Agency
under President Obama, Keith Alexander, has called the Chinese
state theft of U.S. intellectual property the greatest transfer
of wealth in history?
Ms. Murphy. I think so, yes. I believe that's true.
Chairman Pfluger. Ms. Murphy, my question is this, as I
mentioned previously, you have mentioned that the CCP will use
any tactic, technique, procedure. Are they trying to influence
industry leaders, key government leaders, people that have
influence inside the United States?
Ms. Murphy. I can't think of a specific example off the top
of my head, but they definitely wield influence. I don't know
if there is----
Chairman Pfluger. Are they trying to influence certain
people that they can bring into harmonization with what the CCP
is trying to do to undermine our own national security? Is it
in their interest to gather people inside the United States,
whether they be government officials or industry leaders? As my
colleague from Texas just mentioned, you are the
Counterintelligence deputy director, so.
Ms. Murphy. No, I understand, but what I'm trying to think
through is they certainly try to influence innovation and get
into a space to take intellectual property.
Chairman Pfluger. So do they not try to influence people?
Ms. Murphy. No, they certainly try to influence. I'm just
trying to think through--so I would say Confucius Institute
would be one way that they try to influence people. They've
certainly used tactics to repress their own people.
Chairman Pfluger. Have they tried to garner favor so that
they can influence government leaders for their own benefits to
undermine U.S. national security? Would this be a tactic they
would do?
Ms. Murphy. I think that's probably a question for a closed
session, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. Ms. Murphy, I think that the American
people are having a hard time with the Department of Justice
right now because of answers to questions like this. This is
very simple. Ask a thousand people in our country this same
question and they are going to say of course they are trying to
do that. Do you have knowledge of this?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I think that's better for a closed
session.
Chairman Pfluger. I would like to remind the witnesses that
you are testifying under oath.
Ms. Murphy. I understand that.
Chairman Pfluger. Do you have awareness of the CCP trying
to use malign influence by gaining favor with government or
industry leaders in the United States?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I think we'd have to take that to a closed
session.
Chairman Pfluger. Well, I look forward to that. We have
multiple letters that we have sent to you that have gone
unresponded to, including something that was previously
discussed. I look forward to the Confucius Institute discussion
as well.
My time has expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Magaziner.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman.
I think we are touching on some important issues here. I
mean, foreign malign influence is a real threat, and it takes
many forms. It can take the form of trying to influence
individuals in key positions, it can also take the form of
trying to influence public opinion in a variety of ways. That
is why I believe it is entirely appropriate that in Ms.
Murphy's written testimony she highlighted the issue of foreign
aligned influence from the CCP. Let's be clear, here in this
country, we value the First Amendment, we value our individual
freedoms, but the First Amendment does not apply to foreign
governments trying to stoke division in our country, it does
not apply to foreign governments trying to influence individual
Americans, it doesn't apply to foreign governments at all, as a
matter of fact. Nor does it apply to anyone, foreign or
domestic, who is engaging in criminal activity, like plotting
acts of violence.
So it is absolutely appropriate and important that we
support the work of rooting out foreign malign influence that
is seeking to do things like influence public opinion in the
favor of the CCP or individuals.
My hope, again, is that this conversation can continue to
be a bipartisan one. I could certainly spend my whole 5 minutes
talking about the former President and his family's business
dealings in China, which are well-documented, but I think we
can all at least agree that whatever the political affiliation
is of our elected officials, hopefully in the future, people
will exercise better judgment in discretion in who they decide
to do business with and avoiding doing business with
individuals who may be aligned with governments that are
adversaries of the United States.
So, listen, at at a high level, that is why this work is so
important. We have to make sure that across agencies, we are
doing everything in our power to limit the ability of the CCP
to undermine our democratic values, to undermine our economy,
and to undermine our national security.
So with all of that being said, either Mr. Durham or Mr.
Kahangama, can you just give us a summary of what the 90-day
DHS sprint entails? What is the work that is being done at DHS
right now to escalate our ability to defend against the CCP
threat?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question. I'm happy to
answer it.
So, as was mentioned, the 90-day sprint involves a
concerted Department-wide focus on six key areas to counter the
threat from the PRC in the homeland. This includes countering
their pursuit of critical infrastructure, their economic
coercion, countering their role in fentanyl coming across our
border, securing our screening and vetting systems to make sure
they're able to identify those risks, countering the PRC's
movement and activities in the Arctic, and then making sure
we're maximizing our counterintelligence information sharing
against PRC-based counterintelligence threats.
I think what I'd like to emphasize is that these activities
are what the Secretary is using to focus the Department and to
elevate things that we've already been doing, make maximum and
efficient use, just like our State Department and CIA, and
others are centralizing their China and PRC-based activities.
It's to set a stronger foundation for longer-term activities to
counter these, it's part of an endeavor to work with inter-
agency partners and the private sector and really to infuse the
PRC into every aspect of our mission set, because we've come--
it's been made quite clear that the PRC threatens all aspects
of our mission, so reorienting and pivoting the Department to
that threat for long-term awareness is part of that campaign.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you.
I only have limited time left. I spent most of my first
round of questions focused on the issue of IP theft against
U.S. companies. Another persistent cyber threat from the CCP is
their attempts to infiltrate critical infrastructure,
particularly utilities. Can you just speak briefly about that
threat and about DHS's actions to mitigate it?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you.
I would say that the threat of PRC intrusions into our
critical infrastructure is the most pressing concern we would
have with regard to the PRC. Their potential ability to gain
access and hold our decision making at risk in light of a
conflict is of utmost concern. We are actively working to
ensure that we are engaged with critical infrastructure owners
to patch systems, to share information, to turn off systems
that are actively being exploited, and making sure that we take
a whole-of-Government approach, whether that involves working
with partners from DoD, the DOJ, Department of Commerce, and
others.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Ms. Murphy, does the FBI have any recommendations or
opinion about Members of Congress making use of TikTok?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I don't know that the FBI has an opinion
on Members of Congress using TikTok as an application. I think
you're probably aware that the FBI employees are not allowed to
put TikTok on their FBI-issued Government devices. And that we
only----
Mr. Bishop. Mm-hmm. Why is that?
Ms. Murphy. Because we are only allowed approved apps on
our Government device. I think that the committee is probably
aware of the threat that the FBI perceives from TikTok or a
nation-state like China having access to data to millions of
Americans.
Mr. Bishop. Would there be any reason to believe that that
threat would not also apply if Members of Congress are using
TikTok?
Ms. Murphy. No, there would be no reason not to think that
that wouldn't be a threat to Congress.
Mr. Bishop. Ms. Murphy, do you have any responsibility for
the FBI's FISA 702 database use?
Ms. Murphy. I don't have any responsibility for the
database, no.
Mr. Bishop. Well, all right. Maybe my question was not very
clear. Let me ask it this way. A Reuters article a couple of
days ago points out that the FISA Court, in an opinion issued
in April 2021, just declassified and released by the ODNI,
found that the FBI improperly searched for information in a
U.S. database of foreign intelligence 278,000 times over
several years, including on Americans suspected of crimes,
according to a ruling released Friday. Are you conversant with
that subject matter?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir. We have a person that's assigned
specifically to deal with the 702 matter.
Mr. Bishop. Who is that?
Ms. Murphy. His name is Mike Herrington.
Mr. Bishop. OK. You do not have that within your purview
then?
Ms. Murphy. Not the specific thing that you're talking, no.
Mr. Bishop. Would you be aware of the--well, you would not
be able to speak to, for example, changes that have been made
by the FBI to prevent the abuses that the FISA Court described
in its order, correct?
Ms. Murphy. So I know that we've implemented significant
changes. For instance, I know that the numbers that the FBI has
queried on U.S. person information acquired under FISA 702 in
2022 was approximately 204,000, and that represented a 93,
almost 94 percent drop year over year from 2021.
Mr. Bishop. There has been sort-of a pattern. It was 3
million, and then this order talked about it being 278,000. But
there have been a series of events where the 702 database use
has been critiqued by the FISA Court. Americans only learn
about it subsequently. Why should Americans be confident now
that the use of the database is appropriate if these things--
previous steps have been taken to correct the abuses, but it
continues to happen, according to the FISA Court?
Ms. Murphy. So I think the FISA Court, sir, is different
than FISA 702. Applications that go in front of the FISA Court
are full FISAs.
Mr. Bishop. No, no, no, the FISA Court was the Court that
issued the opinion that said the 702 database has been being
abused by the FBI. You are aware of that, aren't you?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. OK. That is what I am talking about. The FISA
Court has repeatedly said the FBI is abusing its access to the
702 database. Why should Americans be convinced that now the
FBI has rectified that, whereas it didn't before?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I don't know the details of that report,
but what I would tell you is that the FBI strives to protect
the American people. When there's policies or procedures in
place, that that are identified to have----
Mr. Bishop. I am really looking for specifics. OK.
Let me ask this question, does anyone on the panel know the
holding of the Supreme Court case Lamont v. Postmaster General,
1965? Just to clue you in, it is the case that deals with
whether Americans have a First Amendment right of access to
foreign propaganda. Is none of you aware of that case?
Mr. Kahangama, do you have any responsibility for the MDM
team at the Department of Homeland Security, the one that deals
with misinformation, disinformation, and malinformation?
Mr. Kahangama. I do not.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Mr. Durham, do you have any responsibility
for that?
Mr. Durham. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
I have a team at DHS that looks at foreign malign
activities, yes.
Mr. Bishop. Explain what that is, please, or what your team
does.
Mr. Durham. My team looks at various efforts of the CCP,
Russia, and other foreign nations, and how they attempt to
influence opinions, win the hearts and minds of individuals in
the United States, and engage in activities that would
ultimately be in their benefit entirely.
Mr. Bishop. Does DHS continue to switchboard, in the
testimony of one of your officials on the MDM team?
Mr. Durham. Sir, I'm not aware of any switchboarding. I'm
not in position to address that question.
Mr. Bishop. My time has expired.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr.
Crane.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to make a comment about something that one of my
colleagues who just left the room said. He made a reference to
the former President of the United States and his family and
their known business dealings in China and other places. I
found it interesting because one of the biggest differences
between the Trump family and their foreign business dealings
and the Biden family and their foreign foreign business
dealings is that the Trump family actually owns businesses.
They actually own hotels and resorts. OK. Pretty stark
difference from what we are learning--what many of us knew, and
now we are actually hearing, as the Oversight and Judiciary
Committee, actually get to bring in witnesses.
The sad thing is for everybody in this room, everybody in
this room, everybody in this town, everybody in this country
knows that if the FBI and our DOJ had the type of damning
information, hard evidence, bank records, et cetera on the
money laundering that this President, his family have been up
to the last couple of years, and their names were Eric and Don
Jr., we wouldn't even be having this hearing. You know why?
They would be in jail. This is exactly the type of thing I was
talking about, Ms. Murphy. This is exactly why so many of your
colleagues have had enough, and they have become
whistleblowers.
Ms. Murphy, what do you think about that? So many of your
colleagues have had enough. What do you think about the
whistleblowers that just said, I can't do it anymore. I can't
cover for the organization, the institution that I work for,
because I didn't swear an oath to them, I actually swore an
oath to the United States and the Constitution. What do you
think about that, ma'am? Do you feel like they betrayed the
institution or are you glad that they are up here?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I appreciate the question.
I'm proud and I'm happy that we live in a country where
there's whistleblower protection acts and that people can come
forward when they think things have been done incorrectly.
You know, like I support the FBI. I think the FBI does
amazing work.
Mr. Crane. You know, ma'am, I think they do do some amazing
work, too. But I think we both know that its reputation is
massively tarnished. I think we are both glad that we have
whistleblower provisions in this country. But I think if you
weren't under oath and we weren't wearing these clothes and in
this room right now and we were having a private conversation,
I sure hope there is part of you that is embarrassed and
disgusted with what the FBI has been up to. I know the American
people are. I mean, look at the movies growing up. You guys are
in, like every movie as the hero. When you were a little girl
and you were watching movies growing up, did you notice that?
Those cool blue jackets with the bright yellow lettering, the
FBI on it, was that pretty cool watching those movies growing
up and those TV shows and now getting to work for this
organization?
Ms. Murphy. It's amazing to work for this organization.
Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. Is there a part of you, though, that feels torn,
ma'am? Like the whistleblowers that are coming up here now in
droves, that just say, I can't, I can't do it anymore. I didn't
swear an oath to the FBI. Is there a part of you that feels
torn or not at all? Ma'am, I am asking you a serious question.
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I'm very proud to work for the FBI. I
think I stated that.
Mr. Crane. I know you are. That is not what I asked you,
ma'am. I asked you if you feel torn.
Ms. Murphy. Not at the least.
Mr. Crane. Not the slightest?
Ms. Murphy. Uh-uh.
Mr. Crane. Well, that is pretty sad, ma'am. That really is.
It really shows who your allegiances are to. It really does. As
somebody who served this country myself, and I come from a very
proud unit, the Seal teams, I know that my allegiances are not
to NSW, Naval Special Warfare, they are not to a Seal team. I
am glad, I am so proud that we have men and women who see their
oath to this country, and they said, I can't do it anymore. I
am going to go try and straighten this out so that the
organization that I love can maybe, just maybe, be turned
around, quit being a partisan tool, and actually protect the
American people, which it clearly is not doing right now.
Thank you. I yield back my time.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman yields.
The Chair will now enter to a third round of questioning
and recognizes myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I would like to enter into the record the annual Threat
Assessment by the Office of the Director of National
Intelligence*, and it basically goes to the previous question
that I mentioned.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files and is also
available at https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/ATA-
2023-Unclassified-Report.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Let me just read Malign Influence Operations. What this
ODNI report says, it says Beijing has adjusted by redoubling
its efforts to build influence at the State and local level to
shift U.S. policy in China's favor because of Beijing's belief
that local officials are more pliable than their Federal
counterparts. PRC actors have become more aggressive with their
influence campaigns. It goes on to talk about--and I will enter
this into the record--it goes on to talk about other tactics,
techniques, and procedures.
Chairman Pfluger. Ms. Murphy, you mentioned the work that
the FBI has done on Confucius Institutes. I am proud to sponsor
a bill and legislation that gets at the heart of Confucius
Institutes. Do you believe that the CCP is using malign
influence to affect outcomes of research and other academia
outcomes at our universities?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, so I don't know if I'd say it's to affect
the outcomes, but probably more to steal the research.
Chairman Pfluger. OK.
On May 12, 2023, Special Counsel John Durham submitted a
300-page report to Attorney General Garland examining the FBI's
investigation into alleged links between the 2016 Trump
campaign and Russian efforts to interfere in the Presidential
election. Ms. Murphy, does your department deal with
counterintelligence, specifically elections?
Ms. Murphy. The Counterintelligence Division does, yes,
sir. It works it along with another division that deals with
election security.
Chairman Pfluger. So your division deals with
counterintelligence and has access to election security.
Ms. Murphy. So election security isn't owned by the
Counterintelligence Division. There's a specific part of the
FBI that deals with election security, but we work with that
piece of the FBI in regards to protecting elections and
obviously with DHS.
Chairman Pfluger. Special Counsel Durham assessed that
neither U.S. law enforcement nor the Intelligence Committee
appears to have possessed any actual evidence of collusion in
their holdings at the commencement of the Crossfire Hurricane
Investigation. The Bureau subsequently discounted or willfully
ignored material that did not support the narrative of a
collusive relationship between Trump and Russia.
As the deputy assistant director for the FBI's
Counterintelligence Division, are you familiar with this
report?
Ms. Murphy. I have not read that report, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. You have not read the Durham report?
Ms. Murphy. I have not yet read the Durham report, no, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. I am honestly speechless at this point in
time. I am not sure what to think of this, as someone who has
spent an entire career in counterintelligence. Special Counsel
Durham found that the FBI moved too quickly with its
investigation of the 2016 campaign and relied on uncorroborated
evidence when launching its investigation. Does this concern
you?
Ms. Murphy. I'm sorry, can you repeat the question?
Chairman Pfluger. That there was a very fast pace of the
investigation and that uncorroborated evidence was used when
launching the investigation. Does that concern you?
Ms. Murphy. So, again, sir, I haven't read the Durham
report, so I'm not sure--you know, I have no knowledge of----
Chairman Pfluger. Does this fall under the
counterintelligence umbrella?
Ms. Murphy. The Durham Report? I'm sure portions of it do,
yes, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. Does a suggestion or an accusation of
election collusion between a foreign government and the United
States or a person or an entity in the United States fall under
counterintelligence?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. So the alleged collusion between Mr.
Trump in 2016 and Russia would have fallen under the
Counterintelligence Division of the FBI?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. And you have not read the Durham report?
Ms. Murphy. I have not read the Durham report.
Chairman Pfluger. Is there a reason? Is it not required
to----
Ms. Murphy. No, I just haven't had time.
Chairman Pfluger. Ms. Murphy, do you actively investigate
counterintelligence with foreign entities around the world?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, sir.
Chairman Pfluger. This is a sincere question, does election
collusion worry you?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, obviously election collusion would worry
me. Yes sir.
Chairman Pfluger. Does any malign influence to the United
States worry you?
Ms. Murphy. Yes sir.
Chairman Pfluger. OK. I would highly recommend reading
that, because we spent 4 years discussing that there was
uncorroborated evidence. The Durham Report specifically
outlines the outcome of that. It is very disappointing to hear
this and I think this is why we have these discussions and
questions.
The Chair's time has expired and I now recognize the
gentleman from New York, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Perfect timing because I would like to address some of what
the Chairman just addressed and some of what my colleague from
Arizona addressed in attacking the FBI.
First, let's talk about the Durham report. I will make it
real short for you Ms. Murphy. The Durham Report seemed to fail
to consider the fact that the original tip that set off the
Crossfire Hurricane Investigation was that Russia would be
disseminating hacked emails about related--that would help
Donald Trump. Lo and behold at the end of July that is exactly
what happened. So the Durham Report focused solely on what was
internally within the intelligence files of the FBI and did not
mention the obvious corroboration that the tip turned out to be
true.
Second, the Durham Report said that an investigation was
justified to be opened. It should have just been a preliminary
investigation as opposed to a full investigation.
Third, the Durham Report talks all about the Steele
dossier, which had nothing to do with the origination of the
Russia investigation and had nothing to do with the Mueller
investigation. It was not relied on. That investigation of
course led to, I believe, six individuals connected to the
Trump campaign who were convicted, whereas the Durham Report,
the Durham investigation, had one guilty plea by someone who
was referred from the Office of Inspector General and two
acquittals on pretty pathetic charges. So let's get our facts
straight about the Durham Report.
Second, I want to address what my colleague from Arizona
was saying about the FBI whistleblowers. I was actually in that
hearing last week, he was not. What I can tell you about those
individuals is separate and apart from whether they are
whistleblowers or not, they were deemed by the FBI to be
national security risks because one allowed his own personal
views of January 6 to affect his official duties by not turning
over to his superior open-source information that ultimately
led a different agent to determine that a subject was actually
at the Capitol committing violence on January 6.
Second, another one, another special agent decided that he
was the legal expert on what a legitimate grand jury subpoena
was and was not and refused to serve a grand jury subpoena on a
witness that had been issued by the grand jury with the support
of a Federal prosecutor and his supervisory agent. Yet he
decided that he knew best and so he refused to do that.
My colleague wants to talk about being a partisan tool, I
think is what he used. Sadly, and perhaps unwittingly, the
partisan tool here is someone who is Donald Trump's henchmen
funding these witnesses to try to diminish and undermine the
FBI. Why are they trying to diminish and undermine the FBI at
Donald Trump's direction and behest? Because the FBI is
investigating Donald Trump. That is what we are doing here.
That is why--and I see my colleague from Georgia, who I am sure
is waved on to this committee----
Chairman Pfluger. The committee will suspend.
I would advise Members that under Clause 1 of Rule 17 of
the Rules of the House, they must observe the House standards
of decorum and debate and conduct. They must act and speak
respectfully and may not use disorderly words, unparliamentary
language, such as words impugning the motives of their
colleagues or words that are partially or personally offensive.
Yield back to the gentleman from New York.
Mr. Goldman. Could I have my minute back, since you
suspended?
Chairman Pfluger. Yes.
The time was approximately 1 minute and 15 minute, 1 minute
and 20.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you. Appreciate it.
So why are my colleagues trying to undermine the FBI? Why
are they asking to defund the FBI? It is not because the FBI is
not doing its job, it is because the FBI is doing its job. The
problem they have is that the FBI is doing its job in
investigating their dear leader, Donald Trump. If you can
undermine the investigator, if you can undermine independent
journalists doing investigative reporting, then you can
undermine our entire system of democracy. That is the
authoritarian playbook 101, you attack the democratic
institutions, you attack the independent, objective individuals
who provide checks and balance in a democracy, and then, rather
than follow the law and the rules, you can violate the law and
the rules because there is no one with any credibility who can
hold you in check.
So, do you want to know the reason why the FBI is going
down in its credibility? It is because it is being attacked by
people on the other side of the aisle. That has to stop.
I yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The Chair now recognizes the gentleman
from North Carolina, Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. Ms. Murphy, I also was surprised at your answer
that you haven't read the Durham report. Do you consider the
Durham report contents--or let me ask you this, have you been
briefed on the report? That was a no. Your mic sounds like it
is off. Was it working?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir.
Mr. Bishop. There we go. So you haven't been briefed on it.
Have you read even the executive summary?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Here is a portion. Our investigation determined
that the Crossfire Hurricane investigators did not and could
not corroborate any of the substantive allegations contained in
the Steele reporting, nor was Steele able to produce
corroboration for any of the reported allegations even after
being offered $1 million or more by the FBI for such
corroboration. Further, when interviewed by the FBI in January
2017, Danchenko, he is the primary subsource, also was unable
to corroborate any of the substantive allegations in the
report. That is just a sample.
I know Mr. Goldman spent a good bit of time attempting to
sort-of denigrate the Durham Report for understandable reasons.
It is devastating to the FBI. That seems to me that that would
be--and since it was a counterintelligence investigation that
the Special Counsel appointed by the Department of Justice has
summarized in terms like that, that that would be of grave
concern to you as a deputy director of the FBI responsible for
counterintelligence. Can you explain why--and you said you
haven't had time to read it? It has been out since the 12th of
this month, so almost, I guess--what is this, the 23rd--so 11
days. Mr. Goldman has obviously been briefed on and read it,
many Members of Congress have. Why is that not a matter of such
import that you would want urgently to understand what the
Special Counsel concluded about the work of the
Counterintelligence Division in such a grave case?
Ms. Murphy. Sir, if you'd like a brief on the Durham Report
from the Counterintelligence Division, I'm happy to take that
back.
Mr. Bishop. Wow. That sounds almost contemptuous.
Let me ask you this, then. Just go back to what you have
written in your submitted testimony to this committee today. I
was a little bit stuck on the first round of questioning, but
let me just go back to it. It is your testimony--let me begin
at the end of photograph or the third page of your testimony.
This was talking about malign influence. Again, I think you
said that you don't really have much responsibility for that,
but surely you must know the details behind this. You said
utilizing lessons learned since 2018, the FITF widened its
aperture to confront malign foreign operations of the PRC,
Iran, and other global adversaries. To address this expanding
focus and wider set of adversaries and influence efforts, we
have also added resources to maintain permanent surge
capability on election and foreign influence threats.
Can you explain the details behind that, please.
Ms. Murphy. Sir, I think when we're talking about surging
resources, I think it's the permanent staffing of the Foreign
Intelligence Task Force.
Mr. Bishop. What is surge capability? That sounds like
something that you can add people when you need it.
Ms. Murphy. I think we did surge, and I think now we've
made those positions permanent.
Mr. Bishop. I see. So you have made--there is permanent
surge capability. So if you ever need to surge, you got people
permanently employed to do whatever you may need to interfere
with the election.
How about--yes, that is just astonishing. I am just without
words, that the FBI is unconcerned. Do you know whether anybody
at the FBI has read the Durham Report?
Ms. Murphy. I'm sure people have read the Durham Report,
sir.
Mr. Bishop. Can you name anybody that you know has read it?
Ms. Murphy. No, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Do you intend to read it?
Ms. Murphy. I do intend to read it.
Mr. Bishop. Does the FBI intend to undertake any changes in
the way it conducts counterintelligence operations based on the
Durham Report?
Ms. Murphy. I can't answer that, sir. I can take that
question back.
Mr. Bishop. I yield.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Mr.
Crane.
Mr. Crane. I am going to yield my time to the gentlewoman
from Georgia.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman yields to the gentlelady
from Georgia, Ms. Taylor Greene.
Ms. Greene. Thank you. I appreciate it. I appreciate you
guys coming to speak to the committee today. Thank you very
much for letting me wave on.
Just a few months ago, our Nation watched in absolute
horror while a Chinese spy balloon traversed across the United
States of America, spying on our military bases, our country's
infrastructure, just surveilling everything that China could
take in as it traveled across the United States. The Biden
administration did absolutely nothing. Americans were so upset.
The outrage was unbelievable.
Then finally, finally, the spy balloon gets shot down over
the Atlantic after China completed its mission. Come to find
out, after they picked up the pieces out of the ocean, that
there--and they knew from pictures they were taking that this
device was sending back images and information back to China.
It is almost unspeakable. It is unspeakable that this actually
happened.
In 2018, the Department of Justice announced the China
Initiative to combat the CCP's relentless campaign to steal
U.S. intelligence, technology, and cutting-edge research.
Ms. Murphy, I share my colleagues' shock that you haven't
read the Durham Report, so I am not sure how much you know
about the China Initiative. under President Trump's
administration. But I think it was very important, as well do
many Americans who feel threatened by China. China wants to
replace us economically, and they are doing a pretty damn good
job of it. China wants to beat us militarily, and they have the
fastest-growing military in world history. So Americans that
exist and live and pay all the taxes outside of this city truly
feel threatened by China. We are greatly appreciative of the
Trump administration that had the China Initiative.
In March 2022, even FBI Director Christopher Wray, who is
loyal completely to the left and trying to go after their
political enemies, admitted that the Bureau had more than 2,000
China-related cases and was opening a new China-related case
every 12 hours. In spite of this, despite the clear need for a
mission focusing on CCP threats, Assistant Attorney General
Matthew Olsen ended the China Initiative based on accusations
that the investigations under the initiative were excessive or
racially biased.
Ms. Murphy, you have quite an extensive career, and I would
think you would understand the threats that China poses to us.
Do you agree with Attorney General Matthew Olsen ending the
China initiative?
Ms. Murphy. Thank you for the question.
I agree the threat from the Chinese Communist government is
massive and something that we need to take very seriously in
all levels of our Government and our private and public
sectors. I think the China Initiative is something that was
misperceived by our Chinese community to be against Chinese
people. I think that concept behind the Chinese Initiative was
to protect academic institutions and research from the Chinese
Communist government. I think the things that we're doing to
protect research in universities and innovation continues in
that space. If people are doing criminal acts or grant fraud,
then we're working with those institutions to take corrective
action or criminal prosecution.
Ms. Greene. Well, Ms. Murphy, protecting our national
security and protecting our country from everything, protecting
our intelligence, protecting our technology, protecting
America's interests has nothing to do with anyone's race or any
type of identity. The China Initiative wasn't any type of
anything to go against Chinese Americans. This was all about
fighting the CCP. So would you agree that this initiative needs
to be put back in place?
Ms. Murphy. I would say that the work that we're doing in
that area continues.
Ms. Greene. Well, I don't think it is good enough, because
obviously, FBI Director for--Director Christopher Wray has
admitted that more than 2,000 related cases have been opened.
Now there is a China-related case every 12 hours. So I would
say that you all are failing at your mission.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
Ms. Greene. Yes. I yield back to Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Crane. I yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The Chair now recognizes Ms. Greene for
her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I would like to continue talking about this Chinese spy
balloon here for for just a minute. It is, it is truly
shocking. Senior U.S. Government officials reported in February
2023 that the Chinese spy balloon was able to gather
intelligence from several sensitive homeland defense sites
resulting from the Biden administration's of course, willful
refusal, shocking refusal, something that Americans just do not
understand, can't comprehend, why it wasn't shot down. Given it
is a proven fact that the Biden family has been receiving
payments, from our oversight investigation, from CCP-linked
foreign nationals in exchange for power and influence, this
could very well be strategic sabotage by the CCP-basically-
owned White House.
I would like to ask you, Mr. Kahangama, do you think that
this is a national security threat against our homeland?
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question.
While I would defer some of the intelligence questions to
my colleague in the intelligence community, I would say that
the ability of the high-altitude balloon to conduct
surveillance from the CCP perspective is a threat to our
country.
Ms. Greene. Right. But given the fact that we have seen
money transferred from China into LLCs and then that money
being paid out to multiple Biden family members, that is a
clear--it actually puts our country at risk, our entire
national security at risk when that is happening. That is
proven in bank statements, it has been shown in financial
reports that exist in the Treasury that we have reviewed. I
think it is very serious.
What kinds of vulnerabilities to sensitive homeland
security sites and critical infrastructure were likely created
as a result of this intelligence breach.
Mr. Kahangama. Thank you for the question, ma'am.
I would say the use of the high-altitude balloon is just
one more tool, as I've mentioned earlier today, with regard to
the CCP's toolbox, they use everything at their disposal, and a
high-altitude balloon is just one more of them. It's also seen
as perhaps a provocative action of theirs, the same way they
are engaged in provocative activities in South China Sea and
Taiwan Straits.
So with regard to the vulnerabilities, there's certainly
some concern about the imagery that may have been collected or
that's possible to be collected from such a balloon, over
critical infrastructure, over military installations and such.
But at this point, I'm not in a position to say any more about
what those individual vulnerabilities are.
I would defer to my colleagues at the FBI, and specifically
in DoD, who have oversight of the actual balloon and are
engaging in the actual research and analysis of the tools that
were on it.
Ms. Greene. OK, well, Ms. Murphy, I would ask you then--I
guess you are deferring to Ms. Murphy? Is that correct?
Mr. Kahangama. Ma'am, not necessarily Ms. Murphy, but the
other folks at the FBI who are working with element of DoD to
provide some----
Ms. Greene. All right, well, I will ask all three of you,
since all of you receive taxpayer-funded paychecks, just like I
do, how do you think the American people feel about a spy
balloon going all the way across the country taking pictures of
God knows what--the American people have no idea. They wanted
it shot down, screamed for it shot down. So what do we have to
say to the American taxpayers who work very hard for the money
that they earn, pay the IRS their tax dollars that pay all of
our paychecks, pay for this building, the lights that turn on,
and all of the research and everything to do with this entire
thing? I will go one at a time. What do you all have to say to
the American people on that failure?
Ms. Murphy.
Ms. Murphy. I'd say the FBI is working very hard to protect
the American people.
Ms. Greene. Do you think the American people trust the FBI,
Ms. Murphy?
Ms. Murphy. Yes, ma'am, I do.
Ms. Greene. I am going to tell you they don't.
Sir.
Mr. Kahangama. I would say that the high-altitude balloon
posed a threat and it was shot down, and we are working with
the investigative agencies to determine the specifics of that.
Ms. Greene. Thank you.
Mr. Durham. Ma'am, I would say that the people at I&A, the
analysts there are working diligently to ensure that we share
any and all threat information with those individuals across
the Nation who are in position to mitigate those threats.
Ms. Greene. Well, the tragic news for our country is China
has already collected everything they need and their mission
was successful while our Government's mission failed the
American people.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Pfluger. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I would like to thank the witnesses for your time, for your
service, for coming to this committee and talking about a very
important issue.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Chairman, before you close, could I be
recognized for unanimous consent request?
Chairman Pfluger. Yes.
The Chair recognizes----
Mr. Bishop. Just briefly. I am sorry, Mr. Chairman.
To submit for the record New York Post article, May 18,
2023, ``Democrats attack FBI Whistleblowers--Giving Cover to
the Agency's Abuses.''
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Pfluger. So ordered. Thank you.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted For the Record by Honorable Dan Bishop
democrats attack fbi whistleblowers--giving cover to the agency's
abuses
By James Bovard, Published May 18, 2023
Updated May 18, 2023, 9:57 p.m. ET
Congressional Democrats revealed a new Federal crime Thursday:
having the same name as anyone who tweeted derisively about the Jan. 6
Capitol Clash.
Rep. Linda Sanchez (D-Calif.), vice chair of the House Equality
Caucus championing LGBTQI+, sought to demolish FBI whistleblower Marcus
Allen for retweeting a post asserting ``Nancy Pelosi staged January
6.''
When Allen repeatedly stated that wasn't his Twitter account,
Sanchez berated him for interrupting her tirade.
After she finally seemed to admit it wasn't his account, she
demanded to know if Allen agreed that Pelosi staged Jan. 6. Allen said
no, and Sanchez's time expired.
This epitomizes how Congressional Democrats treated FBI
whistleblowers in Thursday's House Weaponization of the Federal
Government Subcommittee hearing.
Rep. Stacey Plaskett (D-Virgin Islands), the ranking Democrat,
howled, ``My colleagues on the far right are on a mission to attack,
discredit and ultimately dismantle the FBI.''
She claimed Republicans ``have brought in these former agents, men
who lost their security clearances because they were a threat to our
national security--who out of malice or ignorance or both have put
partisan agenda above the oath they swore to serve this country and
protect its national security.''
The Durham report this week exposed the FBI's brazen machinations
to rig the 2016 election.
But all the FBI's sins have been expunged, at least for Team Biden
supporters.
It was unclear Thursday whether Congressional Democrats consider
FBI critics to be traitors or heretics or maybe both.
Allen, an FBI staff operations specialist who served two tours in
Iraq with the Marines, was suspended without pay after the FBI
condemned him for having ``conspiratorial views in regards to the
events of January 6th.''
His crime? As part of his research task, he forwarded a link to an
open website that said ``Federal law enforcement had some degree of
infiltration among the crowds gathered at the Capitol.'' (Which it
did.)
But you can't blame Marcus Allen for the FBI's bizarre Boston bus
dragnet.
FBI Washington Field Office pressured the FBI Boston office to open
investigations on 138 bus passengers who traveled to DC Jan. 6, 2021,
merely because ``two individuals [on the buses] entered restricted
areas of the Capitol that day.''
Boston FBI officials responded by asking for video showing the
wrongdoing, especially since there was no evidence the passengers had
even entered the Capitol.
FBI Washington replied that it couldn't supply video because it
might disclose undercover agents or confidential human sources in the
crowd.
In lieu of providing evidence, FBI bosses wanted agents across the
Nation to presume anyone who was suspected was automatically guilty.
Rep. Matt Gaetz declared, ``Violence on January 6 doesn't justify
weaponizing the government against people who were innocent and did
nothing wrong.''
FBI Special Agent Garret O'Boyle, a 101st Airborne Division member
and veteran of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars, was suspended after he
was compelled to divide a single domestic-terrorism case into ``four
different cases'' to bolster the Biden narrative of a vast terrorist
threat.
Boyle testified that FBI management ``creates an Orwellian
atmosphere that silences opposition and discussion.''
A committee staff report declared that ``the FBI appears to be
complicit in artificially supporting the Administration's political
narrative'' that domestic violent extremism is ``the `greatest threat'
facing the United States.''
Another witness was Steve Friend, a 12-year FBI veteran and SWAT
team member who was suspended without pay in September after
complaining the FBI was falsifying data on domestic terrorism.
Friend lamented last year the leftist tilt of FBI management:
``There is this belief that half the country are domestic terrorists
and we can't have a conversation with them. There is a fundamental
belief that unless you are voicing what we agree . . . you are the
enemy.''
FBI Assistant Director Christopher Dunham says Friend was suspended
after he ``downloaded documents from FBI computer systems to an
unauthorized removable flash drive'' and refused to participate in Jan.
6 cases.
Rep. Thomas Massie (R-Ky.) condemned Democrats for disparaging the
witnesses.
Massie groused, ``Big business is working with the government to
weaponize against the American people.''
He hammered Bank of America for sending the FBI a list of all its
customers' charge or debit cards used in Washington between Jan. 5 and
7, 2021.
Massie complained that anyone who had ever purchased a firearm with
a Bank of America card was ``elevated to the top of the list''--even if
the purchase occurred in Iowa in 1999.
The FBI denies retaliating against whistleblowers.
But O'Boyle bitterly declared, ``The FBI will crush you . . . and
your family, if you try to expose the truth about things they are doing
that, are wrong.''
O'Boyle told the committee: ``I never swore an oath to the FBI. I
swore my oath to the Constitution.''
Perhaps someone should remind House Democrats that, likewise, their
oath was to the Constitution and not to the FBI.
Unfortunately, the FBI can count on a vast Praetorian Guard on
Capitol Hill to prevent Americans from learning how their rights and
liberties have been trampled.
James Bovard is the author of 10 books and a member of the USA Today
Board of Contributors.

Chairman Pfluger. The Members of the subcommittee may have
some additional questions for the witnesses, and we would ask
the witnesses to respond in writing to these in a reasonable
amount of time. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing
record will be open for an additional 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:14 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman August Pfluger for Jill M. Murphy
Question 1. Mexican transnational criminal organizations are the
main producers for U.S.-consumed illicit fentanyl, using PRC-sourced
primary materials. The CCP has appeared to back away from cooperative
agreements on counternarcotics issues with the United States after the
U.S. Government took action to condemn the CCP genocide of Uyghurs in
the Xinjiang Ugyhur Autonomous Region. Given the devastating toll
illicit fentanyl is taking on Americans, what are you doing to mitigate
the endless flow of this and other dangerous drugs into our country?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. China has proven to be an adept and persistent threat
to U.S. economic competitiveness, utilizing intellectual property
theft, control over supply chain, and illicit trade to advance their
goals in this space. Can you give specific examples of what the FBI and
DHS are doing to directly counter threats to the U.S. economy emanating
out of China?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. The former director of the National Counterintelligence
and Security Center, Bill Evanina, testified before this subcommittee
in March that the theft of intellectual property by the PRC costs
America as much as $500 billion a year. What are each of your agencies
doing to mitigate the catastrophic impact of this theft?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Working in Washington DC, we are all too familiar with
the ``revolving door'' concept. One issue we have seen as part of the
CCP's influence campaign has been to create strategic business ties
with people in high positions within Government and top connections in
the business world. Can you talk about some of the main sectors of
Government the CCP is trying to influence through this practice?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. The CCP has taken advantage of our relaxed laws
regarding public-sector officials entering the private sector--TikTok
has been hiring former members of the U.S. intelligence community with
significant intelligence backgrounds from the CIA, FBI, NSA, and even
our military. What kind of threat does this pose to our own
intelligence?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. During the hearing on May 23, 2023, I asked how the
Manhattan-based Chinese police station, operating as a provincial
branch for the Ministry of Public Security (MPS)--an organization that
belongs on the Commerce Entity List for its implication in human rights
violations and abuses of Uyghurs, was founded on U.S. soil. You
promised to respond to this question and others in our April 24th
letter to DHS and FBI in a Classified setting. I resubmit this question
now, with the expectation that you will fulfill your promise to provide
the answer in a Classified setting in a timely manner.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. According to the USDA, the estimated value of U.S.
farmland owned by entities in the PRC, jumped more than 20-fold in a
decade, from $81 million in 2010 to nearly $1.9 billion in 2021.
Moreover, Chinese companies appear to be strategically buying land near
sensitive military sites across the United States. What is your
assessment of the counterintelligence threat of these purchases by
China and other foreign adversaries?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. In 2018, the Department of Justice announced the China
Initiative to combat the CCP's relentless campaign to steal U.S.
secrets, technology, and cutting-edge research. In March 2022, FBI
Director Christopher Wray said the bureau had more than 2,000 China-
related cases and was opening a new China-related case every 12 hours.
Despite this clear need for a mission focusing on CCP threats, the
Department of Justice ended the initiative in favor of a broader
approach to countering nation-state threats, despite that the People's
Republic of China in particular poses serious and persistent threats to
U.S. national security interests. By the Department of Justice
scuttling its China Initiative, do you agree that it can send the wrong
message to FBI field agents that the Department of Justice no longer
prioritizes threats from China?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 9. On May 12, 2023, Special Counsel John Durham released a
report on Matters Related to Intelligence Activities and Investigations
Arising out of the 2016 Presidential Campaigns. Special Counsel Durham
found that the FBI moved too quickly with its investigation of Trump's
2016 campaign and relied on uncorroborated evidence when launching its
investigation. Given the significant resources and scale of that
investigation, how much ground was lost detecting real-world threats
such as those posed by the CCP against the United States while the FBI
was preoccupied with the investigation of the Trump campaign?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 10. At the hearing, I asked you whether you read Special
Counsel Durham's report in which you responded that you ``haven't had
time.'' Since the hearing, have you now familiarized yourself with the
report and the report's findings involving matters related to the FBI's
counterintelligence division?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 11. Special Counsel Durham found that an ``objective and
honest assessment'' of the evidence ``should have caused the FBI to
question not only the predication for [the investigation] Crossfire
Hurricane, but also to reflect on whether the FBI was being manipulated
for political or other purposes. Unfortunately, it did not.''\1\ Do you
have any reason to disagree with the Special Counsel's finding?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Special Counsel John Durham, Report on Matters Related to
Intelligence Activities and Investigations Arising out of the 2016
Presidential Campaigns at 305 (May 12, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 12. Special Counsel Durham found that ``the matter was
opened as a full investigation without ever having spoken to the
persons who provided the information,'' and the FBI launched the
investigation without ``any significant review of its own intelligence
databases,''\2\ as well as without ``collection and examination of any
relevant intelligence from other U.S. intelligence entities.''
Moreover, the FBI's investigation began without conducting any
interviews of ``witnesses essential to understand the raw
information,'' that the Bureau had obtained, and without using ``any of
the standard analytical tools typically employed by the FBI in
evaluating raw intelligence.''\3\ First, do you have any reason to
disagree with the Special Counsel's findings? Second, as the deputy
assistant director of counterintelligence at the FBI, do these findings
concern you?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Id. at 9.
\3\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 13. Special Counsel Durham concluded that the FBI ``failed
to uphold their mission of strict fidelity to the law.''\4\ First,
would you agree that the FBI's conduct in this matter was improper and
should never have happened? Second, as the deputy assistant director of
counterintelligence at the FBI, will you commit to assuring us that
going forward the FBI is not going to busy itself pursuing politically-
motivated investigations?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id. at 17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman August Pfluger for Iranga Kahangama
Question 1. Mexican transnational criminal organizations are the
main producers for U.S.-consumed illicit fentanyl, using PRC-sourced
primary materials. The CCP has appeared to back away from cooperative
agreements on counternarcotics issues with the United States after the
U.S. Government took action to condemn the CCP genocide of Uyghurs in
the Xinjiang Ugyhur Autonomous Region. Given the devastating toll
illicit fentanyl is taking on Americans, what are you doing to mitigate
the endless flow of this and other dangerous drugs into our country?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. China has proven to be an adept and persistent threat
to U.S. economic competitiveness, utilizing intellectual property
theft, control over supply chain, and illicit trade to advance their
goals in this space. Can you give specific examples of what the FBI and
DHS are doing to directly counter threats to the U.S. economy emanating
out of China?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. The former director of the National Counterintelligence
and Security Center, Bill Evanina, testified before this subcommittee
in March that the theft of intellectual property by the PRC costs
America as much as $500 billion a year. What are each of your agencies
doing to mitigate the catastrophic impact of this theft?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. DHS Secretary Mayorkas announced the ``90-Day sprint''
to focus resources on China, which is long overdue. Given that Chinese
leadership openly views the United States as an adversary and for
decades has utilized the weight of its civilian research and commercial
sectors, along with the military and defense industrial sectors, to
gain every available advantage over U.S. competition, can you please
explain how a ``90-Day sprint'' is going to manifest into something
more permanent to truly counter these determined and unrelenting
efforts?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. The CCP continues to exploit vulnerabilities in
American academic society to exploit U.S. research and development,
especially through Confucius Institutes. While most of the original
Confucius Institutes at American campuses have been shuttered as the
U.S. Government has started to take action against them, similar
programs simply called by a new name have replaced them. Moreover, many
American universities retain relationships with Chinese universities
that support the CCP strategy of Military-Civil Fusion. What action is
DHS taking to counter this new wave of Confucius Institutes and Chinese
universities and the counterintelligence threat posed to American
academic research and development?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. China poses a major cyber-espionage threat with the
capability to cause major disruption to the U.S. homeland's critical
infrastructure. Given the reality that the Chinese may unleash these
capabilities in a future conflict over Taiwan, the South China Sea, or
other disputes, what is your office doing to prepare our critical
infrastructure to withstand such a cyber attack?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. The CCP has weaponized technology to access sensitive
commercial and Government data in the U.S. homeland through companies
like Tik Tok and DJI drones. Under the 2019 Chinese National
Intelligence Law, all Chinese organizations and citizens are required
to support, assist, and cooperate with state intelligence work. What is
being done to counter this threat given that many Americans from our
youth to even police departments utilize these platforms, often unaware
of the potential espionage threat to data that presents?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Dina Titus for Iranga Kahangama
Question 1. Secretary Mayorkas' ``90-Day PRC threats sprint''
requires reports from various DHS departments on the threats posed by
China. Can you please tell us what you anticipate DHS will elicit from
this report? What kinds of actionable steps are we going to see from
this ``Sprint''? Will reports on findings across DHS be available to
Members of Congress so we can help determine how we are best positioned
to help this effort?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Reports over the last several months have found that
despite import restrictions put in place by Congress (the Uyghur Forced
Labor Prevention Act), certain Chinese e-commerce companies may be
exporting apparel to the United States that contains cotton from the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. The CBP executive assistant
commissioner, who oversees the Office of Trade, has said that:
``[DHS's] goal for the forced labor laws [is] to prevent merchandise
from being made with forced labor in the first place, and we will not
rest until we achieve that goal.'' What is DHS doing, beyond just
screening goods, that will help the United States achieve this broader
goal, as stated by CBP's executive assistant commissioner?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Chairman August Pfluger for Tyrone Durham
Question 1. Mexican transnational criminal organizations are the
main producers for U.S.-consumed illicit fentanyl, using PRC-sourced
primary materials. The CCP has appeared to back away from cooperative
agreements on counternarcotics issues with the United States after the
U.S. Government took action to condemn the CCP genocide of Uyghurs in
the Xinjiang Ugyhur Autonomous Region. Given the devastating toll
illicit fentanyl is taking on Americans, what are you doing to mitigate
the endless flow of this and other dangerous drugs into our country?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. China has proven to be an adept and persistent threat
to U.S. economic competitiveness, utilizing intellectual property
theft, control over supply chain, and illicit trade to advance their
goals in this space. Can you give specific examples of what the FBI and
DHS are doing to directly counter threats to the U.S. economy emanating
out of China?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. The former director of the National Counterintelligence
and Security Center, Bill Evanina, testified before this subcommittee
in March that the theft of intellectual property by the PRC costs
America as much as $500 billion a year. What are each of your agencies
doing to mitigate the catastrophic impact of this theft?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Southwest Border crossings by Chinese nationals
numbered 430 in Oct. 2022, 1,400 in Feb. 2023, and 3,200 in April 2023.
Traditionally, discussions on Southwest Border security have focused on
incoming Mexican and Central American nationals. Can you tell the
committee why border crossings by Chinese nationals have surged
specifically during the last 2 months?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. There has been recent reporting about the increase in
quality and quantity of luxury counterfeit products such as
``superfake'' handbags, many of which come from China, becoming a
pervasive and costly problem for the high-end U.S. retail industry. Is
the Nation State Threats Center engaged on this problem, and if so,
what is being done?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. The CCP has forcibly detained more than 1 million
ethnic Uyghurs in reeducation camps, and an estimated 100,000 Uyghurs
are said to be working in forced labor conditions, making goods that
are sold across the global economy for artificially low prices. Apart
from the inhumane and exploitative practices, forced labor places
legitimate manufacturers at a competitive disadvantage. What is DHS
doing to ensure our American companies are competing on an even playing
field?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted risks to American
economic prosperity in a globalized system that is dependent on the
People's Republic of China (PRC). There were months-long shortages for
goods including personal protective equipment and critical minerals.
Can you speak about what DHS is doing to ensure that supply chains are
stable and protected for critical items and resources going forward?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. According to the USDA, the estimated value of U.S.
farmland owned by entities in the PRC, jumped more than 20-fold in a
decade, from $81 million in 2010 to nearly $1.9 billion in 2021. Aside
from the potential counterintelligence threat these land purchases
present, PRC acquisitions of U.S. farmland have raised serious concerns
for American food supply chains and water usage. Is this something DHS
is engaged in?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question From Honorable Dina Titus for Tyrone Durham
Question. Reports over the last several months have found that
despite import restrictions put in place by Congress (the Uyghur Forced
Labor Prevention Act), certain Chinese e-commerce companies may be
exporting apparel to the United States that contains cotton from the
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region. The CBP executive assistant
commissioner, who oversees the Office of Trade, has said that:
``[DHS's] goal for the forced labor laws [is] to prevent merchandise
from being made with forced labor in the first place, and we will not
rest until we achieve that goal.'' What is DHS doing, beyond just
screening goods, that will help the United States achieve this broader
goal, as stated by CBP's executive assistant commissioner?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
