- SMART INVESTMENTS: TECHNOLOGY'S ROLE IN A MULTI-LAYERED BORDER SECURITY STRATEGY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SMART INVESTMENTS: TECHNOLOGY'S ROLE IN
A MULTI-LAYERED BORDER SECURITY STRATEGY

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
BORDER SECURITY AND ENFORCEMENT

AND THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
OVERSIGHT, INVESTIGATIONS, AND ACCOUNTABILITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 9, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-75

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
59-681 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON BORDER SECURITY AND ENFORCEMENT

Clay Higgins, Louisiana, Chairman
Michael Guest, Mississippi           J. Luis Correa, California,
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia          Ranking Member
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Garcia, California
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
officio)                             (ex officio)
Natasha Eby, Subcommittee Staff Director
Brieana Marticorena, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT, INVESTIGATIONS, AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Dan Bishop, North Carolina, Chairman
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Glenn Ivey, Maryland, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Elijah Crane, Arizona                Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Yvette D. Clarke, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Sang Yi, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lisa Canini, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Clay Higgins, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Louisiana, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Border
Security and Enforcement:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Border Security and Enforcement:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Dan Bishop, a Representative in Congress From the
State of North Carolina, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Glenn Ivey, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Maryland, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability..................     9
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................    11

Witnesses

Mr. Thaddeus C. Cleveland, Sheriff, Terrell County, Texas:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    14
Mr. Carl Landrum, Vice President, Civilian Programs and Strategy,
Dedrone:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Mr. David J. Berteau, President and CEO, Professional Services
Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    23

Appendix

Questions From Honorable Delia C. Ramirez for Carl Landrum.......    43
Questions From Ranking Member Glenn Ivey for David J. Berteau....    43
Questions From Honorable Delia C. Ramirez for David J. Berteau...    44
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for David J. Berteau...    45

SMART INVESTMENTS: TECHNOLOGY'S ROLE IN A MULTI-LAYERED BORDER SECURITY
STRATEGY

----------

Tuesday, July 9, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Border Security and
Enforcement, and the
Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations,
and Accountability,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:15 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Clay Higgins
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Higgins, Bishop, Greene, Ezell,
Strong, Crane, Correa, Ivey, Thanedar, Ramirez, and Clarke.
Mr. Higgins. This Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Border Security and Enforcement, and the
Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
committee in recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the importance of
emerging technologies for border security detection and
inspection purposes and explore the coordination and
collaboration of the Department of Homeland Security with
private industry. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
Good afternoon and welcome to the Subcommittee on Border
Security and Enforcement and the Subcommittee on Oversight,
Investigations, and Accountability. It's a joint hearing on
technology's role in enhancing our border security.
The crisis at our Southern Border poses an existential risk
to our Nation. To combat this threat, emerging border security
technologies play a critical role in deterring criminal
activity in the mass illegal immigration that we have witnessed
under the Biden administration.
Illegal immigration has surged to an unprecedented level,
with approximately 9.7 million illegal aliens crossing our
border since President Biden took office. This is more than
double the entire population in my home State of Louisiana.
Influx of fentanyl and other deadly drugs is destroying
American families and communities. The latest data shows that
in the past year, approximately 13,000 pounds of fentanyl had
been seized at the Southwest Border. Cutting-edge technology is
crucial in interdicting these dangerous substances and
apprehending drug traffickers.
Furthermore, dangerous cartels continually exploit
vulnerabilities in our border security. DHS's partnership with
the private sector is crucial in leveraging the most advanced
technologies available to identify, track, and respond to these
threats on land, air, and sea. We have a responsibility to our
Nation to use every tool and technology at our disposal to
protect our homeland from these threats.
DHS's deployment of emerging technologies is necessary to
combat the illegal movement of aliens, drugs, weapons, and
other illicit commodities from crossing the United States
border. As transnational criminal organizations and terrorists
constantly seek new methods to penetrate the vulnerable border,
these innovative technologies are essential in countering the
evolving threat, including the use of cartel drones and coyote-
smuggling operations.
The commercial security industry has always played a vital
role in protecting America's homeland. Private-sector
investments in new technologies have enabled components such as
Customs and Border Protection to properly and strategically
deploy personnel and technology to maximize the agency's
effectiveness and fulfill its mission.
I'd like to express my gratitude to our witnesses for
appearing before the committee today and to discuss how DHS
works with industry to provide advanced solutions to our law
enforcement personnel on the ground, emblematic of the many
private partners working with DHS to secure our homeland.
Border security technology will never replace front-line
agents and officers. However, technology can be a critical tool
to aid law enforcement personnel to carry out their mission.
The need for advanced technology will continue to grow, as well
as the need for personal investment from each one of us as
Americans, for us as a committee to support, to prepare the
necessary agents on the ground to defend our Nation.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time. I look
forward to hearing from the witnesses.
[The statement of Chairman Higgins follows:]
Statement of Chairman Clay Higgins
July 9, 2024
Good afternoon and welcome to the Subcommittee on Border Security
and Enforcement and the Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations, and
Accountability joint hearing on technology's role in enhancing our
border security.
The crisis at our Southern Border poses an existential risk to our
Nation. To combat this threat, emerging border security technologies
play a critical role in deterring criminal activity and the mass
illegal immigration that we have witnessed under the Biden
administration.
Illegal immigration has surged to an unprecedented level with
approximately 9.7 million illegal aliens who have crossed our borders
since President Biden took office. This is more than double the entire
population of my home State of Louisiana.
The influx of fentanyl and other deadly drugs is destroying
American families and communities. The latest data shows that in the
past year, approximately 13,000 pounds of fentanyl have been seized at
the Southwest Border. Cutting-edge technology is crucial in
interdicting these dangerous substances and apprehending drug
traffickers.
Furthermore, dangerous cartels continually exploit vulnerabilities
in our border security. DHS's partnership with the private sector is
crucial in leveraging the most advanced technologies available to
identify, track, and respond to these threats on land, air, and sea.
We have a responsibility to our Nation to use every tool and
technology at our disposal to protect our homeland from these threats.
DHS's deployment of emerging technologies is necessary to combat
the illegal movement of aliens, drugs, weapons, and other illicit
commodities from crossing the United States Border.
As transnational criminal organizations and terrorists constantly
seek new methods to penetrate the vulnerable border, these innovative
technologies are essential in countering these evolving threats,
including the use of cartel drones and coyote smuggling operations.
The commercial security industry has always played a vital role in
protecting America's homeland. Private-sector investments in new
technologies have enabled components such as Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) to strategically deploy personnel and technology to
maximize the agency's effectiveness and fulfill its mission.
I would like to express my gratitude to our witnesses for appearing
before the committee today to discuss how DHS works with industry to
provide advanced solutions to our law enforcement personnel on the
ground, emblematic of the many private partners working with DHS to
secure our homeland.
Border security technology will never replace front-line agents and
officers. However, technology can be a critical tool to aid law
enforcement personnel carry out their mission. The need for advanced
technology will continue to grow, as well as the need for personnel
ready to defend our Nation.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.

Mr. Higgins. I recognize the Ranking Member, my friend, Mr.
Correa, to speak his opening statement.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, my good friend, Chairman Higgins.
Thank you, Chairman Bishop, for holding this important hearing,
and, of course, welcome to our witnesses today. Do hope to
learn more about what Congress can do to do a better job
preparing, implementing the latest technologies at our borders.
Today presents an opportunity to hear about the new
technologies that can support homeland security. I hope that we
in Congress learn the lessons that you all too well know to
continue to protect the homeland. I'm pleased to see the Biden
administration prioritize integrating advanced technologies
like AI, or artificial intelligence, into homeland security
initiatives, while still ensuring the protection of civil
rights and civil liberties. Advanced technologies will help CBP
officers and agents work more efficiently and effectively to
keep the American people safe.
I must say that our Nation has always been a Nation of
international trade and commerce. My home State, California,
the San Ysidro-San Diego border crossing every day over 70,000
vehicles cross and over 20,000 pedestrian cross that border on
a daily basis.
Our border customs officers, those folks in the blue
uniforms, scanned vehicles using AI-powered machines to detect
and interdict drugs and other dangerous substances before they
enter our country. These systems not only allow for better
targeting, but also for quicker inspections. Facilitating the
timely flow of trade and travel helps keep the economy strong.
Last year Nation-wide, CBP used over 370 nonintrusive
inspection scanners to examine more than 9 million conveyances,
resulting in the seizure of more than 127,000 pounds of
narcotics and the identification of 125 undeclared passengers.
But, clearly, the challenge--the scale of the challenge is
huge, and more technology is needed.
More scanners means less fentanyl on our streets. More
investment in cameras in ground-based sensors means more data
that our officers and agents can use to stop human smugglers
and human traffickers.
But as all of you know, technology isn't enough. In fact,
it's the well-trained men and women at our border that are our
greatest resource, and technology helps them do a good job. But
the women, men--men and women at our front lines are very
critical.
Sadly, our ports of entry today need over 5,000 more CBP
officers. Five thousand more CBP officers are needed at our
border today to do the job we are asking them to do. Border
Patrol is also facing a major shortfall. Even the best
technology cannot fill these gaps, and we should also remember
that border security does not start or end at our border.
Excuse me for a minute. We need the cooperation of our
neighbors across the hemisphere to tackle the big problems. We
need to be working with Mexico to counter drones and go after
smugglers and traffickers. We need to be working with the South
American countries to screen passengers coming into the
hemisphere at the point of origin. We need to I.D. potentially
dangerous individuals before they even get on a plane to come
to this hemisphere.
Lot of cooperation is happening, but it's still not enough.
Back home in California, we look at the border as an economic
driver that adds to our economic growth. California today is
the fourth-largest economy in the world. Trade and travel
across our borders boosts our economic output and brings us
closer to our southern neighbors.
Today, as Members of Congress, we support ways to increase
legitimate trade and travel while keeping the American public
safe. We often use technology to do this, but, sadly, the
timely and cost-effective deployment of technologies has been a
long-standing challenge for CBP. It is vital that the Federal
Government collaborate with the private sector to develop and
adopt cost-effective and innovative technologies sooner rather
than later.
To help address this problem, I've worked with Congressman
Luttrell to introduce the Emerging Innovative Border
Technologies Act, and this bill addresses the capability gaps
at border security by requiring the Secretary of Homeland
Security to submit a plan to Congress to identify, integrate,
and deploy innovating technologies, like AI, machine learning,
and nanotechnology into our border security initiatives. This
is just one of many other things Congress can be doing to help
the men and women at the border.
I look forward to hearing your recommendations today,
gentlemen. You are the experts. Let us know what else we can do
to make sure that technology comes to the forefront of our
battles at the border immediately, not 5, 10, 20 years later.
Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
[The statement of Ranking Member Correa follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member J. Luis Correa
July 9, 2024
Today presents an opportunity to hear about innovative technologies
that can support and strengthen the Department of Homeland Security's
border security effort. I hope we also learn how Congress can do more
to ensure our front-line personnel have access to the technology they
need when they need it.
I've been pleased to see the Biden administration prioritize
integrating advanced technologies like artificial intelligence into
homeland security initiatives, while still ensuring the protection of
civil rights and civil liberties.
As I am sure we will hear more today, advanced technologies can
help CBP officers and agents work more efficiently and effectively to
keep the American people safe. At San Ysidro in San Diego alone, over
70,000 vehicles and 20,000 pedestrians enter the United States every
day. There, our Customs officers--the blue uniforms--scan vehicles
using AI-powered machines to detect and interdict drugs and other
dangerous substances before they enter our communities. These systems
not only allow for better targeting, but also for quicker inspections
than intrusive manual inspections. Facilitating the timely flow of
trade and travel helps keep our economy strong.
Looking Nation-wide, last year CBP used over 370 non-intrusive
inspection scanners to examine 9.2 million conveyances, resulting in
the seizure of more than 127,000 pounds of narcotics and the
identification of 124 undeclared passengers. The scale of the challenge
is clearly immense.
More technology is needed. More scanners mean less fentanyl on the
street. More investments in cameras and ground-based sensors means more
data that our officers and agents can use to stop human smugglers and
human traffickers.
But technology isn't enough. In fact, well-trained personnel are
still the Department's greatest resource. Technology helps them do
their jobs, but the men and women on our front lines who staff our
ports of entry and work between ports of entry are absolutely critical.
Unfortunately, our ports of entry need over 5,000 more CBP officers to
do all of the work ask them to do. Border Patrol is also facing a
shortfall. Even the best technology cannot fill these gaps.
We should also remember that border security does not start or end
at our border. America alone cannot solve our border security
challenges. The right technology and personnel can help, but we need
cooperation across our hemisphere to tackle the big problems. We need
to be working with Mexico to counter drones and go after smugglers and
traffickers.
We need to be working with South American countries to screen
flights arriving in the hemisphere for individuals, particularly
dangerous individuals, who may attempt to cross unlawfully into the
United States. A lot of cooperation is happening already. But we still
need more. Our foreign partnerships are vital to securing our border.
In my State, we see the border as more than a national security
issue. It's the economic driver for my community and many others. Trade
and travel across the border support our economy--the greatest thing we
have as a country to compete with other countries. It boosts our
economic output and bring us closer with our southern neighbors. As
Members of Congress, we support ways to power the growth of legitimate
trade and travel while still keeping American communities safe.
We often use technology to do this. But unfortunately, the timely
and cost-effective deployment of technologies has been a long-standing
issue for CBP. It is vital that the Federal Government to collaborate
with the private sector and venture capital to develop and adopt cost-
effective and innovative technologies.
To help address these problems, I worked with Congressman Luttrell
to introduce the Emerging Innovative Border Technologies Act. This bill
addresses capability gaps in border security operations by requiring
the Secretary of Homeland Security to submit a plan to Congress to
identify, integrate, and deploy innovative technologies like AI,
machine learning, and nanotechnology into border security initiatives.
This is just one of likely many things that Congress could do to
help our men and women at the border. We must continue to work together
to create opportunities for CBP to utilize innovative technologies to
protect national security and facilitate trade and travel at the
Southern Border. I look forward to the recommendations from our
witnesses.

Mr. Higgins. The Ranking Member yields. I now recognize the
Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations, and
Accountability, the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr. Bishop,
for his opening statement.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon to
everyone attending. Thank you to our witnesses for joining us
today to share your insights on how the Department of Homeland
Security can partner with the private sector for technological
solutions to enhance border security.
As Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight,
Investigations, and Accountability, I have no doubt of the
critical need for DHS to take advantage of technology to
increase the operational effectiveness of the agents
responsible for securing our Nation's borders. The new
technologies act is a force multiplier for CBP agents in the
field and providing them with greater situational awareness and
enabling more efficient use of CBP resources.
For example, the deployment of autonomous surveillance
towers, unmanned aerial systems, and other surveillance
technology along the border facilitates real-time monitoring
for potential threats, especially in remote areas that are far
more difficult for Border Patrol agents to cover.
We know that there have been more than 1.8 million got-
aways at the border since January 2021, 194,000 since October
2023. That's a major national security crisis. Using technology
to detect and prevent these threats must be a critical
priority.
In a 2021 report, however, the DHS inspector general found
that CBP lacks sufficient personnel to fully leverage
surveillance technology advances. Using artificial intelligence
can help alleviate the manpower issue. Enabling surveillance
and processing tools to operate with greater autonomy may
reserve time for agents to attend to the most significant
threats personally. Automating previously labor-intensive tasks
also helps free Border Patrol agents to get back in the field
to safeguard the homeland.
Similarly, using--the use of nonintrusive screening
equipment and facial recognition technology at land ports of
entry plays a critical role in protecting the homeland while
facilitating lawful trade and travel. Our recent inspector
general report also found that, because of limitations in
camera technology, CBP had only a 76 percent success rate in
capturing images of vehicle passengers at ports of entry, and
of those captured, only 81 percent were of sufficient quality
to conduct adequate screenings.
Staying at the cutting edge of technology is vital to
national security and defending our border, particularly as
cartel tactics and use of technology have become increasingly
advanced. In recent years we've seen cartels routinely deploy
sophisticated and widely available drones to conduct
countersurveillance on Border Patrol and to advance their
smuggling operations.
In February last year, Chief Sector Patrol Agent Chavez
testified that the Rio Grande Valley sector had experienced
over 10,000 drone incursions in a single year. It is not hard
to imagine that cartels have increased the frequency of
incursions since then.
In transcribed interviews with the committee, multiple
sector chiefs affirmed that cartels seek to exploit any
perceived vulnerabilities to facilitate human and drug
smuggling across the border between ports of entry. CBP's
adoption and implementation of advanced C-UAS technology is
crucial to denying cartels the ability to freely operate drones
across the border.
The House Majority emphasized the importance of border
technology when it passed the border security bill, H.R. 2,
requiring CBP to present a 5-year strategic technology
investment plan that lists security technology priorities
needed to address risks and capability gaps. The bill also
requires CBP to provide clear goals and time lines for
implementing their technology priorities.
H.R. 2 also requires CBP to take steps to streamline the
acquisition process and increase partnerships in consultation
with the private sector to ensure that CBP is well-informed on
technological advances and innovations relevant to the border
security mission. The CBP innovation team has legislative
authority to fast-track technology projects up to $25 million.
As CBP considers and pilots new technologies, it is
important to define success and identify performance metrics to
ensure that money is spent efficiently and effectively.
According to the Government Accountability Office, as of July
2022, the CBP innovation team invested more than $120 million
in 73 cutting-edge technology pilot projects. At the time of
the report, however, the team had not clearly derived
strategic-level goals or quantified performance goals to assess
progress.
In an environment as fast-paced and crucial to homeland
security as the Southern Border, it is imperative to identify
metrics for success in implementing new technologies. It is my
hope that our witnesses can help identify these metrics and
performance goals so Congress can conduct meaningful oversight
over CBP's technology investments.
Of course, technology can't replace the need for Border
Patrol agents, a border wall, and the basic will to enforce our
immigration laws. It is not a silver bullet to solve the border
crisis, but it can help the men and women of Border Patrol to
be more effective in carrying out their mission of securing
America's borders.
Today's hearing is about how DHS can work with the private
sector to deliver smarter security and ensure that taxpayer
dollars are being used for the greatest effect. I look forward
to an informative hearing with our witnesses.
I yield back.
[The statement of Chairman Bishop follows:]
Statement of Chairman Dan Bishop
July 9, 2024
Good afternoon and thank you to our witnesses for joining us today
to share insights on how the Department of Homeland Security can
partner with the private sector for technological solutions to enhance
border security.
As Chairman of the Subcommittee on Oversight, Investigations, and
Accountability, I have no doubt of the critical need for DHS to take
advantage of technologies to increase the operational effectiveness of
the agents responsible for securing our Nation's borders.
These technologies act as a force multiplier for CBP agents in the
field, providing them with greater situational awareness and enabling
more efficient use of CBP resources.
For example, the deployment of autonomous surveillance towers,
unmanned aerial systems, and other surveillance technology along the
border facilitates real-time monitoring for potential threats,
especially in remote areas that are more difficult for Border Patrol
agents to cover.
We know that there have been more than 1.8 million gotaways at the
border since January 2021, including 194,000 since October, 2023.
That's a major national security crisis. Using technology to detect and
prevent these threats must be a critical priority.
In a 2021 report, however, the DHS inspector general found that CBP
lacked sufficient personnel to fully leverage surveillance technology
advances.
Using artificial intelligence can help alleviate the manpower
issue. Enabling surveillance and processing tools to operate with
greater autonomy can reserve time for agents to review the most
imminent threats. Automating previously labor-intensive tasks also
helps free Border Patrol agents to be back out in the field to
safeguard the homeland.
Similarly, the use of non-intrusive screening equipment and facial
recognition technology at land ports of entry plays a critical role in
protecting the homeland while facilitating lawful trade and travel.
A recent inspector general report also found that because of
limitations in camera technology, CBP had only a 76 percent success
rate in capturing images of vehicle passengers at ports of entry. And,
those captured, only 81 percent were of sufficient quality to conduct
adequate screenings.
Staying on the cutting edge of technology is vital to national
security and defending our border, particularly as cartel tactics and
use of technology have become increasingly advanced.
In recent years, we've seen cartels routinely deploy sophisticated
and widely available drones to conduct countersurveillance on Border
Patrol to advance their smuggling operations.
In February of last year, Chief Sector Patrol Agent Chavez
testified that the Rio Grande Valley sector had experienced over 10,000
drone incursions in a single year. It is not hard to imagine that
cartels have increased the frequency of incursions since then.
In transcribed interviews with the committee, multiple sector
chiefs affirmed that cartels seek to exploit any perceived
vulnerabilities to facilitate human and drug smuggling across the
border between ports of entry. CBP's adoption and implementation of
advanced C-UAS technology is crucial to denying cartels the ability to
freely operate drones across the border.
The House Majority emphasized the importance of border technology
when it passed the border security bill, H.R. 2, requiring CBP to
present a 5-year strategic technology investment plan that lists
security technology priorities needed to address risks and capability
gaps. The bill also requires CBP to provide clear goals and time lines
for implementing their technology priorities.
H.R. 2, also requires CBP to take steps to streamline the
acquisition process and increase partnerships and consultation with the
private sector to ensure that CBP is well-informed on technological
advances and innovations relevant to the border security mission.
The CBP Innovation Team has legislative authority to fast-track
technology projects up to $25 million dollars. As CBP considers and
pilots new technologies, it is important to define success and identify
performance metrics to ensure that money is spent efficiently and
effectively.
According to the Government Accountability Office, as of July 2022,
the CBP Innovation Team invested more than $120 million in 73 cutting-
edge technology pilot projects. At the time of the report, however, the
team had not clearly derived strategic-level goals or quantified
performance goals to assess progress.
In an environment as fast-paced and crucial to homeland security as
the Southern Border, it is imperative to identify metrics for success
in implementing new technologies. It is my hope that our witnesses can
help identify these metrics and performance goals so Congress can
conduct meaningful oversight over CBP's technology investments.
Of course, technology can't replace the need for Border Patrol
agents, a border wall, and the basic will to enforce our immigration
laws. It's not a silver bullet to solve the border crisis, but it can
help the men and women of Border Patrol to be more effective in
carrying out their mission of securing America's borders.
Today's hearing is about how DHS can work with the private sector
to deliver smarter security and ensure that taxpayer dollars are being
used for the greatest effect. I look forward to an informative hearing
with our witnesses.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Chairman Bishop.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Oversight, Investigations, and Accountability, the gentleman
from Maryland, Mr. Ivey, for his opening statement.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Chairman Higgins, Chairman Bishop,
Ranking Member Correa. To the witnesses, thank you for
appearing today. I look forward to your testimony.
I think my colleagues have raised a lot of the points that
I wanted to touch on. But with respect to the technology piece
for detecting, whether it's contraband coming across the border
or drones, I think it's critical that we make some immediate
and aggressive steps to try and address that.
We've got--when I had a chance to go down to the Rio Grande
Valley--it was about a year ago, I guess--we had a chance to
see some of the technology that was at work. This picture to my
right shows one of the scanners that's used for trucks as they
come through. You can see the result on my left side.
So it's almost like an X-ray or an MRI machine that can
detect what's going on inside the truck, and it's been very
effective, as I understand it, at identifying contraband and
slowing the flow.
You can put them down.
The challenge at the time was they didn't have enough of
them for the ports of entry. I know that they've been trying to
expand that number over time.
One of the things I'd like to hear about today is where we
are on that process, because they had the ability to transmit
back to a central location the results from each one of those,
just like if you went to get an X-ray at your radiologist, the
radiologist might not be reading it at the place where the X-
ray is being done. They might be at a different location. That
allows a more efficient use of the technology. It also allows
more use of AI, because AI does a better job of scanning than
the human eye does.
So one of the things I'd like to hear about is to what
extent we've integrated the AI into this process and how
extensively we're using these. Because I was told at the time--
and, again, that was almost a year ago, which is like dog years
in tech. That's, like, 20 years almost. But, you know, how far
have we come on that front?
Because if it's that effective--and I think everybody
agrees that--and Border Patrol was certainly in support of it--
let's see if we can expand it and do more with it to intercept
more. Because everybody agrees that fentanyl and other
contraband coming across the border has been devastating to the
country.
If we can have these kinds of solutions, which aren't super
expensive--they're not cheap, but they're, you know, worth the
weight of the--worth their weight in gold, I would say--we
should be trying to move in that direction quickly.
As the point was made a few minutes ago, yes, we need
Border Patrol agents. When we were down there, they said they
needed assistance. We've heard at hearings and some of the
reports we've gotten back from Homeland that they're 5,000
short on officers and agents. I know we're taking other steps
to try and address that.
We're working our way through the appropriations process,
and there's some hang-ups there that we need to work through, I
think, to make sure that there are no cuts to Homeland or--I
think the White House budget is the way to go. It's a little
less than what's been proposed by House Republicans here, but I
think we have to find a way to get the money to the front.
Because I think we all agree that--we might disagree about
a lot of things, but I think we all agree that the resources
need to go to the border to help address these kinds of issues.
I also wanted to talk a little bit about drones. My
colleague, Chairman Bishop, mentioned that already. But that
was another one that was brought to our attention when we were
down there at the border.
They Border Patrol agents were saying that they were
outnumbered 17 to 1 on drone usage and that the drones that the
cartels had were more sophisticated than the ones that we had
allocated to them. I'm hoping that that's changed over time,
but I'm not sure.
Then, of course, the other thing that we need to pay
attention to is the rapid transformation of drone technology,
in part based on what's going on in Ukraine and in part what's
going on in Gaza. When I was in Israel a few weeks ago, we had
a chance to tour a company called Rafael that's developing
anti-drone technology that is pretty amazing.
These are the guys that invented Iron Dome, the technology
they've got for intercepting drones. I believe we are working--
we being the United States and the Department of Defense--to
get that rolled out quickly. But as you heard a few minutes
ago, the cartels are using it for reconnaissance purposes, as
well as smuggling purposes, and we're not giving our people at
the border an equal chance to compete and fight back with that.
So to the extent we can do that quickly, I think we should do
it.
Now, I know there's a couple of bills that are pending in
the Congress, in the House here. One of them, I think, had 3
committees it had to go through, and I know Chairman Bishop
referenced H.R. 2 as well. We've got to make sure that, you
know, the pieces of those bills that need to get done so we can
address the drone issue, that has to happen.
I know, you guys, that's not your bailiwick there--I'm
talking to the witnesses, but I'm talking to our House of
Representatives, too. These are the kinds of things that we
need to get done so that we can get the tools to our people who
are on the border and arm them in the fight that they're waging
right now.
I also wanted to mention quickly the--DHS's OTA, the Office
of Transaction Authority, that does--that allows the Department
to bring in cutting-edge technology that can be used on these
fronts, and I know Ranking Member Correa and our colleague, Mr.
Luttrell, who is not here, but--have legislation to help with
this, too. We want to make sure we're moving all of this
legislation forward as quickly as possible.
I know this is a Presidential election year. I know all of
us are up for re-election or election to something, you know,
whatever. But this is one where I think we have to find common
ground and move this legislation, let--the pieces of
legislation so we can enable our people at the border to defend
us and give them the tools that they need to do it effectively.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Ranking Member Ivey. Other Members
of the committee are reminded that opening statements may be
submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 9, 2024
I welcome today's hearing on border security technology as I have
long supported small businesses interested in partnering with the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to fulfill the Department's
essential mission of securing our Nation.
I appreciate that the Biden-Harris administration and DHS have been
dedicated to increasing opportunities for small business owners as the
Nation strives to fulfill America's foundational promise. President
Biden is successfully carrying out his pledge to help minority-owned
businesses grow by increasing the amount of Federal funds spent on
contracts with small, disadvantaged businesses.
In fiscal year 2023, the Biden-Harris administration awarded an
all-time high of $178.6 billion in Federal contracts to small
businesses, including disadvantaged businesses. DHS obligated $9.9
billion to small businesses--the most in Department history. In
contrast, Republicans are proposing significant cuts to the Small
Business Administration and attempting to defund the President's agenda
to advance racial and gender equity in Federal contracts. Republicans
fail to recognize that when small businesses--the backbone of America's
economy--engage in Government procurement, they have the potential to
foster job creation, diversity, competitiveness, and innovation.
Unfortunately, the Federal procurement process may be complicated
and challenging to manage, particularly for businesses that have never
done business with the Government before. I look forward to hearing
today how we can strengthen the ability of businesses, especially small
businesses, to secure contracts with DHS to increase the use of novel
technologies, including border technologies.
Technology can have a profound impact on how we secure the homeland
and protect the American people. It can be a tremendous force
multiplier for the officers at ports of entry and agents in the field
who work tirelessly to prevent dangerous people and contraband from
entering our country. Technology makes it possible to inspect more
vehicles and cargo, identify who is entering the country, and detect
illegal border activity. However, we must use technology in a
responsible manner that protects privacy, civil rights, and civil
liberties.
I also look forward to discussing today how we can ensure
compliance with privacy policies and individual rights protections,
such as due process and non-discrimination, as we field new and
advanced border technologies.

Mr. Higgins. I'm pleased to welcome our panel of witnesses,
and I'll ask that all witnesses please rise and raise your
right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Higgins. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Thank you. Please be seated.
I'd now like to formally introduce the witnesses. The
Honorable Thaddeus Cleveland--this is the one time I get to
call you Thaddeus--is the sheriff of Terrell County, Texas. He
was appointed in 2022 and was later elected to office. Before
becoming the sheriff, Cleveland had a distinguished career in
the United States Border Patrol serving for over 26 years.
His last 11 years in Border Patrol was spent as a patrol
agent in charge of the Sanderson Border Patrol station. Sheriff
Cleveland served in multiple locations throughout Arizona, New
Mexico, and Texas. He also served as an assistant chief in
Washington, DC.
The gentleman seated to the sheriff's left, Mr. Carl
Landrum, is the vice president of Civilian Programs and
Strategy for Dedrone, a leader in smart airspace security.
Dedrone employs sophisticated machine learning video algorithms
to detect and pinpoint the position of drones from high-
resolution video camera feeds and is used to counter malicious
drones.
Prior to joining Dedrone, Mr. Landrum co-founded Landrum
Strategies, LLC, a business strategy development firm, and
served as the chief patrol agent of the Laredo sector of the
United States Border Patrol.
He was with the Department of Homeland Security for over 27
years in various border security roles. Highly experienced
gentleman.
To Mr. Landrum's left is Mr. David Berteau. The honorable
David Berteau is the president and chief executive officer of
the Professional Services Council. With more than 400 members,
PSC is an advocate of and resource for the Federal services
industry.
As CEO, Mr. Berteau focuses on legislative and regulatory
issues related to Government acquisition, budgets, and
requirements to improve communications between Government and
industry. Prior to PSC, Mr. Berteau was confirmed in 2014 as
the assistant secretary of defense for logistics and material
readiness, overseeing $170 billion in Department of Defense
logistics funding.
I thank the witnesses for being here today. The witnesses'
full statements will appear in the record.
I now recognize Sheriff Cleveland for 5 minutes to
summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF THADDEUS C. CLEVELAND, SHERIFF, TERRELL COUNTY,
TEXAS

Sheriff Cleveland. Chairman Higgins, Chairman Bishop,
Ranking Members Ivey and Correa, other distinguished Members,
thank you for the opportunity to be here today to talk to you
about Terrell County, Texas, and our role at the Terrell County
Sheriff's Office and border security efforts.
Other than my time in the United States Air Force and my
time here in Washington, DC, as a Border Patrol agent assigned
to U.S. Border Patrol headquarters, I have spent a lifetime on
the U.S.-Mexico border as both a resident and a Border Patrol
agent.
As you mentioned, I did spend 26 years in the United States
Border Patrol, the last 11 years as patrol agent in charge of
the Sanderson Border Patrol station, which is my home town out
in Terrell County, Texas, and it's also where I am the sheriff
now.
I'd still be a Border Patrol agent, but, unfortunately, we
lost our sheriff to a heart attack, Santiago Gonzalez, Jr. I
must say his name. He was a very good friend of mine, and he
was also a 30-year veteran of the United States Border Patrol.
He was our sheriff for a year, and at the age of 55 had a heart
attack.
It was at that time I knew it was time for me to take care
of my community in a different manner and still be able to
support the United States Border Patrol. I'll be honest with
you, I think I can support them more from being the sheriff
than I could as patrol agent in charge.
When I talk about Terrell County, it's the tenth-largest
county in the State of Texas. It's out in the Big Bend region,
some of roughest, toughest, most remote border area along the
entire 2,000-mile border with Mexico. Terrell County has 54
miles of river with Mexico, and it's a 2,300-square-mile
county.
The U.S. Border Patrol station there has 91 miles of
border. That's the third-largest amount of border by any
station in the United States Border Patrol.
With that being said, at the sheriff's office, fortunately,
we now have 5 of us, to include myself. Through Governor
Abbott's operation, Lone Star, we've been able to hire 2
additional deputies for that 2,300 square miles. Then the U.S.
Border Patrol has about 50 agents. The reason they don't have a
lot of agents is we don't have the same amount of activity they
do at other places along the border. However, the activity we
do have there is just important.
I want to talk about activity. Like the rest of the border,
we've seen a significant increase over the last 3 years--3\1/2\
years. The highest watermark we've had was a 417 percent
increase in illegal alien apprehensions. Again, that's our
county alone, 417 percent.
We had a 469 percent increase in got-aways. Again, that's
the highest watermark. Each year over the last 3\1/2\ years,
we've had significantly more apprehensions in our portion of
the border. With that being said, historically, we'd have 1
death, and we've had 37 deaths over the last 3 years in our
portion of the border.
Mr. Landrum and myself, both being Border Patrol agents,
we've seen the evolution of technology deployments in the U.S.
Border Patrol, going back from historical seismic centers in
the ground that you often had to drive, you know, hours, miles
to go and check to verify what actually crossed that piece of
Earth, if you will, look for sign, look for footprints. We've
seen that evolve to BuckEye game camera systems and other
camera systems that will send us real-time images to our
desktop computers.
We've also seen remote video surveillance, what we used to
call scope trucks, now remote video surveillance systems that
were--it used to be just a blob on the screen. Well, that
technology, obviously, has also increased, and now we have
almost crystal-clear pictures that we're able to observe and
distinguish if it's an animal or if it's a human. That's also
coupled with radar.
At my station--and, Chairman Bishop, you mentioned
autonomous surveillance towers. I was the patrol agent in
charge when we deployed our first 8 towers. Now we have 11, I
believe, in Sanderson, and that technology is really, really
beneficial because you don't have to have an agent sitting
behind a desk monitoring the camera. The radar and the
technology does it for the agent until it has an activation,
and then it assists in tracking.
But as you all pointed out, with that type of technology,
unless you have enough Border Patrol agents on the ground to go
out and apprehend those that it detects, it's useless. In my
environment there in Terrell County, we've experienced that
quite a bit. We have what is called task saturation where our
technology detects so much that we just don't have the
personnel to go out and chase it.
That's where my office comes in as far as to help support
U.S. Border Patrol. Look, in Terrell County, we don't have a
crime problem. What we have is a border security problem.
Back in 2008, I also spent 6 months at the State of Texas
border security operations center that was ran by Texas
Department of Public Safety. I was Border Patrol's
representative there. That is when they first deployed their
drawbridge camera systems. They now have over 7,000 cameras
along the U.S.-Mexico border. Those provide joint feeds to both
the Border Patrol as well as the Texas Department of Public
Safety.
I see my time is cutting short here. I just want to mention
also that--I know we talked about multi-layered defense, and
we're often talking about technology in that aspect, but I can
tell you what else we need.
It's still--regardless if we're at, you know, 8 million
illegal aliens crossing or 400,000, it takes partnerships.
That's where, again, our office comes to play along the border,
as well as Texas Department of Public Safety, Texas Parks &
Wildlife game wardens, and, of course, Texas military forces.
Last comment I would just like is to acknowledge the work
that U.S. Border Patrol agents do, specifically there in my
home town of Sanderson, as well as the Terrell County Sheriff's
Office, just a tremendous amount of work that's been done.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Sheriff Cleveland follows:]
Prepared Statement of Thaddeus C. Cleveland
July 9, 2024
Chairman Higgins, Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Correa, Ranking
Member Ivey, and distinguished Members of the committee, thank you for
the opportunity to discuss the conditions along the Southwest Border
and the efforts by the Terrell County, Texas, Sheriff's Office to serve
and protect our citizens.
I am honored to represent the citizens of Terrell County and
describe to you what the citizens, law enforcement, and Border Patrol
experience in our portion of the United States and Mexico border.
Other than my time in the United States Air Force and in
Washington, DC, while assigned to U.S. Border Patrol Headquarters, I've
spent my entire life as a resident and in the U.S. Border Patrol along
the U.S./Mexico border. The last 11 years of my 26-year Border Patrol
career were spent as the patrol agent in charge of the Sanderson Border
Patrol Station, which is also my home town and where I am Sheriff.
As background, Terrell County is located in the rugged,
unforgiving, vast Big Bend Region of Texas and shares 54 miles of
international border with Mexico. Terrell County is the 10th-largest
county in the State of Texas and encompasses almost 2,400 square miles.
The Border Patrol Station there is responsible for 91 miles of border,
which is the third-largest portion of border with Mexico by a United
States Border Patrol Station along the entire U.S./Mexico border.
Terrell County, does not have a crime problem, we have is a Border
Security problem. Over the last 3\1/2\ years, Terrell County like much
of the Southwest Border has seen a significant increase in illegal
alien apprehensions; however, what has happened in Eagle Pass, Del Rio,
El Paso, Lukeville, and San Diego with masses of people crossing the
border, does not happen in Terrell County. What we experience are
people who do not want to be apprehended nor give up. When we encounter
them in the desert, they run. When we encounter them on the highways,
they lead us in high-speed pursuits before bailing out and absconding.
The next set of statistics I am going to share with you are the
Sanderson Border Patrol Station fiscal year apprehension and gotaway
percentages compared to fiscal year 2020. In fiscal year 2021 there was
a 289 percent increase in illegal alien arrests and a 323 percent
increase in gotaways. In fiscal year 2022, there was a 417 percent
increase in illegal alien arrests and a 467 percent increase in
gotaways. Last fiscal year, there was a decrease in apprehensions and
gotaways, but it was still higher than the historical numbers with 189
percent increase in illegal alien arrests and 203 percent gotaways.
Citizens of Terrell County pay the price daily for the out-of-
control Southwest Border. We do not have the financial, medical, or
emergency resources as many of the other larger communities affected by
the activity along the border. Yet, the negative and detrimental
results are the same. Valuable and costly emergency and medical
resources are too often diverted to border security. In my county,
landowners have to repair waterlines, fences, and structures destroyed
by illegal aliens crossing their properties, as well as the significant
trash, human biohazard waste, and erosion. Emergency medical services
and law enforcement service has at times been unavailable due to
responding to illegal aliens that are crossing the border.
There has been a total of 37 known deaths of illegal aliens
attempting to cross my portion of the border over the last the 3\1/2\
years. Historically, there was 1 a year. All but 4 of those deaths were
from exposure due to the hot summer months as well as the cold winter
fronts that come through Terrell County. Four died in a vehicle
pursuit, which resulted in a head-on collision. High-speed pursuits
occur with almost every illegal alien smuggling load encountered and
puts citizens my team and I are responsible for in harm's way.
Due to the amount of illegal alien smuggling activity coupled with
the amount of vehicle pursuits we were involved in since I took over as
Sheriff, I reached out to Governor Abbott of the State of Texas and
requested additional resources to assist my office. Governor Abbott and
I discussed the situation, and within a week, the additional resources
I requested were allotted. With assistance from the Texas Department of
Public Safety and Texas Parks and Wildlife, together we seized over 100
vehicles from illegal alien smugglers in the months of November 2022.
Since then, we have observed a shift in tactics by smugglers and are
not seeing the same level of activity in Terrell County. Those shifts
in tactics is what brings us together today to discuss technology and
advancements.
I have seen the U.S. Border Patrol evolve with technology.
Technological evolutions have assisted the U.S. Border Patrol achieve
tremendous success with border security. I've witnessed seismic and
magnetic sensors evolve into imaging sensors, scope trucks have evolved
from black blobs on a screen to Mobile Video Surveillance Systems,
which use infrared night vision and radars with a near-crystal-clear
view.
As the patrol agent in charge of the Sanderson Border Patrol
Station, I worked with Sheriff Ronny Dodson of Brewster County, former
Terrell County Sheriff Clint McDonald to develop a network of BuckEye
game cameras that shared real-time images to our respective offices.
This was a collaborative effort to enhance border security and was the
first effort of its kind along the U.S./Mexico border.
Also, during my command of the Border Patrol Station in Sanderson,
Texas, we received and deployed our first 8 Autonomous Surveillance
Towers. This is an incredible asset, yet we quickly learned they
detected more activity and we did not have the manpower to pursue
everything the towers revealed. With that being said, you can have as
much technology on the border, but without the right balance of
manpower, the technology is useless.
The State of Texas is also utilizing various technology platforms
along the U.S./Mexico border. In 2008, I was assigned as U.S. Border
Patrol's representative to the State of Texas, during this time, Texas
Department of Public Safety first deployed their Drawbridge game
cameras along the along the U.S./Mexico border. This program now has
over 7,000 game cameras along the border. The State of Texas has also
constructed over 40 miles of border wall in Texas and has mounted
camaras systems on the wall as well.
As Sheriff, through Operation Lone Star, my office has been able to
receive night vision and thermal imaging devices and we are waiting on
approval of 3 Mobile Video Surveillance platforms.
I think defining success for border security initiatives at the
county level involves a collaborative approach and setting realistic,
localized objectives. Success at the county level is measured by our
ability to effectively utilize limited resources to enhance security
and reduce illegal activity. This means fostering strong partnerships
with Federal and State agencies, maximizing the impact of every dollar
spent, and ensuring our personnel are well-trained and equipped.
One key indicator of success has been our effective use of grants
and State programs. For example, through Operation Lone Star and
Operation Stone Garden, we've been able to hire additional deputies,
acquire new vehicles, and obtain vital technology like thermal cameras
and night vision equipment. These resources have significantly
bolstered our capability to patrol and secure the border.
Our success is also evident in the reduced level of illegal
activity in Terrell County. By taking control of the highways and
leveraging surveillance technology, we've deterred illegal crossings
and forced smugglers to reroute further north, avoiding our
jurisdiction. This shift is confirmed through intelligence reports and
feedback from sources on the ground.
At the Federal level, success is often measured by broader metrics,
such as overall apprehension numbers and the implementation of large-
scale infrastructure projects. The Federal Government operates with a
much larger budget and a focus on Nation-wide border security
strategies. In contrast, at the county level, we work with more
constrained budgets and focus on immediate, localized impacts.
Ultimately, success for us is defined by our ability to protect our
community efficiently and effectively, using available resources and
strong partnerships to fill gaps where Federal and State support is
limited. This local perspective ensures that we address specific
threats and challenges unique to our region, contributing to the
overall border security efforts in a meaningful way.
The chaos along our Southwest Border is solvable and preventable.
Solutions exist, they need only ask those of us on the ground dealing
with this every day. The border is open, overrun, and the criminal
organizations are taking full advantage of our political gridlock.
To secure our borders we must go back to securing the areas in
between our Ports of Entry. To do this, added resources such as
manpower, technology, and infrastructure are required to detect, track,
and apprehend those who mean us harm. Additionally, we must always be
prepared for a mass migration crisis. We must bolster our current
infrastructure to include the addition of more detention centers that
are used for short- and long-term detention of illegal aliens, that
include immigration judges at each location to expedite immigration
hearings.
Ports of Entry along the Southwest Border should be designated for
specific needs such as political relief, natural disasters, and work-
related industries.
Border Security and Immigration Reform are separate and individual
issues. They should be kept and managed separately as border security
does not just focus on illegal immigration. Border security is
paramount to national security.
To ensure the security of our Nation, those of us that have sworn
an oath to protect and defend the Constitution of the United States
must come together to develop, implement, and execute viable solutions.
This is why I am in speaking to you today. The advancement of
technology has been key to securing America's border. Technology
coupled with the ingenuity of Border Patrol agents will continue to
grow America's advancement of border security. Partnerships and
leveraging technologies at the Federal, State, and local level is also
necessary to keep American and American's [sic] protected.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Sheriff Cleveland.
I now recognize Mr. Landrum for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CARL LANDRUM, VICE PRESIDENT, CIVILIAN PROGRAMS
AND STRATEGY, DEDRONE

Mr. Landrum. Thank you, Chairmen Higgins and Bishop,
Ranking Members Correa and Ivey, and distinguished Members of
the subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify on behalf of
Dedrone. I hope my testimony will help the subcommittee better
understand the rapidly-evolving threats in the air space above
our international borders and that sophisticated technological
solutions exist to counter these threats and to keep Americans
safe.
My name is Carl Landrum, vice president of Civilian
Programs and Strategy at Dedrone, the U.S.-based global
provider of state-of-the-art air space security solutions with
the mission to protect people and property from malicious
drones while enabling the good drones to fly.
Prior to Dedrone, I served nearly 3 decades in DHS,
starting as a Border Patrol agent in 1996. During my career, I
witnessed the use of drones by cartels, transnational criminal
organizations, also known as TCOs, for drug trafficking,
reconnaissance, and surveillance while noting a lack of
technologically-based drone detection capabilities within the
Border Patrol.
Until my retirement in 2023 as a chief patrol agent and
including my present work in industry supporting U.S.
Government customers, I have experienced first-hand the
tremendous evolution of drone usage by TCOs to further their
illicit and deadly activities. Over the same time, the U.S.
Government's counter-drone technology at the border has
struggled to keep pace.
To close this capability gap, Congress must ensure that CBP
has sufficient resources to leverage commercially-available
technologies that can counter TCO drone operations. This
investment must be significant, and it must happen now as
nefarious actors around the world are rapidly advancing their
drone operations and exporting capabilities to our borders.
In the early days of the Ukraine conflict, Dedrone's
counter uncrewed aerial system, also known as C-UAS, was
deployed a crucial role in detecting drone activities. However,
as the conflict progressed, the techniques, tactics, and
procedures, or TTPs, used by both Russia and Ukraine have
evolved at the speed of war, rendering traditional
radiofrequency, or RF, detection methods such as decoding
infective.
Russia's ability to manipulate and conceal the RF
signatures from its drones through technologies like spoofing,
cloning, and even autonomous flight has made the sole reliance
on decoding unreliable.
Rooted in a long-standing tie between Russia and certain
countries in South America, we have begun to see some of these
TTPs arriving in the Western Hemisphere and making their way to
our own borders. Cartels in Mexico have billions of dollars to
invest heavily in sophisticated drone tactics, learn from
conflicts abroad. These tactics include drone-mounted
improvised explosive devices, and DMIEDs are already being used
on the Mexican side of the border today.
This past January, Dedrone entered into a contract with CBP
at no cost to the Government to perform a long-term
demonstration of C-UAS capabilities along a 5-mile stretch of
the U.S. border in Laredo, Texas. To date, Dedrone has invested
over $3.3 million to establish a multi-layer C-UAS detect,
track, and identify, DTI, capabilities, including
radiofrequency radar and camera sensors, as well as software
powered by AI, including machine learning and computer vision.
The Laredo demo can detect nearly 600 different drone
models, including both hacked and home-made drones. In the
first 80 days of the Laredo demo, we identified approximately
2,400 flights in the air space. DJI drones, detections
represented 71 percent of those alerts.
Additionally, 16 other drone manufacturers were detected in
the air space. This multi-layer solution of RF plus radar, plus
camera, combined with AI-driven sensor fusion has provided CBP
complete air domain awareness along these 5 miles of border.
Without Dedrone's larger investment, 29 percent of drone
flights in this air space would have gone undetected.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify, and I look
forward to answering any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Landrum follows:]
Prepared Statement of Carl Landrum
July 9, 2024
introduction
Chairmen Higgins and Bishop, Ranking Members Correa and Ivey, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittees, thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today on behalf of Dedrone. I hope
that my testimony will help the subcommittees better understand the
emerging threats in the air space along our international borders and
that sophisticated technological solutions exist to counter these
threats.
My name is Carl Landrum and I am the vice president of civilian
programs & strategy at Dedrone. Dedrone is a U.S.-based global provider
of state-of-the-art air space security solutions with the mission to
protect people and property from malicious drones, while leveraging
technology to allow good drones to fly. Prior to joining Dedrone last
year, I had the honor and privilege to serve as a law enforcement
professional and senior leader in the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) for nearly 3 decades. I began my career in 1996 as a Border
Patrol agent in San Diego, CA. After the tragic events on September 11,
2001, I transferred to become a Federal Air Marshal from 2003 to 2005,
and then transitioned back to the Border Patrol. Over the course of my
27 years with DHS, I had the opportunity to work in various roles in
multiple sectors along our Nation's international borders, including as
the deputy chief patrol agent of the Yuma Sector in Arizona and as the
chief patrol agent of the Laredo Sector in Texas.
Beginning in 2015, while I was serving as the deputy chief in Yuma,
I personally witnessed the genesis of the use of drones by trans-
national criminal organizations (TCOs)--also known as cartels--
operating on both sides of our international border with Mexico. In
those early years, the cartels conducted simple trafficking operations
using drones. For example, we observed and recovered drones flying
short distances from Mexico into the United States carrying small
amounts of methamphetamine and black tar heroin. Oftentimes these
drones would crash land in backyards demonstrating the initial lack of
knowledge, skills, and capabilities. At that time, the Border Patrol
had no technology-based drone detection capability whatsoever.
From 2015 until my retirement in 2023, and to include my present
work in industry supporting U.S. Government customers, I have
experienced first-hand the tremendous evolution of the usage of drones
by TCOs to further their illicit and deadly activities. While over the
same period of time, the U.S. Government's counter-drone technology and
capability has lagged far behind. To close this growing capability gap,
Congress must ensure that U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) has
sufficient resources to leverage commercially-available technology and
capabilities that can counter TCO drone operations. This investment
must be significant, and it must happen now, as nefarious actors around
the world are rapidly developing and advancing their drone operations
and exporting them to our borders.
from eastern hemisphere to western hemisphere
Since the early days of the on-going conflict in Ukraine, Dedrone's
counter unmanned-aerial systems (C-UAS) have been deployed on the
ground along the front line in what has grown into a full-scale drone
war between Russia and Ukraine. The tactics, techniques, and procedures
(TTPs) used by both countries have rapidly evolved at the ``speed of
war'' over the past 2 years and observing these TTPs first-hand
continues to provide us with incredibly unique and informative insights
and lessons into present and future drone warfare. At the beginning of
the war, ``advanced'' radio frequency (RF) detection, also known as RF
decoding, similar to what is still used on the U.S. borders today, was
the primary capability used to detect Russian drone operations and
attacks. Today that methodology of drone detection is wholly
insufficient and no longer the case in Ukraine. Russia's ability to
manipulate and conceal the RF signatures emanating from its drones,
through TTPs such as spoofing or cloning, or even fly autonomous
drones, means that relying on RF decoding alone for drone detection and
location is quickly becoming unreliable and obsolete.
RF decoding reads the RF signal communications between the drone
and its remote control to extract data such as GPS coordinates (if
available), altitude, and speed. However, there are many limitations to
relying solely on decoding as part of a C-UAS apparatus.

Encryption.--Many drones encrypt their RF signals to avoid
being located. These encryption keys can be easily updated and
changed to ensure that decoding remains not only expensive but
also unreliable. The moment it is known that an RF signal is
understandable, the manufacturer or user can simply leverage a
new encryption mechanism.

No Location Offered.--Not all drones come equipped with GPS
microchips installed. Therefore, if there is no GPS board then
there is no coordinate data to extract even if decoding is
possible. This non-existent GPS board issue is particularly
true when it comes to home-made drones.

Spoofing.--Unencrypted drone data can be susceptible to
tampering. The concern lies in the potential manipulation of
data transmitted by drones, a tactic known as spoofing.
Spoofers can alter drone signals, making them appear to
originate from a different location or masquerade as another
drone altogether. Additionally, spoofers can easily generate a
drone signal where there is no drone at all. This presents a
substantial hurdle in drone detection efforts, especially when
solely relying on RF decoding techniques.

Autonomous.--Some drones can be pre-programmed to fly a
specific route ahead of launch. With these drones there is no
RF signal to direct the drone during flight and thus no RF
signal to detect/decode.
Presently, Dedrone observes all these TTPs being implemented on
both sides of the conflict in Ukraine to hide the true location of
drones. As these TTPs become perfected on the battlefield, it was only
a matter of time before these TTPs permeated from the front line in
Ukraine into the Western Hemisphere and along our Southwest Border. The
TCOs operating along and south of our border with Mexico generate tens
of billions of dollars each year in revenue from their illicit
activities. With this endless supply of funds at their disposal, the
cartels invest significant resources into the latest and most
sophisticated drone-related TTPs that will further their illicit
activities and generate more profit.
Rooted in long-standing ties between Russia and certain countries
in South America, we are beginning to see some of these same TTPs
arriving in the Western Hemisphere and making their way to our own U.S.
borders. According to open-source media reporting, in October of last
year, 8 Colombians were arrested in Jalisco, Mexico for constructing
improvised explosive devices to be used as payloads on drones for a
local criminal gang involved in narcotics trafficking.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Narcosis, 8 Arrested in Mexico For Manufacturing Drone
Explosives, ATLAS NEWS (Oct. 9, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I have personally observed the steady maturation of the TCOs' drone
operations and use of technology on both sides of the U.S.-Mexico
border to thwart CBP's very limited drone detection capabilities.\2\
Even out-going Mexican President Lopez-Obrador over the past year has
openly called for greater international assistance to help Mexico with
its drone problem.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ CJNG attack against indigenous community of Michoacan
denounced, EJECENTRAL (Jul. 4, 2024). Mark Stevenson, Mexican cartels
now use IEDs as well as bomb-dropping drones, ASSOCIATED PRESS (Feb. 4,
2022). Gabriel Mondragon Toledo, NarcoDrones Have Become a Growing
Scare Tactic in Mexico's Drug Wars, INKSTICK (Nov. 7, 2023).
\3\ Julian Resendiz, AMLO seeks enhanced penalties to curtail drone
attacks, NEWSNATION (Aug. 10, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
u.s. borders lack air space security
At present along our international borders, the Border Patrol
maintains only basic C-UAS capability, using only decoding RF
methodology to detect, track, and identify (DTI), from only a single
manufacturer, DJI. For context, Dedrone maintains a library of over 150
unique drone manufacturers, from our deployments around the world.
Additionally, even with just this basic DTI capability deployed along
our international borders, there have been approximately 37,423 flights
detected near the border (within 400 meters) in fiscal year 2024 year-
to-date (YTD), of which >2,492 of those drones flew illegally across
the border.
Along our Southwest Border specifically, the use of drones by the
TCOs is growing at a rapid rate as they innovate to further their
illicit activities. Drones are currently being used by TCOs and other
illicit bad actors to:

Conduct surveillance of U.S. Government personnel and
facilities along the international border;

Conduct counter-surveillance on rival TCO and government of
Mexico (GoM) military positions;

Provide overwatch and guide groups of migrants attempting to
avoid apprehension;

Provide overwatch and guide individuals and groups smuggling
narcotics into the United States;

Physically drop narcotics via drone delivery across the
border;

Physically drop bundles of currency as payments to
individuals on the U.S. side of the border.
At the same time TCOs are using drones more frequently, they are
also continuously altering their technologies and methods, and flying
many different types of drones to defeat USBP's very limited DTI
capability--specific to only non-tampered DJI drones. At present,
Border Patrol agents have virtually zero capability to detect non-DJI,
modified DJI, or encrypted DJI drones.
laredo demo
In January of this year, Dedrone entered into an official contract
with CBP--at no cost to the Government--to perform a demonstration
project of C-UAS capabilities along a 5-mile stretch of the U.S.-Mexico
border in Laredo, TX. To date, Dedrone has invested over $3.3 million
to establish full spectrum C-UAS DTI capabilities including RF, radar,
and camera sensor hardware, as well as software powered by artificial
intelligence (AI), including machine learning and computer vision. This
Laredo Demo can detect nearly 600 different drone models including
altered drones and even homemade drones.
In addition to non-tampered DJI drones, the Laredo Demo project
also detected the following drone types:

In the first 80 days of the Laredo Demo, Dedrone detected 682
unique serial numbers operating along this 5-mile section of the
border. It is important to note that this accounted for only 71 percent
of the total drone detections made during this period. There were an
additional 16 drone manufacturer types that would NOT have been
detected but for the Laredo Demo project. These detections comprise 29
percent of the total made during this period and would not have been
detected prior to the Laredo Demo. The full spectrum of sensing
capability--RF, radar, and camera--combined with the AI-driven sensor
fusion, temporarily deployed by Dedrone, allow CBP to have complete air
domain awareness along these 5 miles of border. Without it, CBP is
limited to their basic DTI capability--specific to only non-tampered
DJI drones--and would be blind to 29 percent of all drone flights.

recommendations for congress
C-UAS Authorization Legislation

We strongly urge Congress to enact comprehensive C-UAS
authorization legislation this year to ensure that CBP's C-UAS
authorities to protect people and property continue well into
the future.

We applaud Chairman Green and Ranking Member Thompson for
their leadership and tireless work on H.R. 8610, the Counter-
UAS Authority Security, Safety, and Reauthorization Act, and we
strongly support the framework and principles of the bill.

Any authorization must include a multi-year renewal of
Federal authorities.

As is envisioned in H.R. 8610, Congress should enact a
multi-year extension and enhancement of C-UAS authorities
under 6 USC 124n for Federal Government agencies like CBP.

Providing agencies with adequate certainty over multiple
years will allow for better planning and budgeting for C-
UAS programs and activities.

H.R. 8610 also contains provisions that clarify the rules
for how and when law enforcement can utilize RF decoding to DTI
unauthorized drones. While RF decoding has its limitations, it
remains a useful tool, and it is vitally important to clarify
the policies law enforcement must adhere to.
DHS Appropriations

Increase funding for the procurement of C-UAS capabilities
by CBP.

As the subcommittees know, the House recently passed a DHS
Appropriations bill for fiscal year 2025 that included a
generous increase in funding to enable CBP to procure
additional C-UAS capabilities. Thank you for this very
timely and important investment in our border security.

Based on my 3 decades of experience executing and leading
border security operations, including the past 9 focused on
C-UAS threats and capabilities, it is my view that CBP
requires a $1 billion program of record to counter current
and emerging threats, and achieve appropriate air space
security along our international borders.

Based on this metric, I believe that Congress should
appropriate $250 million as an initial down payment for the
procurement of CBP C-UAS capabilities.

Congress should direct and encourage CBP to fund C-UAS
programs and activities that move beyond single manufacturer RF
decoding including:

Expand RF sensing to DTI all RF based drones including
spoofed or encrypted drones as well as homemade drones. As
previously described, there are many limitations to relying
solely on decoding as part of a C-UAS apparatus.

Full RF sensing includes localization through
different types of triangulation (ie: angle of arrival and
time difference of arrival) to offer a more fail-safe way
to detect and locate drones.

Angle of arrival (AOA).--Using this method, one
sensor can be used to determine the direction of the drone
and multiple sensors can be leveraged to calculate the
exact position of the drone based on triangulation from
multiple direction sensing sensors.

Time difference of arrival (TDOA).--This method
measures the difference in time of arrival between several
sensors. TDOA depends on the distance between the drone and
sensors.

Further enhance DTI capabilities to detect autonomous
drones (no RF signal) and drones at greater distances by
bringing long-range radar and long-range camera (for visual
confirmation and payload detection) into a single fused
instance from these multiple sensor types.

Enhance non-kinetic mitigation capabilities to allow CBP
personnel to safely address unauthorized drone activity.

Develop and deploy advanced jammer-based mitigation
that is effective against single drones as well as drone
swarms (defined as more than one drone) and sustainable as
the threat seen around the world evolves in the United
States.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify and I look forward
to answering any questions you may have.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Landrum.
I now recognize Mr. Berteau for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID J. BERTEAU, PRESIDENT AND CEO, PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES COUNCIL

Mr. Berteau. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for the
opportunity to be here, Chairman Higgins, Chairman Bishop,
Ranking Member Correa and Ranking Member Ivey, and the rest of
the Members of the committee. It's a great privilege for me to
be here today.
I represent the Professional Services Council, as you noted
in our opening statement, Chairman Higgins. That's over 400
member companies. It's large, medium, small companies, and we
cover only Federal Government contracting. That's our focus, is
how does the Federal Government get more out of the private
sector? To do that, I want to emphasize the partnership.
I'd like to deviate a little bit from my statement and
respond to some of the comments that each of you raised in your
opening remarks and talk about how we come into play there.
Chairman Higgins, you raised the real issue right at the
beginning, right? The threat is evolving faster than our
ability to acquire and use the technology. It's not that
technology isn't developing fast enough. It's that the
Government processes to put the requirements in place, this is
what we need, to get the funds in place, get Congress to
authorize and appropriate those funds, and then actually issue
the contracts and administer those--that's a long period of
time. So you put your finger on it right there. We got to move
faster because the threat is evolving faster to take use of
that technology.
Mr. Correa commented about tech is not enough. You got to
have the people. I think that when we look at--I believe Mr.
Ivey, you mentioned AI as a supplement to that. It's not to
replace people. It's to actually use the time that people have
to be more effective. That's one of the real challenges we have
because we can overwhelm ourselves in that regard.
Mr. Bishop, you focused on what really matters a lot to me,
which is streamlining the acquisition process so you can
actually get to results faster--right?--and to increase that
partnership. We've got a number of recommendations that we come
into play there.
So let me--let me just say, from PSC's, our 3 main goals--
and they're not just goals for technology at the Government.
They're goals for the whole Federal Government--our goal is to
help make the Government a smarter customer. By that we mean
better able to know what they can get, what's out there.
You know, they come looking to you--I mean, the first thing
that the Government will say is, well, I don't have a
requirement for that. That's because they didn't know you could
do it. So make them a better--a smarter customer. Make them a
better buyer, better able to go get it faster. But, more
importantly, streamline the process so you can get technology
at the pace it's developing.
Then, finally, all of you mentioned the connection to the
work force. If you don't have the people, it doesn't matter
what the technology is going to do.
So we have 4 suggestions that we make for this Congress and
for DHS to do that, and I'll be glad to go into those in more
detail in my--in the questions here.
No. 1 is that we believe DHS should focus its contract
requirements more on results and outcomes--what do I want to
get done with this contract--rather than on inputs. I'm going
to buy so much time, so many labor hours, so many labor
categories, et cetera.
No. 2 is Congress can support long-term commitments better
by passing appropriations on time. When you don't get your
appropriations until March 23, and then it takes OMB a month to
apportion it down to headquarters, and it takes headquarters
another month to apportion it down to CBP, you've got 3 months
left in the fiscal year to spend the money. You can get the
technology faster, DHS can deliver the results faster if we
appropriate the funds on time.
The third is that contracts take too long, and we think
Congress can help DHS speed up the time it takes to award
contracts. I'll be glad to elaborate on that a little more
during the questions.
Then, finally, in the end, you know, innovation and
technology doesn't do any good if people can't use it. So you
need to train, you need to take into account how people are
going to use it as part of that process. You know, innovation
that we don't use is not a solution. It's just an additional
problem to come into play.
So we think a lot more emphasis needs to be on training for
use and a focus on use when we acquire that technology.
With that, gentlemen, I'll close my remarks and tell you
I'm grateful for your time and consideration of these matters,
and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Berteau follows:]
Prepared Statement of David J. Berteau
July 9, 2024
introduction
Chairman Higgins, Chairman Bishop, Ranking Member Correa, Ranking
Member Ivey, and Members of the committee, thank you for the invitation
to testify on the role of technology and innovation in our Nation's
border security strategy.
I appear before you today on behalf of the Professional Services
Council (PSC). We are a trade association of companies that do business
with the Federal Government, with more than 400 member companies and
hundreds of thousands of employees across the Nation. PSC represents
the full scope of the Government contracting sector, with companies of
all sizes (small, mid-sized, and large). Our member companies work in
partnership with every Cabinet department and agency, supporting every
mission and function of the Federal Government.
I am here not just as the head of PSC but also as a person with
more than 40 years of experience on these issues from all sides,
including two stints inside the Pentagon as well as with industry, at a
think tank, in academia, and now in my ninth year at PSC. I have run
contracts that undertake to bring technology to border security and to
the broader challenges of national security and addressing the
Government's needs. I have worked with State and local governments in
partnership with Washington. I have seen the challenges that both sides
face, and I have worked to provide what is needed to improve
acquisition outcomes. In particular, I have long wrestled with how
Federal agencies can find, acquire, and use new technology and
innovative processes and systems.
PSC's member companies provide the full range of technology and
professional services to all Federal agencies that pertain to our air,
land, and sea border-related issues. Within the Department of Homeland
Security, their customers include Customs and Border Protection (CBP),
the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), and Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). They also support
agencies beyond DHS, including for example the Office of Refugee
Resettlement (ORR) in the Department of Health and Human Services and
the Justice Department's Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR)
as well as many other programs and agencies.
PSC member companies help the Government acquire and use multiple
technologies, including detection systems, communication systems and
networks, artificial intelligence and data analytics, UAS (unmanned
aerial systems) and counter-UAS, case management, information
technology systems and infrastructure, and many other vital and
emerging technologies needed for border security.
The diversity of contracts and customers, the range of solutions
provided, and the size and reach of PSC member companies give us broad
and deep perspectives on the challenges involved with identifying,
procuring, and implementing technology and innovation to secure our
borders and the important partnership role that our members and all of
industry has in supporting border security in all its dimensions.
In fiscal year 2023 (FY23), DHS obligated more than $25 billion on
contracts, including:

$7 billion for CBP,

$2 billion for TSA,

more than $3 billion for ICE, and

$1.4 billion for USCIS.
Both new and legacy technology needs make up a significant part of
those contract dollars, playing essential and critical roles in
protecting and securing the border. These contracts represent the
partnership of Government and industry, working together on the same
goal--to develop and acquire the capabilities needed for mission
success through systems and processes that are timely, cost-effective,
and accountable. That partnership operates within Federal acquisition
rules and regulations that encourage competition, innovation, and
investment in the homeland security marketplace.
psc goals for the government-contractor partnership supporting
technology and innovation
At PSC, we support this Government-contractor partnership by
focusing on three goals:

making the Government a smarter customer and a better buyer
(i.e., knowing what to buy and how to buy it),

improving contracting procedures to support technology
modernization and innovation, and

supporting policies and practices that build and sustain the
workforces needed to meet Government missions, both for our
member companies and for their Government customers.
First is to help the Government become a smarter customer and a
better buyer, leading to improved acquisition outcomes. Being a smarter
customer means knowing what is available from every source, including
the private sector, the national economy, and around the world. Being a
better buyer means that, once the Government identifies a product or
service they can use, being better able to get the funds and procure
that product or service. Both goals need to focus on getting better
results for the Government, consistent with its needs.
Second is to support technology modernization and innovation
through contracts. The Government is not alone in being able to find
and get innovation and new technology. Contractors can and do play
vital roles in extending the Government's reach, capability, and
capacity. I will have more to say on these vital roles later in this
statement.
Third is to support workforces needed to meet Government missions,
both for our member companies and for their Government customers.
Better and more relevant training is an important part of workforce
development and retention, and it is one of the areas that Government
contractors can strongly support. These goals are particularly
important in all the areas affected by border security, where shortages
of trained, experienced personnel is a long-standing issue.
In summary, the overall goal of PSC and our member companies is to
help the Government operate better, improve outcomes and results, and
achieve its missions. These goals are particularly important in all
aspects of achieving border security.
keys to a comprehensive and successful strategy
Next, I want to touch on the elements of a successful border
security strategy. My Pentagon experience taught me that a successful
strategy needs to address ends, ways, and means. Most importantly, a
strategy is only as good as its implementation. A key element of
successful implementation is for the strategy to include finding and
using technology and innovation to support its goals.
``Ends'' are the objectives, both as a final state and as the
strategy is being followed. What are the goals?
``Ways'' are the actions and reactions taken to pursue the
strategy's objectives. What do you do, and particularly what do you do
differently?
``Means'' are the resources needed: The people, the equipment, the
funds, the support, and the innovation and technology.
In essence, a strategy is a detailed plan, with goals, planned
actions, and resources. Designing, issuing, and implementing any
strategy, including a border security strategy, is a joint
responsibility of the Congress and the Executive branch, but it also
depends on that Government-industry partnership. Let me highlight some
of the roles contractors play in setting and implementing strategy.
Our member companies do not develop or promulgate the Government's
strategies. They do not set the goals and objectives. Setting goals and
defining the objectives (the ``ends'') of any strategy is the
Government's job, what the Office of Management and Budget calls
``inherently Governmental functions.''
It is also the Government's job to lay out the actions and
reactions taken to pursue the strategy's objectives, the ``ways'' of
the strategy.
The ``means'' are also set partially by the Government. Executive
branch agencies set up the offices and programs and, through the
Congress, secure the funding, part of the ``ways'' of the strategy.
Where contractors come in is providing some of the rest of the
``means,'' including the necessary people, equipment, facilities, and
support. Throughout the implementation of a strategy, adjustments will
be needed. On the border, for example, closing one access point might
lead to increased use of another access point, requiring shifts in
resources and activities. It is in that adjustment and adaptation where
technology and innovation can play a big role, and contractors are also
the broadest and deepest source of technology and innovation to help
that adjustment. Let's look at that more closely.
technology and innovation
At PSC, we connect the words ``technology'' and ``innovation'' to
focus on technology solutions and innovation in systems and processes.
Innovations can be changes in operations, improvements in integrating
data, upgrading communications systems and networks, or cutting the
time needed for a specific action. Often, the two (technology and
innovation) go together. Incorporating a new technology can require,
for example, changes in procedures, updates in training, or alternate
ways to exchange data or to communicate.
Recent years have seen a call in the Government for more
innovation. This includes greater access to companies in the private
sector, including companies with no prior Federal Government business.
That approach should be part of the Government's pursuit of innovation,
but it's not enough. The Government also needs to improve its use of
today's contractors as a path to greater use of technology and
innovation.
Why is that? It is because doing business with the Federal
Government is not the same as doing business in the commercial market.
Contractors are funded with taxpayer dollars, and the American public
expects tighter, more rigorous Government rules and regulations for
Federal contractors than for other private-sector companies. Congress
regularly responds to instances of contractor misconduct by updating or
expanding laws that flow through those regulations.
These rules mean that companies that do business with the Federal
Government must comply with myriad requirements and produce reports
that depend on accounting systems, billing processes, employee time
keeping, and detailed information far beyond those needed for
commercial business. The Government often requires contractors to
provide access to their proprietary intellectual property, their
software code, or their trade secrets.
All of these compliance requirements are designed to support
Government goals, but they often contribute little to actually
delivering results under a contract. In general, purely commercial
companies do not need or have the systems and processes in place to
certify compliance with Government contracting requirements. Since
failure to comply often can incur civil and criminal penalties and even
result in a company being debarred from future Government contracts,
these rules add costs and time and are therefore a disincentive for
commercial companies to compete.
Since existing Government contractors already have those compliance
systems in place, they are in a better position to help their
Government customers identify useful new technology and innovation and
to work with the Government to modify existing contracts to incorporate
that new technology into delivering better results. Using existing
contractors to identify and incorporate technology and innovation can
reduce the risk for the Government, help target new technology and
innovation to those aspects of the mission where they will produce the
greatest benefit, and provide improvements without the time-consuming
effort to award new contracts.
The bottom line, then, is that both new and existing contractors
can help the Government incorporate technology and innovation to meet
mission needs, including border security.
a multi-layered border security strategy
A multi-layered border security strategy needs to include the
necessary ends, ways, and means of any good strategy. But what would a
multi-layered border security strategy need to cover?
It's critical to address the immediate zone of border crossings
(detection, identification, interception, etc., both at or away from
authorized ports of entry) of both the Southern and Northern Borders as
well as coastlines and airports, but a multi-layered strategy is more
useful if it covers additional topics, including but not limited to,
for example:

U.S. needs for better intelligence before individuals arrive
at any border

entry points that are not at the land boundaries of the
Nation (air, sea)

drugs or other unwanted materiel arriving in small packages
or in containers (or via drones)

tracking people, processing cases, and managing and reducing
case backlogs

detention, housing, and medical care, etc., of individuals.
This broader, multi-layered approach would involve more than CBP to
include not only the relevant agencies and components of the Federal
Government but also State and local governments and other nations. In
all of these interactions, a multi-layered strategy would be better to
the extent it incorporates new technology and innovation in products,
systems, and processes, leading to better success across the broad
definition of ``border security.''
Most importantly, for border security, a multi-layered strategy
needs to be more than simply ``ends, ways, and means.'' The actions
(the ``ways'') and the resources (the ``means'') need to be integrated,
tied together in a common operating picture and interoperable,
accessible, and useable by all players. Doing that demands better use
of new technology and innovation across the board.
why is it hard for the u.s. government to use technology and
innovation?
It is hard to get the Government to see the value of new
technology, new systems, and new processes, to allocate scarce funds to
buy and use them, and to change how it operates so that it can realize
the advantages of that innovation. Why is this so hard? Here is what
I've learned.
(1) It is hard for the Government to identify or become aware of
applicable and relevant new technology, systems, and processes;
(2) It takes time (years) to plan, program, budget, and get
Congress to provide the necessary funding to procure and use
technology and innovation;
(3) It takes more time to solicit, evaluate, and award the
contracts or buy the technology; and
(4) It takes still more time to get the Government personnel at all
levels to deploy and use the new systems and processes and
technology.
Using existing contractors, as noted above, can cut some time from
these steps, but it still takes too long.
What, then, do we suggest will address all the issues outlined
above?
psc suggestions to improve access to and use of technology and
innovation
PSC draws on the experiences of its member companies as they
undertake to identify innovations and new technology, offer them to the
Government, and incorporate them into on-going operations. Based on
that, we offer the following suggestions as ways to improve access to
and use of technology and innovation.
(1) Earlier and More Comprehensive Identification of Innovations and
Technology for Border Security
DHS components can improve their ability to find useful technology
and systems and process improvements through actions such as:

Focus their requirements, both for contracts and for
operations, on results and outcomes, not just on inputs, and
promulgate those requirements publicly so that companies can
work to develop technology to meet them. Update the
requirements often to incorporate available innovation.

Develop and make publicly available a long-term (e.g., 5-
year) investment plan and update that plan regularly.

Expand communications with industry and encourage both
existing and potentially new contractors to offer solutions.
Give feedback to those offerings.
(2) Support Long-Term Resource Commitments and Increase Flexibility for
Existing Resources
DHS can improve its use of existing funding and justify the need
for additional funding. These suggested steps and improvements may
help.

Border security will be substantially improved if Congress
appropriates funds on time, by the beginning of the fiscal
year, avoiding continuing resolutions or the disruptive threats
of a Government shutdown. On-time appropriations will enable
DHS components to access technology and innovation faster and
get results sooner.

DHS can use existing reprogramming authority earlier and
more often in the fiscal year to address emerging needs and
opportunities. (Note that this needs support from both the
White House and Congress.)

Use multi-year funding and contracts to support key
investments in new technology.
(3) Speed Contract Awards
An age-old problem with the Government is that, when contracts take
too long to put in place, by the time new technology is procured, it
will no longer be new. Recent data show clearly that, across the
Government, the time between a contract solicitation and the award of
that contract has been getting longer. In addition, delays appear to be
increasing in the period of time before a solicitation is issued. Both
of these problems need attention by DHS and Congress.
Congress can help by conducting oversight hearings that illuminate
both the increased time consumed by contracting and the causes and
possible fixes to reduce that time. Congress can also help by requiring
annual reports from DHS on procurement and administrative lead times
for all types and sizes of contracts.
(4) Training To Use New Technology
We all know how hard it is to adapt to an upgrade or an innovation
in something that we are used to, whether it's using a new cell phone,
the latest version of the operating system of a laptop, or the features
and controls of a new car. This same dynamic exists when any agency or
component incorporates new technology and innovation into existing
operations.
To offset this natural occurrence, DHS components could plan for
and fund the time, the resources, and the capacity and capability to
train the workforce to take advantage of new technology. Contractors
can help develop and provide that training more rapidly and broadly.
conclusion
In closing, on behalf of PSC and our members, I thank you for your
time and consideration of these matters. PSC member companies are proud
to work with CBP, with DHS, and with other Federal departments and
agencies to provide technology and increase innovation for border
security. We are committed to the missions.
As always, PSC is available at your convenience to address any
questions or concerns the committee has, now and in the future. I will
try today and for the record to answer any questions you may have, and
I look forward to continuing to work with the committee and these
subcommittees on these issues. Thank you.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Berteau.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for 5
minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning may
be called after all Members have been recognized. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Landrum, would you clarify for the committee and for
the Americans that are watching regarding drone technology? In
my limited time, it's just what I'm going to focus my questions
on for you gentlemen.
Regarding drone tech and anti-drone tech, will you explain
the difference between defensive and offensive capabilities for
anti-drone technology for America?
Mr. Landrum. Yes, sir. When it comes to C-UAS
capabilities--which is what you're referring to--there are 2
big portions of that. One of them is the ability to detect,
track, and identify a drone that is flying in an air space that
is being covered by that particular technology.
Mr. Higgins. Is what I'm referring to--not to interrupt,
but that we would call defensive drone technology. Would you
explain offensive drone technology?
Mr. Landrum. Yes, sir. That side of it is referred to as
mitigation. Mitigation can take forms of radiofrequency, so via
jamming, radiofrequency jamming. It also could be kinetic; just
depends on the situation. Inside the United States, kinetic is
not used.
Mr. Higgins. So for radiofrequency interruption for a drone
that's been observed by a law enforcement professional on the
front line as a suspicious drone, a criminal drone, the
defensive technology of our anti-drone capabilities is that we
can track those drones, and we can show the history of that
flight, we can identify that drone. But the full capability of
anti-drone technology--I bring this us up for my colleagues
across the aisle primarily, because what the administration has
been telling us, what the Secretary of Homeland Security has
been telling us, we're using that anti-drone technology. But
he's only telling you the half-truth.
It's used in the defensive capabilities of our anti-drone
technologies, not the offensive capabilities or the mitigation
capabilities. So when you talk about radiofrequency
interruption, you're talking about landing that drone, correct?
Mr. Landrum. What we are talking about with jamming--the
radiofrequency jamming, which can be band jamming, spectrum
jamming in some--in some cases or some technologies----
Mr. Higgins. What happens to that drone?
Mr. Landrum. What you're doing is you're breaking the
connection between that drone and its pilot.
Mr. Higgins. Right. So what happens to the drone itself?
Mr. Landrum. The drone generally in every situation is
different. Every single environment is different, and what's
available mechanically is different.
But generally, what happens is 1 of 3 choices. Either, No.
1, that drone will be disrupted, it won't know what it's doing,
so it will return to its home location automatically. No. 2, it
could just come straight down to the ground. Or, No. 3, if the
right circumstances existed, you could actually take control of
that drone and bring it----
Mr. Higgins. You could take control of it. In the interest
of time--I'm trying to get to here--the offensive capability of
our existing anti-drone technology allows us to disconnect a
criminal drone from its operator and take control of it either
because we land it or we actually seize control of it.
Is this a technology that we currently have?
Mr. Landrum. We do have very limited amounts of that
technology.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Sheriff, long ago when I was a young
police officer, 20 years ago--I think it was 2005--one of the
more interesting things that happened that week, we had an
armed robbery, high-speed chase. I happened to be involved, was
able to force the suspect's vehicle to crash. In the process,
crashed my own car, but made the arrest.
When the supervisor showed up pretty quickly, my crashed
patrol car and that crashed suspect car was not treated with a
typical Louisiana uniform motor vehicle crash report. It was
treated as a criminal--as a part of a law enforcement action in
that response to criminal activity.
So the crash itself was documented in our investigative
report, not in a typical uniform motor vehicle crash report,
because it was a law enforcement action.
On the border, when law enforcement uses the offensive
capabilities of our existing technology to bring down a drone,
this administration wants to treat that law enforcement action
as a crash to be investigated by FAA.
So this is something--we have follow-up questions we're
going to deliver in writing to you gentlemen. But it's an area
where I believe that this committee can come together and
address the common-sense difference between a law enforcement
action where a drone is taken down using existing technologies
that we have versus an aircraft crash that requires
investigation by FAA.
My time has expired, but my interest in this topic has not.
I yield to the Ranking Member.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I concur with you on
this being an issue for both of us to work on, both sides of
the aisle.
I want to also add to that another wrinkle in our FAA law,
which is, if our locals want to take down drones, do anything
with drones, right now they are prohibited from touching
drones. Only a Federal authority can actually do anything of a
sort to a drone.
So that means my folks back home monitoring Disneyland or
an Anaheim Angels game, it's the local authorities, they have
no power over bringing down a drone. So there's a lot of issues
in existing law that we have to address. More in lines of,
really, how do we coordinate Federal, State, and local agencies
against this--you know, this danger, so to speak?
If I may, gentlemen, thank you for your comments. Mr.
Landrum, I want to start with you. Yesterday we spoke, and you
said you started seeing drones at the border as early as 2014?
Mr. Landrum. It was late 2015, 2016, 2017 is where we
really started seeing this activity at the border.
Mr. Correa. Have we reacted? Do you believe the homeland
security reacted appropriately to these threats at that time?
Mr. Landrum. Sure. I think the reaction has--was slower
than I would have wanted it to be as a Border Patrol agent on
the border at the time. But there has been a reaction.
Yes, some--some equipment and some assistance has arrived
to help the agents.
Mr. Correa. You know, not only has the number of drones
coming across the border increased, but you said something
right now that caught my interest. You said cartels in Mexico
have billions. We know they are. They have the best consumer
market in the world, American drug consumers. They've got a lot
of money.
But you said cartels in Mexico have billions to--and
they're using explosive devices. On whom?
Mr. Landrum. There are multiple open-source media reports.
An easy Google search can deliver dozens upon dozens of these
throughout the entire country of Mexico where drones with
explosives are being utilized down there. In addition to the--
--
Mr. Correa. Utilized against who? Authorities or each other
or all of the above?
Mr. Landrum. I think it's really all of the above.
Definitely utilized between rival cartel positions and
government of Mexico positions, but also as recently as just
last Friday in my--in my longer opening statement, just last
Friday, you know, a cartel attacked some local community
members in a drone attack that went on for a couple of hours.
Mr. Correa. So these are very dangerous offensive
capabilities that are now being introduced to drones to be
used?
Mr. Landrum. These are dangerous offensive capabilities
that are being utilized by the cartels, and they are getting--
--
Mr. Correa. As I watch what's going on on a daily basis the
Ukraine war, this technology is evolving on a real-time basis.
Every day somebody is coming up with a better way to hit the
other side, so to speak.
I guess, Mr. Berteau, you gave us 3 ways that we could
speed up the delivery of these technologies to our front line,
so to speak. I'm just concerned, given what I know of the
bureaucracy, both State and Federal, that we're going to need a
new way to deal with this because, if drones are evolving on a
daily basis, this threat to our country is multiplying as we
speak.
Mr. Berteau. Yes, sir. I think this--both the speed and the
scale of that multiplication will continue to increase over
time, but I also think that American ingenuity can respond to
that with the technical capabilities and the data integration
necessary----
Mr. Correa. If the bureaucracy moves out of the way.
Mr. Berteau. The bureaucracy has demonstrated a number of
times when it can do that. One of you mentioned the other
transactions authority that's available, for example, to the
Department of Homeland Security to do that. I would recommend
this committee take a look at it--and I'd be glad to amplify
this for the record--at some of the expansions of that
agreement authority that the Defense Department has been given
to move from prototypes into actual production products that
you can deliver.
Recently last year, in the National Defense Authorization
Act, the Air Force got authority to use operations money, that
is, O&M in DOD terms, to incorporate new technology into
existing systems, which would speed up the process a whole lot.
Because there's a lot of platforms out there that are obsolete,
but you can bring new technology in as part of that.
Then the last piece of it is, actually, using the data. You
mentioned noninvasive technology. I actually had a contract at
Otay Mesa 26 years ago to look at sampling noninvasive
technology for cars coming across the border. What happened is
we quickly overwhelmed the computer's ability to actually use
the data and analyze the data. We could collect data faster
than we could analyze it.
Today, with artificial intelligence, the reverse is true.
We're actually running out of data. We need more collection of
data to be able to analyze it quickly and get it to the agents.
All of those are things that would speed up the process even
with the bureaucracy where it is.
Mr. Correa. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
I recognize the Chairman of the Oversight Subcommittee for
Homeland Security, Mr. Bishop, for his questioning.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Landrum, I guess, first you--I was taken by what the
Chairman was discussing about defensive and offensive
capabilities and specifically offensive. First time I ever
heard--and I think the number then used was, like, 3,500
flights and I've heard about 10,000 flights in a sector.
Your testimony suggested detecting--and I don't know over
what period it was--but 2,400 flights in a 5-mile area, I think
I heard. Is that what I heard?
Mr. Landrum. In a 5-mile area over an 80-day period of
time.
Mr. Bishop. So that starts to sound like even the numbers
that I've heard before are small compared to what actually is
happening. Am I getting the right message there?
Mr. Landrum. Yes, sir, you are.
Mr. Bishop. So just a massive number of--and is this cross-
border activity or just drones in the area?
Mr. Landrum. That number is all drone activity within 400
meters of either side of the border.
Mr. Bishop. OK. But a lot of it is cross-border, I assume?
Mr. Landrum. There is cross-border. In that particular
number, over that same 80-day period of time, there's
approximately 146 incursions in that 5-mile area.
Mr. Bishop. OK. So distinguish the 2 issues then for me in
terms of what I ought to be concerned about as a Member of
Congress.
Certainly, I--I was stunned to hear the number of cross-
border flights that are allowed into their--that are happening
over the American border as something I just would have assumed
that whenever a drone is crossing the border and it's
unauthorized, somebody would take action and stop that.
Mr. Landrum. There's no legal way to fly a drone over the
border. That does not exist. So any drone that crosses the
border in either direction has committed a violation.
Mr. Bishop. Yet, it sounded to me that--I mean, it's not
like you used--DHS uses offensive action against every unlawful
crossing drone, right?
Mr. Landrum. That's correct, Congressman. They----
Mr. Bishop. Why don't they? I remember at an earlier
hearing, I said, well, why aren't they shot down? Ms. Titus
ridiculed me for that by saying that would mean they'd be
shooting drones down at Las Vegas National Airport.
I said, well, I didn't have that in mind, but out over the
wilderness border area, some of the drones crossing--again, I'm
not an expert. But why wouldn't there be offensive action taken
against every such drone?
Mr. Landrum. Again, I retired a year-and-a-half ago, but I
believe this statement is still true to this day. What DHS, and
specifically CBP with that particular border mission, what they
need is they need greater resources from this body, from
Congress.
Mr. Bishop. OK.
Mr. Landrum. They need those resources pushed to the border
to be able to invest into these commercial technologies.
Mr. Bishop. All right. So, Mr. Berteau, I'm going to go to
you then, because you asked a--teased this issue about
contracts take too long. A lot of what we're hearing and a lot
of what we hear out of Ukraine, one thing that I--and even
missiles and drones fired against Israel or launched against
Israel, where we respond with, you know, missiles off of--fired
off of ships and so forth. Their drone costs $100 and the
missile costs $10 million to shoot it down, that seems like an
asymmetry that we can't tolerate forever.
Comment as you will, and it will save some time for the
sheriff, if you will, on the--this what you say about the
contracts take too long, and are we facing a problem of
asymmetry that we've got to figure out some other ingenuity to
solve?
Mr. Berteau. First of all, Mr. Bishop, on the asymmetry,
we're definitely facing that problem. I mean, obviously, you
can't spend a $10 million missile to seek a $100,000 target
because you're going to run out of money before they run out of
targets.
Mr. Bishop. Even in Washington.
Mr. Berteau. But I think technology is on our side there,
our ability to actually find ways to do that. Ukraine has been
an enormous test bed here.
But I also want to go back to the speed things up. So in my
time in the Pentagon at the height of the campaign against ISIS
and Afghanistan, we had something called the Joint Rapid
Acquisition Process, right, where an urgent need could be sped
up through the process with some funding that was available to
both demonstrate what you could do and do it quickly. So the
Government can move fast, not for everything, not for all the
time.
Mr. Bishop. Would that be the model you would look to if
you were----
Mr. Berteau. It certainly would be a model that I would use
as part of that, and I'd be happy to expand on that for the
record as well.
Mr. Bishop. Sheriff Cleveland, in the about minute I've got
left, I wanted to ask you, you mentioned the word saturation at
some point, saying that, essentially, you're able to use these
equipment--types of equipment spot all you need, but it doesn't
really make a difference in the mission, maybe, because you're
taxed completely.
Speak to that, if you will, and whatever else occurs to you
about what--based on what you've heard from the other
witnesses.
Sheriff Cleveland. Yes, sir. So, as I mentioned, the
Sanderson Border Patrol Station there in Terrell County has 91
miles of border they're responsible for. They're responsible
for all 54 miles of Terrell County and then the southeastern
portion of Brewster County.
So when you have 50 agents, approximately 50 agents
patrolling 91 miles of border and you factor in days off,
annual leave, sick leave, you're actually, you know, left with
about 3 or 4 agents on duty at a given shift.
Then they're responsible for all of that border and
responding to all those sensor activations, whether they're ATS
towers--or AST towers, BuckEye game cameras, and then, of
course, the remote video surveillance systems.
Mr. Bishop. By the way, if you're able to acquire targets
and go apprehend people, then they get processed and released
into the country. That's another issue.
I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on
Oversight, the gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Ivey, for his
questioning.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Landrum, let me pick up where Chairman Bishop left off
with respect to responding to these drone incursions. I suppose
they don't actually necessarily need to cross the border just
for reconnaissance. They could be on the other side of the
border and still, you know, depending on whatever camera
capability they have, get whatever information they need
without crossing the line.
But let me ask you this: What kind of countermeasures--I
think that's what Chairman Bishop was getting at. Do we have
the capability to actually respond? My math was like I guess
around 30 incursions a day, something like that, with drones
that you all were detecting with what you had put up.
Do we have the ability to respond to those in some way, you
know, take them down or, you know--I don't know if it has to be
an intercept actually, but you mentioned the decoding piece,
which apparently they've got the ability to prevent that, but
what capabilities do we have to defend ourselves against those
kinds of incursions?
Mr. Landrum. Congressman, I don't know the current numbers
today, but I can tell you that when I retired from Laredo
Sector as the chief patrol agent there at that time, I can tell
you that at that time we had 2 devices that we could utilize to
cover 177 miles. Each device covers about 1 kilometer in each
direction, so you can extrapolate the math from that.
It's very difficult to get in the path and to actually
mitigate something when you have so few resources to be able to
do it. All of that being said, I do think it is super important
for this body to understand that getting a complete picture of
domain awareness down at the border, so utilizing track,
detect, and identify to see every drone at the border, that
part is extremely challenging.
Without additional technology to the border in addition--
you know, in addition to the RF that's available today, but
going to complete RF to detect all drones and radar to detect
drones that are not emitting a radiofrequency signal and camera
to be able to slew to cue that camera to provide that
information to the end-user, all of that is necessary.
Mr. Ivey. Let me follow up on that. So if I'm hearing you
right, you have a single device--this is a year-and-a-half
ago--that would cover a kilometer each way I think you're
saying.
How much would one of those devices cost? What's it called?
What's that device called?
Mr. Landrum. They're just generally referred to as
mitigation devices. It depends company by company.
Mr. Ivey. They're also drones?
Mr. Landrum. No, they are not drones.
Mr. Ivey. OK. What are they?
Mr. Landrum. They are radiofrequency jamming capabilities.
Mr. Ivey. They have to be devices that are--go up into the
air to do that?
Mr. Landrum. Their range is about one kilometer, 1.2.
Mr. Ivey. How much does each one of those cost?
Mr. Landrum. Rough order of magnitude, you can get them--
you could get them from our company as cheap as $50,000 for
some mobile devices. Then for some other devices that are
available, they could range anywhere from $250,000 up to
$800,000 per device.
Mr. Ivey. Let me ask you what's being done--I see I'm
running out of time--but what's being done in Israel and
Ukraine with respect to intercepting drones?
Mr. Landrum. It's still the same technologies of
radiofrequency jamming. In some of those cases, they actually
utilize--when it comes to mitigation, they'll use what's called
kinetic mitigation, which could be something as simple as
shooting an AK-47 at the drone that they visually see with
their eye.
Mr. Ivey. All right. Last--well, geez, I'm running out of
time. But I wanted to actually follow up with Mr. Berteau about
the procurement process, because I've heard variations of this
with respect to other types of technology, and how to
accelerate it.
Because especially in the instance where you have long-term
contracts that are, say, 3 years or 5 years or something along
those lines. While that contract is running, someone develops a
new technology that could actually perform that function
better, but they've run into trouble convincing it could be the
Department of Defense, I don't mean to pick on them, but
whatever the Government agency is, to terminate the contract or
do something in order to integrate the new technology and use
that.
Has that been your experience, and are there ways to try
and address that so we can integrate the new technology that's
available?
Then a variation of that, way back in the day on the
software piece when the Government was having trouble with
that, they went with off the shelf. I think it was GAO or
something that did it.
Is there a variation of that where, you know, we've got
commercially available in this instance drones--I guess this is
a list of commercial companies that are making drones. I'm not
sure. But is there a variation of that where we could just--the
Government becomes instead of a procurement through the RFP
process, which takes forever, as you pointed out, we just do
more of an off-the-shelf approach to purchasing these drones or
countermeasures?
Mr. Berteau. First of all, Ranking Member Ivey, it is a
very common problem that a contract in the realm of technology
development can become obsolete pretty quickly. That's not the
fault of anybody, but it is an actual result of you tend to buy
under contract that which you bought before.
The starting point of any renewal contract is basically the
old contract that you had in place. So it takes a lot of effort
for the Government to do kind-of the market research to say,
what can we do beyond that?
There's 3 things you can do to help fix that. No. 1 is
better market research, and we've urged the Government to do
that market research not only before the solicitation, before
the request goes out for bids, but as they're evaluating the
bid.
So, you know, a year after you develop the solicitation,
you're evaluating these bids, take a look at what the market
can do now, not what it could do 2 years ago when you did your
market research. So that's the first thing.
The second thing is actually, as I mentioned earlier, focus
on the outcomes and the results you want. If you write that
into your contract, it's a lot easier to modify the contract to
get what you need as technology evolves rather than have to
scrap it and start all over again.
Mr. Ivey. Give me third.
Mr. Berteau. The third thing is you need the support of the
leadership of the agency to be able to do that. When I
mentioned the Joint Rapid Acquisition Council in DOD, it had
the strong support of the Secretary of Defense. It had all the
people in the room who could waive whatever regulations they
needed to waive so you could get that. You can't do that for
everything, but you can do it for the most important things.
Mr. Ivey. Well, let me thank the Chair for his indulgence
in allowing me to run over. I would ask, as you've offered, for
you to provide additional written information about how we can
go about integrating that approach. Thank you.
Mr. Berteau. We'll be happy to do that, sir. Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
I knew not to interrupt Mr. Berteau, because he's married
to a Louisiana woman. I don't want to get fussed at.
The Chair recognizes my colleague, my friend Ms. Greene,
the gentlelady, for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here today.
Fentanyl is the No. 1 killer of Americans between the ages
of 18 to 45. It kills approximately 300 Americans every single
day. Fentanyl doesn't discriminate based on whether we're
Republicans or Democrats, our race, our gender. No identity.
Fentanyl doesn't care. It kills people.
Since Joe Biden has taken office, we've seen record amounts
of fentanyl pour into our communities from the Southern Border.
According to Georgia Narcotics Association, approximately 7 out
of 10 pills on the streets are laced with fentanyl, coming
across the Southern Border.
In counties throughout my district, in Georgia's 14th
District, from--ever since 2020, fentanyl-involved deaths have
increased over 350 percent. It's highly prevalent.
Since Joe Biden took office, approximately 62,000 pounds of
fentanyl have been seized at the border, yet Federal officials
estimate that they are only able to seize 5 to 10 percent of
all fentanyl smuggled across the Southern Border.
I'd like to ask each of you about this, because this is
Americans being murdered right here at home. We're talking
about technology and our Government is spending a lot of money
on technology, but where do you believe our border security
technology systems are failing so much so that we can only
seize 5 to 10 percent of fentanyl smuggled across the Southern
Border? I'll start with you, Sheriff.
Sheriff Cleveland. Howdy, ma'am. So I can speak to Terrell
County. We haven't had a marijuana seizure in about 5 years.
The reason we haven't had a marijuana seizure or any other
narcotic seizure--and I was the patrol agent in charge at my
station for the last 11 years before taking over as sheriff--is
because we used to have airplanes that would fly to the border.
They would land short of the border, and they'd have radar
fades where they'd fall off radar.
AMOC, Air and Marine Operations Center out in Riverside,
California, would provide us those GPS coordinates of those
radar fades. We would communicate, my station, with the
government of Mexico in Ciudad Acuna, and they would send out
the Mexican military to either destroy clandestine air strips
or seize that marijuana.
So in my county, we have not had any of the fentanyl
seizures. But I will tell you that I've spoke at many fentanyl
events, and I'm actually flying back into the District of
Columbia Friday to speak at the Lost Voices of Fentanyl here on
the monument--or, I'm sorry, on the Mall at the monument.
You're right. Fentanyl is killing hundreds of thousands of
Americans and China is able to do it without firing a single
bullet.
When we--we look at the left. The left is going to tell us
that it's coming between--or at the ports. The right is going
to tell us it is coming in between the ports of entry. But the
honest thing is is that we still have a porous border and it's
able to come through.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Sheriff.
Mr. Landrum.
Mr. Landrum. I would echo everything that Sheriff Cleveland
said there. I mean, all of that is true. In my personal
experience, in the State of Arizona, I've overseen men and
women, Border Patrol agents there that have seized hundreds of
pounds of fentanyl. So I've seen it first-hand in my experience
there.
In my experience in Texas, I have not seen it in my
experience in Texas. So I can't make the same claim that I can
when I worked in Arizona.
All of that being said, I completely agree that this is
being done, these precursors that are being sent are being done
with the full intent from China to actually do that. It is
negatively impacting our country to the tune of 100,000 deaths
a year, plus or minus in there. That is huge numbers. You can
definitely relate it to an act of war.
Ms. Greene. Thank you.
Mr. Berteau? Did I say that right?
Mr. Berteau. Thank you. So I go back a ways in the
Government. Back 35 years ago, I actually was the oversight for
the DOD role in the counter-drug mission. Nobody heard of
fentanyl at that point, right?
But the problems are remarkably similar. There were 3
things. No. 1 is we had trouble detecting. We couldn't tell
what was coming in.
No. 2 is, as soon as we closed off one point of egress,
they'd find another one. We closed off the Southern Border,
they'd come off the California coast. We'd close off the
California coast, they'd come in through Vancouver. I suspect
that's still at work today, although I'm not up on the day-to-
day piece.
No. 3 is the consumption at the other end, right? Because
the big problem with the war on drugs, as Mr. Correa mentioned,
is we're the market. Now, unfortunately, in those days we had a
conscious market that knew what they were buying. Now we have
people who have no idea what they're doing.
So I think there are a couple of technical solutions to
this. They're probably pretty expensive. I don't--I'm not a
technology person, right, but I can try to translate that.
I think it comes into the fact of how do we increase our
ability to detect, right? Whether it's 10 percent that we're
catching or 20 percent, we'll never be 100 percent but we ought
to increase this.
The fourth piece--and I think this is the first time it's
been mentioned up here--is the role of China in all of this. I
don't think we can ignore the fact that the drone technology is
coming out of China. The drug technology is coming from China.
So somewhere you have to get back and interdict at the
source as well as at the receiving end, I think. None of those
are easy. They're hard to do. They're technically hard to do.
I would certainly want to focus the efforts of this
committee on getting the technology to be able to increase our
ability to detect, because you can't intercept unless you can
detect.
Ms. Greene. Thank you. I agree with you. We also have to
hold the Mexican cartels accountable, because they're the ones
smuggling it in the country so--but I definitely agree.
I'm out of time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. The gentlelady yields.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Ezell, is recognized
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, everybody.
Thank you, all our witnesses, for being here today.
You can pick almost any spot on the map in the United
States and find an example of a border crisis. Every State is
now a border State. As a former sheriff, I know this disaster
does not just affect a single community. The physical and
emotional toll our men and women of law enforcement responding
to this disaster is also another cost that can be placed
directly on this administration.
We must be doing more to support our first responders. I'm
completely supportive of trying to identify easier, better, and
safer tools for our law enforcement officers, including their
ability to share information.
This is why, with my colleague, Mr. Ivey and I introduced
H.R. 8654, the Streamlining Law Enforcement Information Sharing
Act. Congress should be finding ways to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of Federal programs intended to
help law enforcement collect relevant information from Federal
agencies to State and local governments.
Today's discussion focuses on a new technology that can
also improve officers' ability to protect our American
citizens, but I want to make sure we do so in a way that does
not compromise private citizens' data or information.
Sheriff Cleveland, thank you so much for your service, and
thank you for being here today. Can you talk a little bit about
how advancing technologies and information-sharing platforms
enhance your ability to coordinate across agencies and
jurisdictions?
Sheriff Cleveland. Well, again, having been a Border Patrol
agent in my home county, you know, we're pretty well integrated
in information sharing there. It's nothing that I've done. It's
something that the State of Texas, U.S. Border Patrol, and our
county levels along the border and I'd probably say that all
along the U.S.-Mexico border just because of the border
security issue going back decades. We're pretty well integrated
in that manner.
But I would like to mention something I didn't mention in
my opening remarks is networking. Something that we've done
different in our portion of Texas, and it goes on down the
border, is using the same apps to communicate.
We may have a vehicle that comes in my county, and we may
see it for a while, suspect it of being there for, you know,
reason to smuggle. Then we'll get on our chat group and send it
on down the line.
We've had many, many cases of successful interdictions of
illegal alien smuggling loads 6, 7 counties down the road, 300
miles down the road right close to San Antonio. So I do agree
with what you said, but I do believe we're pretty well
integrated along the border at the Federal, State, and local
level.
Mr. Ezell. Very good. We know that AI drone systems and
similar tools are helpful aids to our law enforcement, but
ultimately, a successful operation still comes down to a well-
funded, trained, and highly supported, and our personnel.
Do you agree the human aspect is still clearly the most
effective factor to achieve your Department's mission as
technology advances?
Sheriff Cleveland. Most certainly. As I mentioned earlier
as well, you know, you can have so much technology detects so
much, and if you don't have the manpower to go out and actually
put the handcuffs on the bad guy then it's going to be useless.
Mr. Ezell. Very good. I know you are an end-user of the
border technology. In your experience, what types of
performance metrics are important for us to consider?
Sheriff Cleveland. Well, at the local level, mine is my
community, you know, am I able to respond to all the incidents
that go on. As I mentioned earlier, we don't have a crime
problem. We have a border security problem.
I actually have a guest with me here, Mr. Rattly. He's a
retired Air Force colonel. He's a landowner down in my county
and he spends part of his time up here in Washington, DC, where
he has his home.
A few months back, his property was actually broken into.
Fortunately, he had a camera system. He was up here in
Washington when it happened, and the--he witnessed it
happening. He called me immediately.
The hardest thing I can tell a landowner or a citizen in my
county--and I've had to do it as both patrol agent in charge at
the Border Patrol station and the sheriff--is I don't have
anybody to send right now. That was my response to him at that
moment.
Mr. Ezell. Oh, my goodness.
Sheriff Cleveland. However, he called the neighboring
Border Patrol station, the Comstock Station, and they actually
had somebody in the area who was able to respond right away.
They were able to catch the subject in his house, and then we
were able to take custody of that individual to prosecute him.
But there's many examples of similar incidences. So, you
know, again, keeping my community safe is going to be my metric
in how we assist the United States Border Patrol.
Mr. Ezell. That's, you know, my focus, as a former law
enforcement officer like yourself, is manpower. Taking care of
the troops, getting them what they need so they can operate and
do their job.
So I'm out of time. Thank you all for being here today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The sheriff yields.
The gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Strong, is recognized for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Chairman Higgins, Ranking Member
Correa. Thank each of you for being here today.
I don't have to tell you how important cutting-edge
technology is for our law enforcement, particularly as they
carry out their mission at our borders.
As technology continues to develop for those who wish to do
good, so too do the capabilities that those that wish to harm
the United States of America. As we have discussed today, we
have seen how cartels have, you know, taken drones to carry out
illegal activities, including transporting weaponized payloads,
conducting surveillance and carrying out attacks on domestic
critical infrastructure.
It is my understanding for every drone flown by border
security, the Mexican cartel is flying 17 drones. We have
technology to drop these drones, block these drones, intercept
these drones and do forensics on them. We're already doing this
in Israel and the Ukraine is my understanding.
We must have a robust counter-UAS program and capabilities
to ensure we are able to meet these threats head-on. Data shows
the Mexican cartel are flying drones greater than 30 miles into
U.S. air space, landing and offloading drugs on U.S. soil,
fentanyl, heroin, cocaine, marijuana, and the list continues.
Mr. Landrum, could you describe some of the challenges with
detecting drones entering U.S. air space and how counter-UAS
technologies can improve the situational awareness within low-
altitude air space at the border?
Mr. Landrum. Yes, Congressman. Thank you for the
opportunity and the question. When it comes to detecting the
drones that are in the air space, it is very easy to detect a
DJI drone, because that end-user agrees, through the end-user
license agrees to actually transmit that information, which is
also very similar to remote ID, which came into effect earlier
this year.
Receiving that signal also gives you information such as
height, altitude, direction of travel, speed, you know, where
it's actually at to actually locate it on a map to be able to
do something about it. That is--that in itself is a very
challenging process to be able to do that.
To be able to detect all the other non-DJI drones, which in
my opening statement I describe as the other 16 manufacturers
out there, to detect those others it takes more than just that.
It takes direction finding with radiofrequency plus radar plus
camera to be able to do that.
In the example in the Laredo demo, where we brought that
equipment down there to demonstrate that for CBP over the
course of this year, what that did is that exposed the other 29
percent of drones that they were not seeing in that 5-mile
stretch.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Some of those drones are much
smaller than traditional aircraft that would show up on radar.
How does this complicate detecting and preventing drone
incursion?
Mr. Landrum. It is extremely difficult the smaller the
device actually becomes. When it comes to the sensor fusion,
being able to put something that is found either by
radiofrequency or by radar on camera, that is very difficult to
accomplish that. It's not insurmountable. We do it as a
company, but it is a very expensive process to be able to do
it.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. At least 4 different Executive
branch departments--DHS, DOJ, Defense, and Energy--have
statutory authority to use counter-UAS technologies, leading to
overlap in who can respond to drones near-sensitive sites and
critical infrastructure.
In your time in both Government and the private sector,
have you ever encountered a delay in response time to a UAS
incident because of institutional roadblocks such as
overlapping jurisdictions?
Mr. Landrum. The only delay was initially in getting 124,
an authority that--in my personal experience. So, you know,
going back to the 2017-18 time frame, getting that operations
plan in place and getting that actually approved. So there was
a little delay there.
Now the only thing that would delay that particular
response is the lack of equipment or the lack of knowledge that
a drone is flying in the air space.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Following up on the same vein, would
you agree that a dedicated counter-UAS training center for
authorized law enforcement and personnel would be valuable?
Mr. Landrum. Yes, sir, that would be very valuable.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I agree, and that's why I'm working
to do just that. Let's create a dedicated counter-UAS training
center for authorized law enforcement, train them effectively,
and let's take care of business and protect the American
people.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane, is recognized for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
important hearing today. Thank you to the panel for showing up
and trying to educate us and help us understand this problem
better.
Sheriff, I want to say thank you for your service, and I
want to start with you.
Obviously, we're talking about technology. We're talking
about drone, anti-drone technology. As somebody who's been in
the field for a long time and supervised others in the field,
Sheriff, isn't it true that you can have all the technology in
the world, but if your policies don't support the men and women
that are designated to protect the homeland, it really doesn't
matter?
Sheriff Cleveland. Yes, sir, I'd have to agree with that.
Mr. Crane. Would you agree with the fact that this country,
we have a massive amount of debt?
Sheriff Cleveland. I sure do.
Mr. Crane. Yes. The reason I bring that up is because I
think everybody that's in here, everybody in here is all about
trying to stop these drones and counter the technologies that
we see coming into the homeland and making our communities, our
families, our States a lot more vulnerable and a lot less safe.
But my issue is, is that this administration,
unfortunately, has put policies in place that are completely
swamping and overwhelming not only Border Patrol but you guys
as well. Would you say that's correct, Sheriff?
Sheriff Cleveland. We have definitely--and you missed my
opening remarks. We have definitely seen a significant increase
in my county of illegal alien apprehensions and got-aways to
the tune--at the highest watermark, we had a 417 percent
increase in fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2020, and
that was with apprehensions, and a 467 percent increase in got-
aways that same year.
Mr. Crane. What about you, Mr. Landrum? Do you agree with
that point, that you can have all the technology in the world,
but if you don't have leadership that's actually dedicated to
stopping the flow of whatever it is, whether it be drones,
drugs, MS-13 gang members, terrorists, suspected terrorists on
the watch list coming through the Southern Border, it really
doesn't matter?
Mr. Landrum. You absolutely need the leadership and the
authorization to do it. Something that we as a company and me
personally as a retired agent support is the expansion of those
authorities, the 124n authorities, to be able to do these
activities to State, local, Tribal, and territorial law
enforcement officers and agents.
Mr. Crane. Yes, absolutely, because at the end of the day
there's no golden conex box up here. I mean, well, we kind-of
act like there is. We just charge it to the Americans' people's
credit card and to their kids' credit card and their grandkids'
credit card as we run up the national debt.
But the bottom line is, like I'm saying, if you don't have
policies that actually reflect a desire to stop the flow of
what's coming over that Southern Border, it really doesn't
matter, because our law enforcement, our Border Patrol, their
budgets are just completely overwhelmed with everything coming
over that Southern Border.
I know, Mr. Berteau--is that how you say it? You were
talking about I think 4 things that Congress can do. Can you
repeat that list real quick, sir?
Mr. Berteau. Let me make sure I get it right by actually
looking at my notes. Thank you.
So, first of all, we think that DHS can focus its contract
requirements on results, right, rather than on input. So you're
actually focused on what you want the contract to be able--the
results of that contract to be able to help, in this case
Border Patrol agents, for example, to be able to do. What can
they do differently?
Focusing on results allows you to get past a lot of the
problems in the contracting process, including, as we discussed
earlier, what happens if technology evolves? Well, if you've
got the results built into the contract, you can evolve the
contract a little bit. So that's No. 1.
Second is resources, because resources drive strategy way
more than strategy drives resources. So we urge the Congress to
actually give DHS its appropriations on time rather than 6 or 7
months into the fiscal year so CBP has the money and a whole
year to buy it. You'll get the results a lot sooner.
Third is, in fact, to hold their feet to the fire in terms
of how long contracts take. Get the data. Get DHS to be
reporting that. Get them to give you an annual report that
says, here's how long our contracts take. Until you're
measuring something, you're not going to be able to take the
steps to actually reduce that something.
The third is--oh, the fourth is, you got to train the
workers to do it, because, as you point out, if the workers
can't handle it and deal with it, it's going to be a problem,
not a solution.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
It looks like we have no further questions for the
panelists today. I have some data to submit to each of you in
writing, because it was brought up during questioning regarding
the budget and the needs for resources.
So I'm going to share with you in writing, all of you but
Mr. Landrum in particular, how much the budget has increased
for the Department of Homeland Security over the last 4 years.
So I thank the witnesses for their testimony today and the
Members for their questions. Members of the subcommittees may
have additional questions for the witnesses.
Mr. Chairman, do you have any further questions?
Mr. Bishop. No, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. May have additional questions for the
witnesses, and we would ask for the witnesses to respond to
these in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the
hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittees stand adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Questions From Honorable Delia C. Ramirez for Carl Landrum
Question 1. How does your company separate decisions about the tech
you develop and sell to combat drug and arms smuggling from decisions
about the tech you develop and sell to help CBP to facilitate humane
and effective processing of immigrants and asylum seekers?
Answer. Dedrone's stated mission is: ``To protect against malicious
drones while enabling good drones to fly''.
Our current focus working with CBP is on countering the usage of
drones by transnational criminal organizations (TCOs) along our
borders, which includes illicit and deadly activities such as drug and
arms smuggling. Looking to the future, Dedrone offers technology that
could assist CBP in the first stages of supporting immigrants and
asylum seekers. DedroneBeyond enables first responders to safely and
effectively navigate their drones Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS)
to enable an agency like CBP, using drones, to more quickly and
appropriately respond to migrants and their needs in their first
moments in the United States.
Question 2. As we talk about providing CBP with more technology and
increasing its collaboration with the private sector, we must consider
how CBP and companies can ensure individuals' civil rights and civil
liberties are protected. How does your company take steps to protect
sensitive Government information, including personally identifiable
information?
Answer. Dedrone is committed to maintaining a strong cyber and
information security posture, aligning its practices with recognized
standards such as ISO 27001 and NIST 800-53. Our approach ensures that
we implement comprehensive security controls across our entire
technical stack, including software, hardware, and protocols. This
allows for the safeguarding of data integrity, confidentiality, and
availability. By directly aligning to these stringent standards, we
continually assess and improve our security measures to protect against
evolving threats.
Specific to personal identifiable information (PII) and providing
solutions for CBP, Dedrone does not utilize any PII except that of the
user (ie: CBP employees) in the form of work emails and telephone
numbers.
Questions From Ranking Member Glenn Ivey for David J. Berteau
Question 1a. The men and women of U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) are the greatest asset we have in securing the border
and keeping Americans safe. Yet, we are facing significant shortages in
front-line CBP personnel--more than 5,000 officers and agents--and this
may worsen with increasing retirements. Technology can help bridge this
gap.
As we deploy new technology, it's the men and women who are on the
ground every day who will operate this technology and turn information
provided by the technology into apprehensions, drug seizures, and
rescues.
How can CBP ensure that the technology it deploys will help bridge
the gap in personnel and best support officers and agents in the field?
Answer. Many emerging technologies have the capabilities to reduce
work loads on current personnel and create efficiencies which were not
possible just a decade ago. The keys are to evaluate these technologies
and pursue them with urgency but to do so with the user in mind. As I
noted in my statement submitted for the hearing, CBP needs to train to
use new technology.
We all know how hard it is to adapt to an upgrade or an innovation
in something that we are used to, whether it is using a new cell phone,
the latest version of the operating system of a laptop, or the features
and controls of a new car. This same dynamic exists when any agency or
component incorporates new technology and innovation into existing
operations.
To offset this natural occurrence, DHS components could plan for
and fund the time, the resources, and the capacity and capability to
train the workforce to take advantage of new technology. Contractors
can help develop and provide that training more rapidly and broadly.
However, it takes more than training. Technology improvements are,
by definition, fast-moving, which means that it is important for
requirements to take into account the ability of the workers to use it.
Such requirements take more than technical expertise and market
research; they need to have user involvement from the early stages of
the acquisition process. This committee could encourage DHS and CBP to
increase such user involvement in defining requirements, in the
research that helps identify what is available in the current and
future marketplace, and in the evaluation of proposals. Such user
involvement can take more time up front but can pay off in
implementation.
Question 1b. When developing new technology for CBP, how should
companies incorporate feedback and input from field personnel?
Answer. In my experience, feedback from field personnel does not
automatically flow to contractors. Too often, those who are setting the
acquisition requirements and evaluating bids are not well-connected to
the actual workers who will use new technology to accomplish their
missions. The employees in the field know the pain points and the
specific problems which need to be dealt with. Their input is critical
to acquiring the right technological solutions. Contractors seek to
offset this lack of connection by doing their own research into the
needs of the user. This ensures technological solutions which actually
address the problem and are implementable when employed by the end-
user. Acquisition programs which fail to seek and assess such input
create the risk of failing to address the real needs of field
personnel.
Question 2. CBP invests billions in technology and assets; yet
purchases often cost more and take longer than CBP expects. Such delays
can result in technology becoming outdated before it becomes
operational. How can CBP better ensure that it can acquire the most up-
to-date technology in a timely manner?
Answer. The Federal Government's cycle of acquisition, from
developing requirements through obtaining resources through Congress to
soliciting, evaluating, and awarding contracts is simply longer than
the cycle of developing new technology. My statement for the record
cites several steps DHS and CBP could take to mess these cycles better.
DHS components can better ensure that they are acquiring useful
technology and systems and process improvements in a timely way by:

Focusing requirements, both for contracts and for
operations, on results and outcomes,

Making those requirements publicly available early, so that
companies can work to develop technology to meet them,

Updating those requirements often to reflect newly-available
innovation,

Developing and making publicly available a long-term (e.g.,
5-year) investment plan and updating that plan regularly,

Expanding the frequency and the depth of communications with
industry,

Encouraging both existing and potentially new contractors to
offer solutions and giving feedback to those offerings
(companies respond to CBP and DHS requests for information but
rarely get feedback on their responses),

Reducing the time between soliciting a contract and awarding
it (Congress can help this by requiring DHS components to
report these times every year and explain why they are not
shorter).
Questions From Honorable Delia C. Ramirez for David J. Berteau
Question 1a. The technology and protocols we use to stop smuggled
contraband are not the appropriate technology and protocols to use to
address people seeking safety and stability. What would it take to have
discussions about technology and border security that do not conflate
and talk about people and illicit goods as if they are the same?
Answer. Managing the cross-border movement of people and of goods
are indeed quite different, but they share a common dilemma. How can
the Federal Government operate in a way that encourages and supports
the appropriate flow of people and goods while inhibiting improper or
illicit movement of both. In my experience, actors who encourage and/or
benefit from illicit trafficking of both people and goods do not
differentiate between the two; the paths and operating mechanisms are
inextricably intertwined.
That said, and as highlighted in my written testimony for the July
9, 2024, hearing on ``Smart Investments: Technology's Role in a Multi-
Layered Border Security Strategy'', private sector-provided technology
can support a multi-layered U.S. border strategy that separates people
and goods at various stages of the movement process. For example, the
private sector can support U.S. Federal agencies with:

Intelligence capabilities before individuals (whether
immigrants, asylum seekers, or traffickers in illicit goods)
arrive at any U.S. border;

Detection, identification, interception, etc. technologies,
both at and away from authorized ports of entry. Such
capabilities can support Federal missions to interdict
controlled substances or other unwanted materiel arriving in
small packages or in containers (or via drones), as well as
tracking people;

Responsible detention, housing, and medical care, and other
services that can and should be provided to individuals after
they cross into U.S. sovereign territory; and

Case processing, reduction, and backlog management for
individuals who have entered the United States.
This broader, multi-layered approach would involve U.S. Customs and
Border Protection, as well as other relevant agencies and components of
the Federal Government, State and local government entities (e.g., law
enforcement), and other nations. In all of these interactions, a multi-
layered strategy could incorporate new technology and innovation in
products, systems, and processes and lead to better success across the
broad definition of ``border security.''
Question 1b. As we talk about providing CBP with more technology
and increasing its collaboration with the private sector, we must
consider how CBP and companies can ensure individuals' civil rights and
civil liberties are protected. How do your companies take steps to
protect sensitive Government information, including personally
identifiable information?
Answer. Private-sector companies who perform work under Federal
Government contracts in support of border security and immigration
missions, agree to and abide by specific requirements and exacting
standards. These requirements and standards are specified in the
Federal Government's requests for proposals (RFPs) and in the contracts
that are issued to companies responding to those RFPs. CBP, DHS, and
the Federal Government can protect rights and liberties by ensuring
that such protections are included in contracts and by evaluating and
awarding to companies that have a track record of success in complying
with such requirements.
In most if not all contracts, for example, safeguarding sensitive
Government information, including but not limited to personally
identifiable information, is among those requirements, and Government
contractors take these obligations very seriously.
However, it takes time and money to comply with such obligations,
and the Federal Government must include coverage of such costs in their
solicitations and in the contracts subsequently awarded and
implemented.
In addition, Government contractors' systems and processes are
subject to regular and unscheduled audits or other reviews by Federal
agencies.
Questions From Honorable Yvette D. Clarke for David J. Berteau
Question 1. How do interruptions in Government funding--including
Government shutdowns, operating under Continuing Resolutions, and late
budgets--impact agencies and their ability to make procurements and
acquisitions?
Answer. Representatives of the Government contractor community--
including but not limited to PSC--have long argued that funding
uncertainties significantly harm every Government agency's ability to
plan and execute acquisitions. This harm occurs even if a Government
shutdown is avoided, as thousands of Government officials divert their
attention to planning for a potential upcoming lapse in appropriations,
even if Congress subsequently delays that lapse for additional weeks or
months.
The question has a flip side, which is to ask what would be the
benefits of Congress enacting full-year appropriations on time, so that
agencies have a full year to execute the programs and funding
authorized and appropriated by Congress. Agencies have the time to
research emerging technology, solicit bids, and award contracts. Work
can spread across 12 months instead of being crammed into half a year.
Benefits accrue sooner, technology is deployed faster, field agents can
train earlier. Everyone wins.
Funding uncertainty and interruptions also cause direct harm to our
Nation's industrial base, its work force, and its ability to support
critical Government missions. They are particularly bad for many
thousands of small and mid-sized businesses.
As stated in my May 16, 2019, written testimony at a House
Committee on Oversight and Reform hearing on ``Government Shutdowns:
Contract Killers'',

``The contractor community plays many vital roles in assisting the
Government to meet the needs of the American people. Contractor
contributions are necessary to maintaining Government operations. Many
of the capabilities that contractors provide do not exist, or are
insufficiently available, within the Government, and contractors can
expand or adjust their capacity to meet changing mission needs more
quickly than their Federal counterparts. Contractors bring innovation
and solutions from a strong, diversified national interest business
base to support current and emerging requirements for every agency of
the Government.
``Like the Federal employees they work beside, contract employees show
up every day to do jobs that are vital to the Government's ability to
achieve its missions and functions. They are motivated by the same
goals of public service and safety as their Government counterparts.
All of us--Federal workers, contractors, and the American people--
deserve Government efforts to avoid any lapse in appropriations.
Failing that, if there is a future lapse in appropriations for part or
the whole of the Federal Government, we need a better system to
communicate to all stakeholders and to manage the business of
Government.
``More specifically, and as noted in a September 23, 2023, PSC letter
to Congressional leaders, Federal Government funding disruptions--
particularly those from a Government shutdown--result in work stoppages
from Federal agencies, leading to layoffs of workers and financial
instability for all companies that support Federal missions. These
disruptions in turn produce cascading effects on those missions--from
military readiness and America's ability to deter adversaries . . . to
systems modernization and the provision of fast, effective customer
service to the American people.
``As you can imagine, shutdowns are worse than continuing resolutions.
As noted in my 2019 testimony cited above, shutdowns cause remarkable
harm to America's combined Federal workforce (specifically contractor
and civilian personnel), the companies' financial well-being, and
productivity.
``However, the negative impact of a CR on Government contractors and
mission success also remains acute. CRs delay programs and defer new
starts, which dampens innovation and creates unpredictable cash-flow
situations for companies; this is disproportionately hard on small
businesses.
``PSC has long advocated for several practical steps to mitigate the
impact of funding disruptions, whether shutdowns, CRs, or other delays.
Examples of these steps include: (1) enact full-year appropriations
bills prior to the start of each fiscal year; (2) trigger automatic
Continuing Resolutions before a lapse in appropriations; (3) prioritize
spending agreements that will set appropriate budget caps for fiscal
years so that budget levels are known in advance; (4) provide parity
for contractors regarding `back pay' compensation similar to what is
provided for Federal military and civilians personnel; (5) enhance data
collection requirements so the Government can document lessons learned
in planning for and implementing a shutdown, as well as resuming
activities following a shutdown (as recommended in an October 2014
Government Accountability Office report, `2013 Government Shutdown:
Three Departments Reported Varying Degrees of Impacts on Operations,
Grants, and Contracts'; (6) improve shutdown-related communication and
guidance--from the Office of Management and Budget to the agencies and
from the agencies to their contracting partners--as it pertains to
contract administration so that the Federal contracting community
within the Government and companies alike can level-set expectations.
My 2019 testimony cited above expands on each of these recommendations
and includes additional suggestions to help support Government
acquisition in the face of funding uncertainties.''

Question 2a. Artificial Intelligence (AI) should be utilized as a
tool--not a substitute for human decision makers--to enhance our
operations at the border to ensure a safe, orderly, and humane
immigration process. Yet, biases that have been identified with AI as
it relates to race, ethnicity, and gender, could cause unnecessary harm
to individuals entering this country legally or seeking asylum.
What needs to be done to ensure bias within AI does not
discriminate against or reduce people's ability to participate in our
economy and society?
Question 2b. What can be done to encourage private industry to
continue progress on research and standards that will reduce bias in
AI?
Answer. Artificial-Intelligence-related challenges are a
particularly tough aspect of new technology. As Americans become more
familiar with, and use, AI in their daily lives and as the U.S.
Government explores ways to leverage AI to support the full range of
Federal missions, it is important to address a wide range of issues.
One such issue is the various biases that can accompany AI-enabled
technologies and how to identify and mitigate potentially adverse
impacts on individuals' rights and freedoms as well as on the efficacy
of the results.
The Professional Services Council (PSC) has repeatedly stated that
adequate safeguards and guardrails must be in place when Federal
agencies solicit, procure, and use commercially-developed AI products
and services within the Federal environment. This is especially true
when such use could directly impact the American taxpayer and
communities (particularly underserved communities).
In general, the Government contracting industry supports safeguards
and guardrails, where appropriate, to mitigate risks of bias, while
also seeking to encourage innovations that can emerge from development
and use of AI technologies. From an acquisition perspective, PSC has
encouraged Federal agencies to work with industry to incorporate
safeguards and guardrail requirements at the beginning of the
acquisition life cycle. Agencies need to communicate with commercial
vendors on how best to mitigate against bias before the delivery of
goods and services that could have profound impacts on the American
taxpayer.
Executive Order 14110 on the ``Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy
Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence'' and Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) M-24-10 Memo ``Advancing Governance,
Innovation, and Risk Management for Agency Use of Artificial
Intelligence'' instructs agencies to advance the management and
innovation of AI while mitigating risks related to AI use in the
Federal Government, especially concerning public rights and safety.
Core to this, from our perspective, is data--from data provenance to
how data is collected, stored, used/analyzed to who has access to data
in the Federal environment.
PSC has previously recommended the following actions to mitigate
against bias, discrimination, and impacts from AI hallucinations:

Harmonizing Federal AI guidance.--As AI and generative AI
(GenAI) is in its infancy, there is a unique opportunity to
establish order and harmony now in how it should be adopted
before its wide-spread, disparate use across the Federal
Government complicates such efforts. PSC believes that this
type of consistency will help commercial vendors work with
disparate agencies and support innovation Government-wide
through similar requirements and compliance regimes. PSC
recommends that OMB Memo M-24-10 together with the NIST AI RMF
Guidance should supersede agency principles and guidance and
that coordination between OMB and Federal agencies should occur
to reconcile conflicting guidance.

Keeping humans in the loop.--AI, much like humans, is prone
to errors. Though AI tends to make fewer mistakes overall, the
nature of these errors differs significantly from those
typically made by humans. Since AI risk factors can only be
mitigated and not completely eliminated, PSC urges Federal
policy makers and regulators to consider what threshold need to
be met for AI and GenAI to be procured and adopted from a
mission perspective (i.e., the appropriate role of humans to
monitor, supervise, and support operations alongside AI and
GenAI in the Federal context.)

Monitoring human involvement of commercial AI and GenAI.--
Federal agencies should consider incorporating GenAI governance
and oversight structures for monitoring purposes. PSC
recommends establishing governance protocols that protect
proprietary information from unauthorized access or usage
(i.e., govern how Federal operators interact with data when
using AI and GenAI technologies.) Such governance protocols can
establish steps to inform Federal operators on: (1) identifying
the provenance of the data; (2) how data should be cleaned and
labeled; and (3) who has authority to access and run the data
through the model. PSC believes that once these steps are
established, they can provide justification for specific
prompts taken by the Federal operator and identity errors and
where fixes need to occur.

Determining appropriate AI Use Cases in the Federal
context.--A December 2023 GAO report highlighted that ``Without
accurate inventories, the government's management of its use of
AI will be hindered by incomplete and inaccurate data.'' PSC
believes the appropriate identification of AI Use Cases and
completed inventories will support the appropriate safeguards,
guardrails, and use of AI and GenAI in the Federal context and
that those completed AI Use Case inventories can support
innovation. The inventories can also help each agency assess
its AI maturity levels and what AI Use Cases could work for
their specific mission challenges.

[all]
