- SAFEGUARDING DISSIDENT VOICES: ADDRESSING TRANSNATIONAL REPRESSION THREATS TO HOMELAND SECURITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SAFEGUARDING DISSIDENT VOICES: ADDRESSING
TRANSNATIONAL REPRESSION THREATS TO
HOMELAND SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
COUNTERTERRORISM,
LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND
INTELLIGENC

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 17, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-49

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-094 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON COUNTERTERRORISM, LAW ENFORCEMENT, AND INTELLIGENCE

August Pfluger, Texas, Chairman
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island,
Tony Gonzales, Texas                     Ranking Member
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         J. Luis Correa, California
Elijah Crane, Arizona                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Dina Titus, Nevada
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Michael Koren, Subcommittee Staff Director
Brittany Carr, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Seth Magaziner, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Rhode Island, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Ms. Annie Wilcox Boyajian, Vice President for Policy and
Advocacy, Freedom House:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. Bob Fu, Founder and President, China Aid Association Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Enes Kanter Freedom, Private Citizen:
Oral Statement.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    25
Ms. Gissou Nia, Director of the Strategic Litigation Project,
Atlantic Council:
Oral Statement.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    27

For the Record

The Honorable August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence:
Statement of The Sikh Coalition................................    30
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Letter.........................................................    66

SAFEGUARDING DISSIDENT VOICES: ADDRESSING TRANSNATIONAL REPRESSION
THREATS TO HOMELAND SECURITY

----------

Wednesday, January 17, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism,
Law Enforcement, and Intelligence,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:19 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. August Pfluger
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Pfluger, Bishop, D'Esposito,
Crane, Magaziner, Goldman, Correa, Titus, and Jackson Lee.
Mr. Pfluger. I call to order the Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and
Intelligence. Without objection, the subcommittee may recess at
any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from a
nongovernmental panel of victims and expert witnesses to
examine the growing threat of transnational repression and the
implications these acts have on homeland security.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good afternoon. Welcome to the Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence. We are
holding this important hearing to examine and discuss the
rising threats posed by foreign nations that engage in hostile
acts known as transnational repression, a term that may not be
well-known but absolutely should be.
Transnational repression is the act of a foreign government
on an individual or community in another country through
violence, assassinations, the threat of violence, digital
threats, family intimidation, smear campaigns or the
manipulation of legal processes to harass and intimidate
individuals that are critical of the Nation acting as the
aggressor.
Simply put, transnational repression is when authoritarian
regimes, like the Chinese Communist Party or Iran, or others,
go beyond their borders to harass and silence their citizens
and others who defend human rights and advocate for free
speech. Transnational repression is not exclusive to any
specific country. We've seen these oppressive acts employed by
nations that are hostile to the United States and those who our
Nation views as strategic partners and allies as well.
Regardless of our Nation's relationship with the perpetrating
nation, using violence or harassment to silence dissident
voices in our Nation is illegal and should not be tolerated by
our government.
Although this issue is not new, the threat of transnational
repression has grown significantly in the last few years. Some
specific events include, in January 2023, the Department of
Justice announced charges on individuals associated with
Eastern Europe transnational criminal organizations who were
directed by Iran to carry out an assassination plot on a U.S.
citizen who spoke out against the regime's human right abuses.
In April 2023, 40 officers of China's National Police were
charged by the Department of Justice in transnational
repression schemes targeting U.S. citizens and lawful permanent
residents, including operating an illegal police station in
lower Manhattan.
In November 2023, the DOJ charged an official within the
Indian Government, Nikhil Gupta, with murder-for-hire charges
in connection with a foiled assassination plot of a U.S.
citizen who was a prominent Sikh activist in New York City.
These are just a few of the many acts of transnational
repression that have taken place on U.S. soil in the past few
years.
Foreign governments that engage in transnational repression
continue to utilize new and innovative tactics to silence
victims, such as using U.S.-based individuals and groups to
unwittingly help these foreign governments commit acts of
transnational repression.
These actions have included hiring U.S.-based private
investigators, co-opting law enforcement officers or employees
of social media companies, and recruiting members of the local
diaspora communities. Transnational repression will continue to
be used as a tool to silence views that run afoul to those of
autocratic governments if all branches of our government do not
step up and work to solve this challenge.
We must find a way to effectively deter nation-states from
engaging in transnational repression. I hope that today's
testimony will inspire Members of this subcommittee to take
action and work in a bipartisan manner to find solutions. The
United States must remain a bastion for every person to freely
express their views without fear of persecution from foreign
actors.
As Chairman of this subcommittee, I am committed to working
with anyone to uphold that commitment. This committee, in fact,
has led multiple initiatives to conduct vigorous oversight on
the Government's actions in combating transnational repression.
Last year, the committee held a hearing with a Government panel
that examined the threats posed by the CCP to the homeland. In
that hearing, the witnesses discussed how the CCP's acts of
transnational repression, including the use of illegal police
stations across the country, negatively impacted us.
The committee has also heard from Masih Alinejad about her
experience being targeted by the Iranian regime. Last, the
committee recently sent a letter to Secretary Mayorkas and FBI
Director Wray highlighting the threats posed by transnational
repression and requesting a Classified briefing to discuss the
threat. These are just some of the many on-going efforts this
committee has taken to ensure that we effectively combat this
threat.
I'm delighted to have an esteemed panel join us here today
to discuss this pressing national security threat. We will hear
perspectives from two victims of transnational repression, and
two different experts that are working to address this issue as
well. I know all their insight will have a profound impact on
this committee, and I look forward to today's conversation, and
look forward to working with Ranking Member Magaziner and other
Members of this committee on this issue.
[The statement of Chairman Pfluger follows:]
Statement of Chairman August Pfluger
January 17, 2024
Good afternoon, and welcome to the Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence.
We are holding this important hearing to examine and discuss the
rising threats posed by foreign nations that engage in hostile acts
known as transnational repression--a term that may not be well-known
but absolutely should be.
Transnational repression is the act of a foreign government
targeting an individual or community in another country and using
violence, assassinations, the threat of violence, digital threats,
family intimidation, smear campaigns, or the manipulation of legal
processes to harass and intimidate individuals that are critical of the
Nation acting as the aggressor.
Simply put, transnational repression is when authoritarian regimes
like the Chinese Communist Party or Iran or others go beyond their
borders to harass and silence their citizens and others who defend
human rights and advocate for free speech.
Transnational repression is not exclusive to any specific country.
We have seen these oppressive tactics employed by nations that are
hostile to the United States, and those who our Nation views as
strategic partners and allies.
Regardless of our Nation's relationship with the perpetrating
nation, using violence or harassment to silence dissident voices in our
Nation is illegal and should not be tolerated by our Government.
Although this issue is not new, the threat of transnational
repression has grown significantly in the last few years.
Specific events include:

In 2016, individuals associated with the Turkish government
were charged with and convicted of crimes related to acting as
covert agents to negatively influence U.S. politicians and the
public's opinion of Turkish dissident, Fethullah Gulen.

In January 2023, the Department of Justice (DOJ) announced
charges on individuals associated with Eastern European
transnational criminal organizations who were directed by Iran
to carry out an assassination plot on a U.S. citizen who spoke
out against the regime's human rights abuses.

In April 2023, 40 officers of China's National Police were
charged by the Department of Justice in transnational
repression schemes targeting U.S. citizens and lawful permanent
residents, including operating an illegal police station in
lower Manhattan.

In November 2023, the DOJ charged official within the Indian
government, Nikhil Gupta, with murder-for-hire charges in
connection with a foiled assassination plot of a U.S. citizen
who is a prominent Sikh activist in New York City.
These are just a few of the many acts of transnational repression
that have taken place on U.S. soil in the last few years.
Foreign governments that engage in transnational repression
continue to utilize new and innovative tactics to silence victims, such
as using U.S.-based individuals and groups to unwittingly help these
foreign government commit acts of transnational repression.
These actions have included hiring U.S.-based private
investigators, co-opting law enforcement officers or employees of
social media companies, and recruiting members of local diaspora
communities.
Transnational repression will continue to be used as a tool to
silence views that run afoul to those of autocratic governments if all
branches of our Government do not step up and work to solve this
challenge.
We must find a way to effectively deter nation-states from engaging
in transnational repression. I hope that today's testimony will inspire
Members of this subcommittee to take action and work in a bipartisan
manner to find solutions.
The United States must remain a bastion for every person to freely
express their views without fear of persecution from foreign actors. As
Chairman of this subcommittee, I am committed to working with anyone to
uphold that commitment.
This committee has led multiple initiatives to conduct vigorous
oversight on the Government's actions in combatting transnational
repression.
Last year, the committee held a hearing with a Government panel
that examined the threats posed by the CCP to the homeland. In that
hearing, the witnesses discussed how the CCP's acts of transnational
repression, including the use of illegal police stations across the
country.
The committee has also heard from Masih Alinejad about her
experience being targeted by the Iranian regime.
Last, the committee recently sent a letter to Secretary Mayorkas
and Director Wray highlighting the threats posed by transnational
repression and requesting a Classified briefing to discuss the threat.
These are just some of the many on-going efforts this committee has
taken to ensure that we effectively combat this threat.
I am delighted to have an esteemed panel join us today to discuss
this pressing national security threat.
We will hear perspectives from two victims of transnational
repression and two different experts that are working to address this
issue. I know all their insight will have a profound impact on this
committee.
I look forward to today's conversation and look forward to working
with the Ranking Member and other Members of this committee on this
issue.

Mr. Pfluger. I now recognize Ranking Member, the gentleman
from Rhode Island, Mr. Magaziner, for his opening statement.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman Pfluger, for calling
this important hearing.
To our distinguished panel of witnesses, I recognize it
takes incredible courage for you to come before us and speak
out today against those who seek to silence and even kill those
who dissent. So thank you for your willingness to share your
experiences and your expertise with all of us.
The purpose of today's hearing is to explore how to prevent
and protect against nation-states' efforts to harass and
intimidate their own citizens and critics of their government
living in the United States.
Foreign governments are increasingly and more aggressively
disregarding U.S. laws to threaten, harass, surveil, stalk, and
even plot to physically harm people in our homeland.
At our October full committee hearing examining threats to
the homeland posed by Iran, we heard from Ms. Masih Alinejad,
an American-Iranian activist who had been the target of
kidnapping and assassination plots directed by the Iranian
regime. One month later, an unsealed Department of Justice
indictment alleged that an Indian Government employee had
directed a plot to murder a Sikh leader here in the United
States. Mr. Gurpatwant Pannun.
The plots against Ms. Alinejad and Mr. Pannun are horrific
and unacceptable. However, they are, unfortunately, not the
only examples of transnational repression on U.S. soil.
Transnational repression can involve physical violence, as well
as coercing someone to return to their home country, or
threatening and detaining family members back home.
Religious and ethnic minority groups, like Muslims, Sikhs,
and Uyghurs, face threats from the governments of India and
China respectively, while the government of Turkiye practiced
enforced disappearances of its political and religious
opponents living abroad. Political and human rights activists
and journalists face smear campaigns and other attacks by
tyrannical regimes seeking to squash opposition and prevent
truthful reporting.
Intimidation and violence toward any community in the
United States by any nation-state is intolerable and
unacceptable. That is why I was pleased to see President Biden
directly address the Pannun murder plot by the Indian
Government at the G20 Summit with Prime Minister Modi in
September and to see the administration taking action to combat
transnational repression, including arresting and prosecuting
many individuals in the United States for conspiring to act as
agents of the Chinese Communist Party in connection with
operating illegal police stations in the United States to
monitor and intimidate those dissidents who are critical of the
CCP.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
launched its high-risk community protection initiative to
combat digital transnational repression, and the State and
Treasury Departments are sanctioning perpetrators of
transnational repression for their involvement in repressive
acts against individuals residing in the United States.
We must remain focused on preserving America's reputation
as the beacon of hope and freedom to the world, and condemn all
forms of transnational repression. Holding perpetrators
accountable is of strategic importance, as it ensures that the
United States stays true to our values, ensures the safety of
all U.S. persons, and protects the sovereignty and security of
our homeland.
So I'm looking forward to today's bipartisan discussion,
and am particularly eager to hear from our witnesses how the
U.S. Government can do more to deter and mitigate transnational
repression and what we can do in Congress, working together on
a bipartisan basis toward that end.
So thank you again, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Magaziner follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Seth Magaziner
January 17, 2024
To our distinguished panel of witnesses, I recognize that it takes
incredible courage for you to come before us and speak out against
governments who seek to silence and even kill those who dissent. So,
thank you for your willingness to share your experiences and expertise
with us today.
The purpose of today's hearing is to explore how to prevent and
protect against nation-states' efforts to harass and intimidate their
own citizens and critics of their government living in the United
States. Foreign governments are increasingly and more aggressively
disregarding U.S. laws to threaten, harass, surveil, stalk, and even
plot to physically harm people in our homeland.
At our October full committee hearing examining threats to the
homeland posed by Iran, we heard from Ms. Masih Alinejad, an Iranian-
American activist who has been the target of kidnapping and
assassination plots directed by the Iranian regime. One month later, an
unsealed DOJ indictment alleged that an Indian government employee had
directed a plot to murder a Sikh leader here in the United States, Mr.
Gurpatwant Pannun.
The plots against Ms. Alinejad and Mr. Pannun are horrific and
unacceptable. However, they are unfortunately not the only examples of
transnational repression on U.S. soil. Transnational repression can
involve physical violence, as well as coercing someone to return to
their home country, or threatening and detaining family members back
home.
Religious- or ethnic-minority groups like Muslims, Sikhs, and
Uyghurs face threats from the governments of India and China
respectively. While the government of Turkey practices enforced
disappearances of its political and religious opponents living abroad.
Political and human rights activists and journalists face smear
campaigns and other attacks by tyrannical regimes seeking to squash
opposition and prevent truthful reporting.
Intimidation and violence toward any community in the United States
by any nation-state is intolerable.
That's why I was pleased to see President Biden directly address
the Pannun murder plot by the Indian government at the G20 Summit in
September with Prime Minister Modi. To see the Biden administration
take action to combat transnational repression including:

arresting and prosecuting many individuals in the United
States for conspiring to act as agents of the Chinese Communist
Party in connection with operating illegal police stations in
the United States to monitor and intimidate dissidents and
those critical of the CCP.

The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
launched its High-Risk Community Protection initiative to
combat digital transnational repression.

And, the State and Treasury departments sanctioning
perpetrators of transnational repression for their involvement
in repressive acts against individuals residing in the United
States.
We must remain focused on preserving America's reputation as the
beacon of hope and freedom to the world, and condemn all forms of
transnational repression. Holding perpetrators accountable is of
strategic importance as it ensures America stays true to its values,
ensures the safety of all U.S.-based persons, and protects the
sovereignty and security of our homeland.
I am looking forward to today's bipartisan discussion and am
particularly eager to hear how the U.S. Government can leverage
bilateral partnerships to deter and mitigate transnational repression.

Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
January 17, 2024
Transnational repression is a relatively new term being attached to
a substantial--but under-reported--common global practice.
Transnational repression is an extremely dangerous and serious threat
to national security, diaspora, and exiled communities.
Common practices of transnational repression are slander and libel
to attack human rights defenders, journalists, and activists.
Transnational repressors also resort to threatening family members of
the dissidents who still live in the country of origin. The
perpetrators will even go as far as physically assaulting or killing
their targets to send a message to the masses.
These intimidation methods act to deter and silence the diaspora
communities from speaking out against the injustices taking place in
their homelands. The ultimate goal of transnational repression is to
end the targeted individuals' desire for activism all together.
Transnational repression is not only related to activism against
transgressions of government. It is simultaneously connected to working
to asphyxiate the desire for freedom among ethnic and religious
minority groups.
I have long been an advocate for people of all backgrounds to be
able to exercise religious freedom in their preferred houses of worship
without fear of harm or persecution. In recent years, we have seen an
increase in threats of violence toward houses of worship. As a
democratic nation that prides itself as being the land of the free, it
is paramount that the United States provide safety to all people within
its borders regardless of ethnic or religious background.
In 2019, I sponsored the Securing American Nonprofit Organizations
Against Terrorism Act. In 2022, this Act authorized the Nonprofit
Security Grant Program (NSGP) Improvement Act. Through the Department
of Homeland Security, the NSGP provides funding for physical security
enhancements and other security-related activities for eligible
nonprofit organizations, which includes houses of worship, that are at
high risk of a terrorist attack or threats. While bolstering resources
under the NSGP is a critical piece to addressing the threat of
transnational repression, as transnational repression is proving to be
much more broad and far-reaching than previously believed, more must be
done.
In the past, transnational repressive activities have been
associated with authoritarian and adversarial nations such as China,
Iran, and Russia. Recently, it has become more apparent that diaspora
communities from democratic nations and allies of the United States
also experience repression from their countries of origin. More,
repressive activities are now much more expansive with governments' use
of modern technology, thereby increasing the ability for transnational
repression to ``hide in plain sight.'' The fact that perpetrators of
transnational repression are also allies to the United States and that
the internet has made it more convenient for perpetrators to reach
across borders and harass and intimidate individuals, presents unique
challenges to identifying viable mechanisms to hold foreign nations
accountable.
It is my hope that the testimony we receive today will illuminate
some potential ways we can address the very serious and evolving threat
of transnational repression.

Mr. Pfluger. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today on this very important topic, and I
now ask that our witnesses rise and please raise your right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you will give
before the Committee on Homeland Security of the U.S. House of
Representatives will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
but the truth, so help you God?
Ms. Boyajian. I do.
Mr. Fu. I do.
Mr. Freedom. I do.
Ms. Nia. I do.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
I'd now like to formally introduce our witnesses. First,
I'd like to introduce Ms. Annie Wilcox Boyajian, who serves as
the vice president of policy and advocacy at Freedom House, and
serves as the Mark Palmer Distinguished Fellow.
Freedom House is a nonprofit, nonpartisan 501(C)(3)
organization that works to expand and defend freedom world-
wide. In her role, she oversees Freedom House's policy and
advocacy work, leading engagement with the U.S. Government in
collaboration with American human rights groups.
Ms. Boyajian has testified before the U.S. Congress, the
Canadian Parliament, and Taiwan's Legislative Yuan, and
regularly advises policy makers and staff. We look forward to
hearing from you.
Next, I'd like to welcome my constituent from Midland,
Texas, Dr. Bob Fu. Dr. Fu is a pastor and the president of
China Aid. He has admirably dedicated his life to helping those
escaping religious persecution in the People's Republic of
China.
As president of China Aid, Dr. Fu has testified numerous
times before domestic and international governmental bodies.
Dr. Fu has been targeted a multitude of times by the CCP for
his work. He, too, will share his horrifying experiences that
he has had as a victim of transnational repression.
Dr. Fu, thank you for being here.
I would now like to introduce Mr. Enes Kanter Freedom, a
human rights activist, a former NBA star, and a Nobel Peace
Prize nominee.
Due to his outspoken views and his on-going work on human
rights abuses in China, Turkiye, and other parts of the world,
Mr. Freedom's career in the NBA was derailed by the league's
financial decision to pander to the Chinese Communist Party so
that it could continue to broadcast games in the PRC.
Over the course of the last 10 years, Mr. Freedom has also
been targeted numerous times by the Turkish Government. He was
nearly kidnapped in Sri Lanka. His family has been subjected to
on-going scrutiny and detention by the Turkish Government, and
he has received countless death threats and has had multiple
INTERPOL Red Notices issued against him, which is a request to
law enforcement around the world to locate and provisionally
arrest a person pending extradition, surrender, or a related
legal action.
In addition to that harassment, the CCP has led an effort
to silence him. Today, he will share his experience of being a
victim of transnational repression.
Last, we welcome Ms. Gissou Nia, who serves as the director
of the Strategic Litigation Project at the Atlantic Council.
The Strategic Litigation Project works on prevention and
accountability efforts for atrocity crimes, human rights
violations, terrorism and corruption offenses around the world.
She also serves as board chair of the Iran Human Rights
Documentation Center, where she is helping develop and oversee
the group's human rights advocacy and legal programs. The
Center seeks to promote accountability, respect for human
rights, and the rule of law in Iran.
Ms. Nia started her career in The Hague, where she worked
on war crimes and crimes against humanity trials at the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and
International Criminal Court. She was previously deputy
director of the Center for Human Rights in Iran.
Again, I'd like to thank all of our witnesses for joining
us.
I now recognize Ms. Boyajian for your opening statement. If
you guys don't mind, we'll keep these to 5 minutes, as the
Members do have questions. Thank you.

STATEMENT OF ANNIE WILCOX BOYAJIAN, VICE PRESIDENT FOR POLICY
AND ADVOCACY, FREEDOM HOUSE

Ms. Boyajian. Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner,
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify. As you have so eloquently described, transnational
repression occurs when States reach across borders to silence
dissent among exiles and diasporas, presenting a direct threat
to security and rights, and a challenge for both domestic and
international policy.
From 2014 through 2022, Freedom House documented 854
instances of direct physical transnational repression around
the world. This includes things like assassinations,
kidnappings, assaults, detentions, deportations. These acts
were committed by 38 governments in 91 countries. These numbers
are likely only the tip of the iceberg when you factor in
indirect tactics. That's things like surveillance, harassment,
use of spyware, threats against family members, which is known
as coercion by proxy.
The top 10 perpetrators of transnational repression
globally are China, Turkiye, Tajikistan, Egypt, Russia,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Iran, Belarus, and Rwanda. Together,
these 10 countries are responsible for 80 percent of the cases
in our database. China, which conducts the most comprehensive
and sophisticated campaign, is responsible for 30 percent of
the cases in our database.
In the United States, we are generally better protected
from transnational repression than in many other places, due to
our strong rule of law and robust security sector, but many
communities in the United States face serious and persistent
threats, as my fellow witnesses will tell you first-hand today.
Many are surveilled, harassed, or have family members who
are threatened. Some recent egregious examples, some of which
were already mentioned, include an attempted kidnapping and
then attempted assassination against an Iranian women's rights
activist.
Last November, peaceful demonstrators were physically
assaulted in San Francisco during the APEC Summit. This is
American citizens and residents who were roughed up for
exercising their free speech rights, protesting human rights
abuses in China. Later that same month, Federal authorities
indicted and arrested an Indian national for alleged conspiracy
to murder a Sikh activist based in Queens.
In addition to threats from China, Iran, and India, there
are substantial reasons to be concerned about threats toward
U.S. persons originating from an even broader set of countries.
This includes Saudi Arabia, Egypt, the UAE, Turkiye, Russia,
Rwanda, Ethiopia, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Bangladesh.
One way transnational repression manifests in the United
States is through the manipulation or misuse of our own
institutions. This can occur through INTERPOL abuse, which is
when countries misuse INTERPOL's notification systems to have
someone detained on spurious charges. Similarly, foreign
intelligence agencies sometimes provide false information for
our asylum and immigration officials, which can result in the
deportation of individuals who have sought shelter in the
United States.
There has been strong bipartisan interest in addressing
this issue. The Biden administration has made countering
transnational repression a priority across agencies, and we are
pleased to see generally strong interagency coordination and,
as we understand it, increasing engagement between the
Executive branch and the Hill, which are critical if we're
going to effectively address this. There is also legislation
pending in Congress.
But additional action is urgently needed. For too long,
democracies have missed or allowed the actions of authoritarian
countries inside our borders, and this has emboldened states to
act without fear of consequences.
To address this threat, Congress should codify a definition
of transnational repression, and ensure the United States has
the necessary legal authorities to sufficiently address the
threat and support those who are targeted.
U.S. law does not currently include a definition, which we
can talk about more during Q&A. There are two proposals pending
in Congress that would address this. One is the Transnational
Repression Policy Act, which directs the creation of a
strategy, training, and sanctions; and the Stop Transnational
Repression Act, which would create criminal penalties. The
subject matter of those bills extends beyond the jurisdiction
of this committee, but we do urge Members to consider
cosponsoring.
Congress should also work with the Executive branch and
with State and local officials to ensure that personnel coming
in contact with perpetrators and victims of transnational
repression receive the training necessary to recognize and
respond. Many agencies do provide training, but it is not
standardized across agencies, so there are different
definitions and recommended actions.
Finally, Congress should urge the Executive branch to
review current information-sharing practices to ensure
efficient communication within and between agencies and trusted
partners. There is robust communication occurring, but
challenges do remain, and this is, in part, because
transnational repression transcends so many domestic- and
international-facing agencies, and also law enforcement and the
legal system need to keep a lot of information confidential.
We do have additional recommendations that I'm happy to
talk about further that stretch outside the jurisdiction of
this committee, and I really look forward to your questions and
appreciate speaking with you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Boyajian follows:]
Prepared Statement of Annie Wilcox Boyajian
January 17, 2024
Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and distinguished
Members of this subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today. I ask that my full remarks be entered into the record.
transnational repression defined
Transnational repression occurs when states reach across borders to
silence dissent from activists, journalists, and others living in
exile. Perpetrator states do so using intimidation and violence. This
issue presents a direct threat to rights and security around the world,
including here in the United States, and will require a coordinated
response from across the U.S. Government and between the United States
and other democratic governments.
From 2014 through 2022, Freedom House has collected information on
854 direct, physical incidents (assassination, kidnapping, assault,
detention, or deportation) of transnational repression around the
world, committed by 38 governments in 91 countries. During this time,
13 states have engaged in assassinations abroad, and 30 have conducted
renditions.
These numbers are likely only the tip of the iceberg when indirect
tactics are also factored in. Indirect tactics include the use of
spyware, surveillance, threats sent over social media or by phone, or
threats and violence against family members back home, which is known
as coercion by proxy.
According to our database, the top 10 perpetrators of transnational
repression globally are China, Turkey, Tajikistan, Egypt, Russia,
Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Iran, Belarus, and Rwanda. Together, these 10
countries are responsible for 80 percent of the cases in our database.
And China, which conducts the most comprehensive and sophisticated
campaign of transnational repression in the world, is responsible for
30 percent of the cases.
transnational repression in the united states
The United States' strong rule of law and active security sector
lend a measure of protection against transnational repression. We know
from our research that both are important factors in preventing
transnational repression.
Nonetheless, many communities in the United States face serious and
persistent threats, as my fellow witnesses can attest to first-hand and
as we see in recent high-profile incidents on U.S. soil.
One of the most famous cases in the United States involves the
Iranian regime's plot to kidnap journalist and women's rights activist
Masih Alinejad from her home in Brooklyn. When that didn't work, Iran
attempted an assassination plot that was thankfully also unsuccessful.
To this day, Alinejad lives under Federal protection.
Last November, peaceful demonstrators were physically assaulted in
San Francisco during the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
Summit while protesting human rights violations by Xi Jinping and the
ruling Chinese Communist Party.
Later that same month, Federal authorities indicted and arrested an
Indian national for alleged conspiracy to murder a Sikh activist based
in Queens.
It is common for activists we work with to receive threats over
social media, to be surveilled or targeted for spyware, or for their
family members back in their country of origin to be pressured,
threatened, or even beaten up or jailed. Hong Kong-American Samuel Chu,
who is wanted for arrest in Hong Kong due to his advocacy to the U.S.
Congress, discovered a drone hovering outside his apartment in
California, apparently looking in his windows with a camera.
In addition to threats from China, Iran, and India, there are
substantial reasons to be concerned about threats toward U.S. persons
originating from an even broader set of countries, including Saudi
Arabia, Egypt, the UAE, Turkey, Russia, Rwanda, Ethiopia, El Salvador,
Nicaragua, and Bangladesh. It is notable that this list includes a
number of countries that can be considered allies or partners of the
United States. There are likely other countries as well that are
surveilling and intimidating individuals in the United States which we
have not yet documented.
An important aspect of the threat in the United States is the
manipulation of our own institutions. One way this can occur is through
Interpol abuse, which occurs when a country misuses Interpol's
notification systems to have someone detained on spurious charges.
Interpol is now much more aware of the problem than a few years ago and
has tried to make improvements to its internal processes, but some
member states continue to try and abuse the system.
We were pleased to note in September 2023 that ICE updated its
guidance on Interpol to make this kind of abuse harder to perpetrate in
the United States.
Another way manipulation can occur is through foreign intelligence
agencies providing false information for our asylum and immigration
processes. A recent disturbing case of this was documented by the
Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP). OCCRP
obtained a confidential FBI memorandum concerning the case of Leopold
Munyakazi, a Rwandan scholar who had applied for asylum, in which the
FBI found that the U.S. examination of his asylum process was
compromised by Rwandan intelligence. Munyakazi was nonetheless deported
and is currently imprisoned in Rwanda.
recent developments and future risks
A recent and worrying development is the extraterritorial
repression of reporters. As the space for free media and dissent has
closed in authoritarian countries, governments are increasingly
reaching outward to target exiled journalists who continue to do their
courageous work from abroad. Our new report released in December,
titled A Light That Cannot Be Extinguished: Exiled Journalism and
Transnational Repression, examines this issue more closely and
describes the repressive toolkit used against target exiled journalists
and media. At least 26 governments have targeted journalists, and 112
of the 854 cases in our database--13 percent of all cases--involved
journalists.
In our report, we interviewed exiled Cambodian, Uyghur, Turkish,
and other journalists in the United States who described the
repercussions of transnational repression against them by the
governments they left behind.
Perpetrator states of transnational repression are innovating even
as awareness of the problem in host countries grows. Moving forward,
host governments and law enforcement must pay increasing attention to
the role of diplomatic staff and proxy actors working on behalf of
perpetrator states to intimidate exiles. Cases like the murder-for-hire
scheme allegedly organized by an Indian government employee against a
Sikh activist in New York City points to the involvement of criminal
associates. Additionally, foreign governments, such as that of China,
may continue to seek out private investigators to co-opt host state
institutions and more easily reach targeted individuals.
progress so far
There has been strong, bipartisan interest in addressing this issue
here in the United States and a growing interest from democracies in
Europe and elsewhere.
The current administration has made addressing transnational
repression a priority across agencies, with attention given by the
National Security Council. We are pleased to see generally strong
interagency coordination, and, as we understand it, increasing
engagement between the Executive branch and the Hill--something
crucially important for an effective U.S. response.
Among the steps taken by the U.S. Government: The Department of
Justice has been investigating and prosecuting a growing number of
cases of transnational repression plotted against U.S. persons. The FBI
has a dedicated stream of work on transnational repression, including a
public web page, the issuance of several unclassified
counterintelligence bulletins for targeted communities, and the
creation of a general threat intimidation guide that is linked on the
transnational repression webpage and translated into over 60 languages.
Transnational repression is also now a category that can be reported
via the general FBI hotline. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
has shared information on transnational repression with DHS law
enforcement, pursued outreach to vulnerable communities inside the
United States, and is working on developing a strategy to protect
faith-based communities from incidents of transnational repression. DHS
is also working to pull together national and international engagements
on the issue, and DHS and the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
(FLETC) are in conversation around what a training module could look
like. The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) has
also been focused on outreach, issuing a public fact sheet on resources
available to protect against transnational repression. The Commerce
Department has moved to rein in the use of American technology in the
production of powerful commercial spyware, which is a crucial vector of
transnational repression. The State and Treasury departments have
sanctioned perpetrators of transnational repression. The Department of
State has provided some training for diplomats, and State's annual
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices include a section on
transnational repression. They are also engaging on this topic with
allies around the world, including through the G7 Rapid Response
Mechanism Working Group on Transnational Repression and have helped
coordinate emergency responses with partners when individuals have been
targeted for transnational repression abroad.
There are also a number of bills pending in Congress.
These are all important steps that we and others have encouraged,
and we applaud these efforts. But, more action is needed.
an urgent need to act: recommendations for congress
The impact of transnational repression on targeted individuals is
severe. People's physical safety is endangered, their travel is
complicated, their houses are surveilled in the United States and
elsewhere, they are harassed on-line and off-line, and communication
with family and friends living in the country of origin is fraught.
Some people are cut off from their families entirely. Each individual
incident of transnational repression produces ripple effects throughout
the community, fostering an atmosphere of fear and suspicion among
neighbors and compatriots.
For too long, democracies have missed or allowed the actions of
authoritarian countries inside their borders. Such a pattern of
impunity has emboldened states to act abroad without fear of
consequences. Would the government of India have dared to target
individuals in Canada and the United States if the brutal murder of
Jamal Khashoggi had been met with more forceful accountability measures
for each and every Saudi official involved in his death?
There are a number of measures Congress can take to limit the
ability of governments to engage in transitional repression on U.S.
soil and ensure the protection of those within our borders.
(1) Codify a definition of transnational repression in law and
ensure the United States has the necessary legal authorities to
sufficiently address the threat and support those who are
targeted. At present, U.S. law does not include a definition of
transnational repression, something that is needed to allow
officials to understand what transnational repression is, to
identify and apprehend perpetrators, and to direct their
agencies on reporting, training, and sufficient outreach to and
support for victims and potential targets. Current legislative
proposals include the Transnational Repression Policy Act (H.R.
3654/S. 831), which would direct the creation of a strategy to
address transnational repression, require training for certain
officials, and impose sanctions on perpetrators, and the Stop
Transnational Repression Act (H.R. 5907), which would provide
criminal penalties for transnational repression. Though the
subject matter of these bills extends beyond the jurisdiction
of this subcommittee, we urge Members to consider cosponsoring.
(2) Work with the Executive branch and with State and local
officials to ensure that personnel coming in contact with
perpetrators and victims of transnational repression receive
the training necessary to recognize and respond to the threat
and assist victims. Several agencies and bureaus are providing
training for employees. But, trainings are not yet routinized
or mandated for all officials or employees who may come in
contact with perpetrators or victims. There is no standardized
curriculum shared across agencies and often not even a
standardized set of trainings for each relevant employee within
an agency. Definitions, content, and recommended actions vary.
It is important that U.S. agencies establish clear training
materials and ensure regular training throughout the career of
personnel who may come in contact with perpetrators or victims.
Establishing a training module for those who go through FLETC
is one potential way to provide standardized trainings for a
large number of relevant officials.
Whenever possible, Federal agencies should also provide training to
State and local officials they may partner with on
transnational repression issues. FLETC offers training for
State, local, campus, Tribal, and territorial law enforcement
agencies and could potentially incorporate transnational
repression into those trainings. The Homeland Security
Investigations-led Border Security Enforcement Taskforce (BEST)
is another example of Federal and local officials working
together to address transnational threats. It is critically
important those involved with the taskforce receive training to
understand the threat of transnational repression and the
profile of perpetrators and victims, so they can apprehend
perpetrators and ensure they are not undertaking enforcement
actions that will lead to the deportation of individuals who
are under threat from and being targeted by their home
countries.
(3) Review current information-sharing practices to ensure
efficient communication within and between agencies and with
trusted partners and allies. It appears that among personnel
tasked with tracking and responding to transnational repression
there is a tremendous amount of on-going communication across
the Federal Government, but challenges remain.
Because the cross-cutting nature of transnational repression
transcends the jurisdictions of both domestically- and internationally-
focused agencies and because law enforcement and those in the judicial
system are often unable to share information due to the confidential
nature of investigations and court proceedings, it is possible that
information important to know across agencies or between the United
States and partners is not being communicated. For example, when
Federal, State, or local law enforcement suspect an individual is
engaging in transnational repression in the United States is that
information communicated to other law enforcement in the United States
or abroad who may also encounter these individuals? Are potentially
targeted communities notified? When individuals are convicted of
engaging in transnational repression are their names shared with the
State and Treasury Departments and with trusted partner governments for
the consideration of potential transnational repression-related
sanctions?
A review of current procedures could help identify best practices,
gaps, and whether there are ways to maximize efficiency and minimize
duplication of work.
Resourcing may present another challenge to the effective sharing
of information, as the number of personnel assigned to handle
transnational repression is fairly low. At DHS specifically, Congress
should work with agency leadership to determine whether DHS and its
component agencies have sufficient resourcing to address transnational
repression, providing scaled-up resources as necessary.
Freedom House has a number of other recommendations that stretch
outside the jurisdiction of this subcommittee that I am happy to
elaborate on during the Q&A. These include rapidly processing the
pending asylum and immigration applications of individuals at risk of
transnational repression, including the applications of hundreds of
Uyghurs whose cases remain pending; ensuring the United States has
short- and long-term visa options available to those needing to flee
their countries of origin; imposing sanctions on perpetrators more
effectively; withholding foreign assistance from governments that
continually engage in transnational repression; issuing travel
advisories for countries where transnational repression is known to
occur; and making sure to consistently raise the issue with governments
known to engage in transnational repression, especially if those
governments are close partners or allies.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.

Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Ms. Boyajian.
The Chair now recognizes Dr. Bob Fu for his 5-minute
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BOB FU, FOUNDER AND PRESIDENT, CHINA AID
ASSOCIATION INC.

Mr. Fu. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and honorable Members of
this subcommittee. I really appreciate for this opportunity to
share with you.
While the CCP, under Communist Party Leader Xi Jinping, has
engaged in perhaps the worst repression against religious
freedom, rule of law, and human rights since the Cultural
Revolution, the repression, the transnational repression effort
under CCP overseas has been recognized as the most systematic,
multi-front, and multifaceted inside our Western free
societies.
The CCP first compulsively legalized overseas spy work for
all the Chinese. According to this new Chinese National
Intelligence Law passed in 2017, virtually every Chinese,
including those who are born in the United States and overseas
are mandated to do spy work.
Of course, the CCP used its different pro-China
organizations to engage these transnational activities. The
Chinese Embassies and 150 U.S.-based Chinese student and
scholar associations, all China Federation of Returned Overseas
Chinese, and many other organizations have been recruited in
engaging these repression activities. The CCP, of course, is
directly engaging, from kidnapping to physical harassment, to
cyber threats, to individuals and organizations alike.
In my written testimony, I mentioned one case, Mr. Zhu
Meng, a Joseph Zhu, who was just a worker from a Chinese house
church in a missionary, American missionary organization based
in Seoul, South Korea. Yet, after he was kidnapped when he
returned to Beijing, he was sent back to China--I mean sent
back to Seoul, South Korea, with a programmed iPad and a number
of cash in his hand to spy this American organization in Seoul.
Then, in early 2020, he was found hanged on a tree and died,
and the case has still not been resolved.
My--multiple of my staff members based in Midland, Texas,
have been targeted over the years. Most of them are naturalized
American citizens. When they return to China to visit their
friends, they have to surrender their American passports to the
Chinese national state security agents. They need to get their
American passport, to apply for their American passport to
travel outside town. So that is to my staff.
In terms of to myself, I have first-hand experience. Back
to--from September 2020, all of a sudden, my family, my home
were being found surrounded, sometimes as many over a hundred
Chinese thugs wearing masks and chanting ``elimination of Bob
Fu'' every day from 9 o'clock a.m. to 4 o'clock p.m. without
stop for 3 months. So the FBI and our local law enforcement had
to evacuate my family out of our own house. We were exiled from
our own home for 3 months.
Of course, I also received multiple threats from last year,
including text messages, including, of course, those that's
called the swatting messages. From San Francisco--I mean, from
Los Angeles to New York, Houston, their police stations have
been--have received like fake bomb threats; I was booked with
multiple luxury hotels and in my name and claiming I had bombs.
So just a quick recommendation. No. 1, I think I would
recommend the committee to urge the administration to restore
the China Initiative within the Department of Justice. I think
that has nothing to do with racial profiling or any bias or
racist anything.
If we recognize China, the CCP is the No. 1 transnational
threat, as my fellow panelist Annie just mentioned, and the law
enforcement has acknowledged, we should really restore that
initiative.
I also want to recommend the--both administration and the
Congressional, we should have--should establish a National
database to collecting these cases. I think the FBI has a
center, but it's not enough. We should have more comprehensive
data.
The final recommendation is I would urge Congress to pass a
law, legislation to ban those individuals and entities
associated with the CCP and its foreign agents from purchasing
real estate, and to avoid them establishing permanent bases to
harass and engage transnational threats. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Fu follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Dr. Fu.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Enes Kanter Freedom for his
opening statement of 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF ENES KANTER FREEDOM, PRIVATE CITIZEN

Mr. Freedom. Thank you, Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member
Magaziner, and Members of the committee for giving me the
opportunity to testify today on a very important issue of
transnational repression.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's long arm has reached tens
of thousands of Turkish citizens abroad, while Turkiye has been
experiencing a deepening human rights crisis since the alleged
coup attempt in July 15, 2016.
The Turkish Government has been carrying out an
extraordinary campaign of transnational repression against the
critics overseas since the failed coup.
The State Department 2022 Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices in Turkiye reported that the Turkish Government
increasingly coordinated with other authoritarian states to
forcibly transfer more than 100 Turkish nationals to Turkiye
since the 2016 coup. More than 40 individuals were put through
abductions, rendition, and forcible return.
Turkiye's campaign has mostly targeted people affiliated
with the Gulen movement. The movement is a globally-respected,
faith-based civil society inspired by Turkish Cleric Fethullah
Gulen, focusing on promoting interfaith dialog and education
throughout the world.
Fethullah Gulen has dedicated his life to interfaith and
intercultural dialog, community service, and providing access
to quality education. He was the first influential Muslim
public figure to condemn the 9/11 attacks publicly, and express
sympathy for the American people.
His lifelong work on interfaith cooperation has earned him
a recognition from the Christian and Jewish leaders in his
homeland Turkiye and a personal audience with the late Pope,
John Paul II. His efforts have also been praised by other
global leaders who recognize his vital role in fostering mutual
understanding and peace and his leadership in humanitarian
initiatives.
In 2008, Mr. Gulen was ranked among the top 100 most
influential persons by Time Magazine and Foreign Policy and
Prospect Magazine's joint poll of the top 100 public
intellectuals. Many respected institutions awarded him with the
peace awards, but Erdogan regime labeled him as a terrorist
because Mr. Gulen was pro-democracy and in opposition to
Erdogan's policies.
The latest human rights report on Turkiye by the U.S.
Department of State sets out the violation by Turkiye,
including politically-motivated retaliation against individuals
located outside the country and kidnappings and the transfer
without due process of alleged members of the Gulen movement.
Turkish intelligence abducted Selahattin Gulen, who was a
teacher in Kenya, and Orhan Inandi, who was the chairman of a
successful school network in Kyrgyzstan. They were abducted and
faced torture and prison, and they published Inandi's picture
on Turkish media with a broken arm. Most recently, they
abducted Koray Vural, who was a businessman in Tajikistan. The
list goes on and on.
As the reports say, more than 100 individuals abducted by
the Turkish intelligence face torture and prison. Turkiye is
also pressuring other countries to close many successful
schools' math and science academies. As the State Department
reported on the Human Rights Country Report in 2022, the
government applied bilateral pressure on other governments to
secure their assistance with renditions without full due
process and couched such requests as cooperation on countering
terrorism. Some observers attributed the abrupt closure of a
popular Gulen-affiliated school in Albania in September with
pressure from the Turkish government.
A letter sent to the Turkish government in 2022 by the
responsible United Nations Special Rapporteur condemned the
systematic practice of State-sponsored extraterritorial
abduction and forcible return of Turkish citizens from many
countries.
Between 2014 and 2023, Freedom House recorded 112 incidents
of physical transnational repression against journalists
perpetrated by 26 governments. Turkiye is one of the leading
ones.
A Turkish journalist interviewed by Freedom House
experienced the closure of U.S. bank accounts, likely due to
empty terrorism accusations from the Turkish government. There
are dozens of people who live in the United States and their
accounts are still closed. People whose name appear on the
published list have faced various repercussions, including the
freezing or closure of their accounts, negative credit scores,
and various other personal and financial difficulties in
Western countries.
As the reports mention, after 2016, Erdogan's regime
started to arrest everyone who was in opposition, in 1 day,
more than 2 million people labeled as terrorists in Turkiye.
Then I began to call out human rights violations by President
Erdogan in my home country. The Turkish Government asked the
U.S. Government to extradite me back to Turkiye, canceled my
passport, put my name on INTERPOL list, imprisoned my father,
and set thousands of dollars' bounty on my head.
During a 2017 visit to Indonesia, I was nearly kidnapped by
the local government officials, with intentions to send me back
to Turkiye. With the help of a good local officer, I was able
to get out of that country right away. Later that year, I
hardly escaped from police officers at the Romanian airport
that the Turkish Government sent after me. They tried to arrest
me and send me back to Turkiye. Thankfully, U.S. Senator
Lankford got involved and helped me fly back to the United
States.
In 9 years, I received 12 arrest warrants and countless
deaths threats. They tried to attack me in front of a mosque in
Boston. They run social media campaigns against me so their
fanatics could harass me or attack me when they see me. They
pressured American universities, NGO's, and political groups to
cancel their events with me.
Sadly, all these are happening because of a so-called NATO
ally. Instead of protecting and supporting democracy and human
rights in the country or abroad, they became an enemy of the
democracy and human rights.
Seven years after having my Turkish citizenship revoked, I
became an American citizen. While becoming a citizen, I changed
my last name to Freedom and dedicated my whole life to defend
freedom.
I am very grateful to the Members of the Congress for
inviting me here and allowing me to share my story and the
story of millions. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Freedom follows:]
Prepared Statement of Enes Kanter Freedom
January 17, 2024
Thank you, Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and Members
of the committee for giving me the opportunity to testify today on the
very important issue of Transnational Repression.
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's long arm has reached tens of
thousands of Turkish citizens abroad while Turkey has been experiencing
a deepening human rights crisis since a coup attempt on July 15, 2016.
The Turkish government has been carrying out an extraordinary campaign
of transnational repression against its critics overseas since the
failed coup.
The State Department's 2022 Country Reports on Human Rights
Practices in Turkey reported that the Turkish government increasingly
coordinated with other authoritarian states to forcibly transfer more
than 100 Turkish nationals to Turkey since the 2016 coup, and more than
40 individuals were put through abduction, rendition, and forcible
return.
Turkey's campaign has mostly targeted people affiliated with the
Gulen movement. The movement is a globally respected faith-based civil
society inspired by Turkish cleric Fethullah Gulen, focusing on
promoting interfaith dialog and education throughout the world.
The latest annual human rights report on Turkey by the U.S.
Department of State sets out violations by Turkey including
``politically-motivated retaliation against individuals located outside
the country'' and ``kidnappings and transfers without due process of
alleged members of the Gulen movement''.
Turkish intelligence abducted Selahattin Gulen who was a teacher in
Kenya, and Orhan Inandi who was the chairman of a successful school
network in Kyrgyzstan. They were abducted and faced torture in prison.
They published his pictures on Turkish media with a broken arm. Most
recently they abducted Koray Vural who was a businessman in Tajikistan.
The list goes on and on, as the reports say more than 100 individuals
abducted by the Turkish intelligence faced torture in prison.
Turkey is also pressuring other countries to close many successful
math and science academies. As the State Department reported on the
Human Rights Country Report in 2022, the government applied bilateral
pressure on other governments to secure their assistance with
renditions without full due process and couched such requests as
cooperation on countering terrorism. Some observers attributed the
abrupt closure of a popular Gulen-affiliated school in Albania in
September with pressure from the Turkish government.
A letter sent to the Turkish government in 2020 by the responsible
U.N. Special Rapporteur condemned ``the systematic practice of state-
sponsored extraterritorial abduction and forcible return of Turkish
citizens from many countries.''
In this letter, U.N. representatives stated that victims were first
spied upon in the host country and then abducted: ``Victims remain
missing or incommunicado for weeks before being deported. During this
time, they are often subjected to pressure, torture, and humiliation to
pressure them into consenting to be taken to Turkey or into confessions
for trial in Turkey. They are denied access to medical care and legal
aid, and their families are not informed. Victims report repeated
torture by intelligence officers, mainly sleep deprivation, beatings,
waterboarding, and electric shocks.'' While Turkish government neither
denies nor hides the abductions, these acts are publicly promoted and
glorified by government-led media, and the victims are presented in
handcuffs before disappearing.
Between 2014 and 2023, Freedom House recorded 112 incidents of
physical transnational repression against journalists perpetrated by 26
governments. Turkey is one of the leading ones.
A Turkish journalist interviewed by Freedom House experienced the
closure of U.S. bank accounts, likely due to empty terrorism
accusations from the Turkish government. There are dozens of people who
live in the United States and their accounts are still closed.
People whose names appear on the published lists have faced various
repercussions including the freezing or closure of their accounts,
negative credit scores, and various other personal and financial
difficulties in Western countries.
As the reports mention, after 2016, Erdogan's regime started to
arrest everyone who was in opposition. In one day more than 2 million
people labeled as terrorists in Turkey. Then I began to call out human
rights violations by President Erdogan in my home country. The Turkish
government asked the U.S. Government to extradite me, canceled my
passport, put my name on Interpol list, imprisoned my father, and set a
$500,000 bounty on my head.
During a 2017 visit to Indonesia, I was nearly kidnapped by the
local government officials with intentions to send me back to Turkey.
With the help of a good local officer, I was able to get out of the
country right away. Later that year, I hardly escaped from police
officers at the Romanian airport that the Turkish government sent after
me. They tried to arrest me and send me back to Turkey. Thankfully
Senator Lankford got involved and helped me to fly back to the United
States.
In 9 years, I received 12 arrest warrants and countless death
threats. They tried to attack me in front of a mosque in Boston. They
run social media campaigns against me so their fanatics could harass me
or attack me when they see me. They pressured American universities,
NGO's, and political groups to cancel their events with me.
Sadly, all these are happening because of a so-called NATO ally.
Instead of protecting and supporting democracy and human rights in the
country or abroad, they became an enemy of democracy and human rights.
Seven years after having my Turkish citizenship revoked, I became
an American citizen. While becoming a citizen, I changed my last name
to Freedom and dedicated my whole life to defend freedom.
I'm very grateful to the Members of the Congress for inviting me to
hear and allowing me to share my story and the story of millions.

Mr. Pfluger. Thank you very much, Mr. Freedom.
The Chair now recognizes Ms. Nia for your 5-minute opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF GISSOU NIA, DIRECTOR OF THE STRATEGIC LITIGATION
PROJECT, ATLANTIC COUNCIL

Ms. Nia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member,
Members of the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law
Enforcement, and Intelligence. Thank you for inviting me here
to testify on the problem of transnational repression and the
threat it poses to the United States and Americans wherever
they may be in the world.
My team at the Strategic Litigation Project at the Atlantic
Council includes lawyers from the Uyghur community, Venezuela,
Cuba, Afghanistan, Iran and other regions of the world, and so
this testimony is partly informed by that and the experiences
of the impacted communities that we speak to.
First, I'm going to discuss gaps in the law here in the
United States and new legal tools that can address this
problem, and then I'll touch on a few themes I've observed in
interacting with these communities. Maybe that can help better
inform law enforcement and this committee's decisions on this
matter.
So fighting transnational repression should start with
defining, in clear legal terms, what the problem exactly is. I
think we've heard from my fellow panelists that there are two
pieces of legislation pending that would seek to define this
term.
We also--we have a need for a robust criminal legal
approach to address the problem of transnational repression. A
comprehensive definition introduced through legislation could
allow prosecutors to target perpetrators more directly.
If we look at the criminal indictment against the
perpetrators who attempted to kidnap Iranian-American dissident
Masih Alinejad, who this committee is familiar with, there was
a reliance on charges such as conspiracy to commit bank and
wire fraud and conspiracy to commit money laundering.
While the first paragraph of that indictment identified the
problem as one of transnational repression, the lack of a
specific provision in the U.S. Code meant the defendants needed
to face a range of other charges to be brought before a
criminal process.
In that indictment, the four Iran-based defendants were
charged in Federal Court because they hired a private
investigative firm based in the United States and used the U.S.
financial system, which is prohibited to agents of the Islamic
Republic, but many other acts leading up to the kidnapping plot
encompassed transnational repression.
For example, Iranian officials pressured her family with
offers of payment to lure her to meet them in a third country
where she could be more easily abducted. They also imprisoned
her brother on unfounded national security charges, simply to
exert pressure on Ms. Alinejad.
These are all acts of transnational repression intended to
target a U.S. person, but they do not fall neatly within
existing U.S. criminal law. If you look at the DOJ indictments
against PRC actors engaging in transnational repression, you'll
see a similar pattern of charging.
Now, there is a piece of legislation that could identify
that--I mean, that could address that, and we can get into that
a bit in the Q and A. But, as lawmakers, consider these
proposals. Jurisdictional reach needs to be a key
consideration.
It has to be expansive enough to protect victims. In Title
18 of the U.S. Code, we already have jurisdiction over a broad
range of international crimes, like torture, genocide, war
crimes. We need to have that expansive jurisdiction because,
for example, if foreign family members of a political dissident
are being targeted by a foreign state and that political
dissident has recently arrived in the United States as a
refugee or asylum seeker, that would not be covered. So we need
to seek to include that.
I'll quickly touch on a few other things, including that
short of a criminal statute on transnational repression, you
could have something like an extraterritorial Federal criminal
statute for extrajudicial killings, which would also cover a
key component of this.
The last thing that I'll touch on is how--another critical
aspect of this problem is how to identify and address threats
posed to U.S. citizens and residents by U.S. allies, not
adversaries.
A huge part of my work is focused on the threat that U.S.
adversaries pose. However, it's also carried out by
authoritarian governments with strategic partnerships with the
United States, conditioned on aid packages, arms deals,
political support and trade relationships. This includes Egypt,
the UAE, Saudi Arabia, even India, Rwanda.
But a lot of the people who are targeted by this have a
feeling that the U.S. Government would not have their support
if they come forward and give information about these threats
because of those special relationships. So in the Q&A, I'd love
to discuss a bit further how we can encourage those communities
to come forward with that valuable information.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Nia follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gissou Nia
January 17, 2024
Hello Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, Members of the House
Committee on Homeland Security, and Subcommittee on Counterterrorism,
Law Enforcement & Intelligence, thank you for inviting me to testify
today on the problem of transnational repression and the threat it
poses to the United States and Americans wherever they may be in the
world.
I am a lawyer specialized in international criminal law and human
rights law who is the founder and director of the Strategic Litigation
Project at the Atlantic Council. I founded the Strategic Litigation
Projectin 2019 to seek redress for victims and survivors of human
rights violations, atrocity crimes, terrorism, and corruption. Part of
the work of our team focuses on cross-border crimes and the risk that
authoritarian states pose to dissidents around the world. In assessing
these threats, we work closely with activists and impacted communities
to understand patterns and the nature of these threats--which can often
be context- and country-specific. Our team includes lawyers from the
Uyghur community, Venezuela, Cuba, Afghanistan, Iran, and other regions
of the world. We are often consulted by governments, U.N. experts,
private practitioners, and targets of transnational repression on what
legal and policy options are available to address this growing problem.
My testimony today is informed by that work, as well as my experience
over the past two decades working with civil society from oppressive
regimes around the world and understanding the unique threats that
activists, journalists, human rights defenders, and others who speak
truth to power face.
______

First, I am going to discuss gaps in the law here in the United
States and new legal tools that can address the problem of
transnational repression. Then, I will touch on a few themes I have
observed in interacting with communities impacted by this problem and
how this can help better inform law enforcement.
1--Congress should pass better criminal and civil legal tools to combat
transnational repression.
Fighting transnational repression should start with defining, in
clear legal terms, exactly what it is.
Currently, there is legislation pending before Congress that will
help define transnational repression and formulate a strong foreign
policy response to this phenomenon. The Transnational Repression Policy
Act, introduced by a bipartisan group of Senators and building on a
provision Congress passed in the NDAA for 2022 which focused on the
abuse of INTERPOL by authoritarian regimes, seeks to do this.
However we also have a need for a robust criminal legal approach to
address the problem of transnational repression that can better
synthesize the crime and its penalties.
A comprehensive definition introduced through legislation could
allow prosecutors to target perpetrators more directly. For example, in
the criminal indictment against the perpetrators who attempted to
kidnap Iranian-American dissident Masih Alinejad, there was a reliance
on charges such as conspiracy to commit bank and wire fraud and
conspiracy to commit money laundering. While the first paragraph of
that indictment identified the problem as one of transnational
repression, the lack of a specific provision in the U.S. Code meant the
defendants needed to face a range of other charges.
In that indictment, the four Iran-based defendants were charged in
Federal court because they hired a private investigative firm based in
the United States and used the U.S. financial system, which is
prohibited to agents of the Islamic Republic. But many other acts
leading up to the kidnapping plot encompassed transnational repression.
For example, Islamic Republic of Iran officials pressured Ms.
Alinejad's family with offers of payment to lure Ms. Alinejad to meet
them in a third country, where she could be more easily abducted. They
also imprisoned her brother on unfounded national security charges,
simply to exert pressure on Ms. Alinejad.
These are all acts of transnational repression intended to target a
U.S. person, but they do not fall neatly within existing U.S. criminal
law.
A survey of DOJ indictments against PRC actors engaging in
transnational repression reveals a similar pattern of charging.
A new legal definition could specifically outline what types of
acts will constitute harassment and persecution--including crimes like
murder, torture, and kidnapping, as well as cyber attacks and the
spread of disinformation.
As lawmakers consider legislative proposals to criminalize
transnational repression, jurisdictional reach should also be a key
consideration. Title 18 of the U.S. Code already provides jurisdiction
outside the United States over a broad range of international crimes
such as torture, genocide, war crimes, recruitment of child soldiers,
trafficking, piracy, and terrorism.
But jurisdiction must be expansive enough to protect victims. If a
bill only allows for the exercise of extraterritorial jurisdiction when
the perpetrator or victim is a U.S. national, it would leave an
accountability gap. For example, prosecutors would be hindered from
bringing a case if foreign family members of a political dissident are
being targeted by a foreign state and that political dissident has
recently arrived in the United States as a refugee or asylum seeker.
Short of a Federal criminal statute specifically addressing
transnational repression, other proposals that might help enforce
accountability include an extraterritorial Federal criminal statute for
extrajudicial killings, which could provide accountability if a U.S.-
based dissident's family members are killed.
Then there are civil litigation tools that could provide remedies
for transnational repression.
Under the``terrorism exception'' to the Foreign Sovereign
Immunities Act, individuals can sue U.S.-designated state sponsors of
terrorism--currently Iran, Syria, North Korea, and Cuba--for
extraterritorial acts including torture, extrajudicial killing, and
hostage taking. But that is only possible if the plaintiffs were U.S.
nationals at the time the act occurred.
Congress could amend the statute to allow individuals to sue if
they are U.S. nationals or lawful permanent residents at the time the
claim is brought, allowing newly-arrived dissidents who are the target
of transnational repression to hold the governments of their origin
countries accountable.
Staying on the topic of exceptions to the FSIA, the Homeland and
Cyber Threat (HACT) Act has been introduced and re-introduced before
the House since 2019 and would partly address transnational repression
by allowing dissidents who are U.S. nationals to sue foreign states
that launch cyber attacks against them.
However, this would not address the problem of accountability
against private companies--who facilitate the sale of spyware used
against dissidents. A series of judgments from the U.S. Supreme Court
have restricted the possibilities for corporate liability and this
negatively impacts the ability of U.S.-based non-citizen dissidents to
sue companies involved in surveillance. These barriers to
accountability in U.S. domestic law must be removed.
2--How to address transnational repression from U.S. allies versus from
U.S. adversaries.
Another critical aspect of this problem is to how to identify and
address threats posed to U.S. citizens and residents by U.S. allies,
not adversaries. A quick glance at the FBI website to report instances
of transnational repression shows a list of DOJ indictments against
individuals from China, Russia, and Iran but there is nothing to
indicate that these threats can also come from Saudi Arabia, Egypt, the
UAE, Rwanda, and even India.
Transnational repression is not only carried out by U.S.
adversaries, it is also carried out by authoritarian governments with
strategic partnerships with the U.S. conditioned on aid packages, arms
deals, political support, and trade relationships. These authoritarian
states have the same interest other authoritarian states do in
silencing dissidents abroad, and their friendly relationship with the
United States does not deter them from targeting dissidents on U.S.
soil.
The nature of the relationship between governments does however
affect how confident the victims and impacted communities feel in
coming forward to law enforcement here in the United States to inform
authorities of the problem. In consultations I have had with dissidents
from countries friendly with the United States, they have expressed
fear or reluctance in approaching U.S. authorities to detail the
threats they face. There is a pervasive feeling that U.S. authorities
may not defend their interests in the same way they would if the
perpetrators were from an ``adversary'' country like Russia, China, or
Iran--where U.S. foreign policy has taken a clear position in defending
the interests of Americans with no tradeoffs.
The efforts that the FBI has taken to encourage impacted
communities to report incidents of transnational repression is
admirable, but it will only be as strong as the willingness of
communities to come forward. Similarly, the Transnational Repression
Policy Act instructs DHS to create a tip line for victims and witnesses
of transnational repression to share information with the U.S.
Government--but again, these communities need to trust that this
information will be acted on in a beneficial, not harmful, way and this
will require trust.
This touches on a last point. The strategy to combat transnational
repression domestically will be strengthened with improved global
coordination to tackle bad actors. Given the cross-border nature of
this crime, the repression may begin in the origin country, but it can
touch other countries along the way, in a chain of repression that
ultimately can impact U.S. interests. For example, both Saudi Arabia
and Egypt have consented to China's requests that Uyghur dissidents be
repatriated to China--despite the risks that those dissidents will be
imprisoned and sent to ``reeducation'' centers. And multiple U.S.
residents who are dissidents from authoritarian regimes have been
detained or abducted while traveling through the UAE and sent to their
origin country. U.S. law enforcement should work with their
counterparts in allied countries to assess why this is happening and
undertake efforts to better protect dissidents.
______

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and Members of the committee,
thank you again. I look forward to your questions.

Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Ms. Nia.
Thank you all for your testimony, incredibly enlightening,
and I think we'll have a good discussion.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning, and an additional round of
questioning may be called after all Members have been
recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning. Before
I start, I'd like to insert for the record a statement from the
Sikh Coalition to this committee. So ordered, with unanimous
consent.
[The information follows:]
Statement of The Sikh Coalition
January 17, 2024
The Sikh Coalition respectfully submits this statement for the
record in connection with the above-referenced hearing before the House
Homeland Security Committee's Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law
Enforcement, and Intelligence. As a civil rights organization that
represents the Sikh community in the United States, we write to address
our concern about the threats that Sikhs in the United States face from
transnational repression perpetrated by the government of India.
By way of background, the Sikh Coalition is the largest Sikh
American civil rights organization in the United States. Our
organization was founded in the immediate aftermath of September 11,
2001, in response to a torrent of hate crimes and acts of
discrimination, both individual and institutional, against Sikhs
throughout the United States. In the more than 20 years since, our
mission has been to work toward a world where Sikhs and other religious
minorities in America can freely practice their faith without bias,
bigotry, and backlash.
Transnational repression is being used to silence dissidents, human
rights advocates, journalists, and minorities around the world--
including American citizens. This is an area of concern that impacts
diaspora communities targeted by Russia, Iran, India, China, Turkey,
North Korea, and other countries.\1\ To address the safety concerns and
civil rights of our communities, the committee has the ability to pass
existing bills and identify additional recommendations that can
responsibly hold countries accountable for their actions, while also
ensuring that the civil rights and civil liberties of Americans are not
violated and that no community in the United States is scapegoated for
the acts of a foreign nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Mike Abramowitz and Nate Schenkkan, ``The long arm of the
authoritarian State,'' The Washington Post, Feb. 3, 2021, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/02/03/freedom-house-transnational-
repression-authoritarian-dissidents/; and Yana Gorokhovskaia, Nate
Schenkkan, and Grady Vaughan, ``Still Not Safe: Transnational
Repression in 2022,'' Freedom House, Apr. 6, 2023, https://
freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/2023-04/FH_Trans-
nationalRepression2023_0.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the Sikh Coalition cannot speak to all of the lived
experiences of every community targeted by transnational repression, we
write to share with you credible concerns that the government of India
has engaged in such behavior against the Sikh diaspora. Recent events
have confirmed long-standing community concerns about efforts to
instill fear and silence within Sikhs in the United States. In November
2023, the Department of Justice indicted an Indian national who
allegedly attempted to coordinate the assassination of a Sikh American
on U.S. soil at the direction of an unnamed employee of the government
of India.\2\ That indictment also alleges that the government of India
had a list of additional Sikhs--in the words of one conspirator, ``so
many targets''--they planned to kill between the United States and
Canada. Moreover, the Sikh Coalition is also concerned that India is
exporting hate-fueled propaganda to further target religious minority
communities with anti-Sikh, Islamophobic, and otherwise discriminatory
or fear-mongering disinformation to incite community unrest and
violence within the diaspora. These concerns are swelling as we
approach the 40th anniversary of the start of a campaign of genocidal
violence visited upon the Sikh community in India by the Indian
government in 1984.\3\ Sikh Americans who wish to raise awareness about
the acts of India, both historical and present-day, must be free to do
so without fear of retribution and violence from the Indian government,
paid criminals, recruited street forces, or extremist Hindu
nationalists.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ United States v. Nikhil Gupta, Sealed Superseding Indictment,
S1 23 Cr. 289 (VM), https://www.justice.gov/media/1326501/dl?inline.
\3\ Jaskaran Kaur, ``Twenty Years of Impunity--The November 1984
Pogroms of Sikhs in India,'' Ensaaf, Oct. 2006, https://ensaaf.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/20years-2d.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In light of the alarming news of India's alleged involvement in
multiple assassinations and other recent events indicating attempts to
target Sikh Americans and houses of worship in our Nation, it is
imperative that Congress take bold action to protect the civil rights
and civil liberties of all Americans and defend our Nation from such
challenges to our Nation's democratic and pluralistic ideals. The
United States should not tolerate attempts to intimidate, harass, and
threaten its people, and must hold accountable not only the individual
actors but also those involved in the architecting and supporting such
plots. Indeed, our commitment to democracy must be even stronger when
foreign nations are actively propagating fear in our Nation and seeking
to restrict the freedom of our citizens. We appreciate the Biden-Harris
administration prioritizing initiatives to address transnational
repression in 2021. However, this new and developing area of national
security requires greater multi-agency resource coordination to
streamline current processes. Finally, the United States Government
must ensure there is neutral application of existing political tools to
avoid favoritism with specific countries.
i. credible allegations of india's plot to murder americans and instill
fear against a religious diaspora
On November 29, 2023 the Department of Justice unsealed an
indictment \4\ of Indian national Nikhil Gupta, who was allegedly
recruited by an employee of the Indian government to work with others
to assassinate Sikh Americans and Canadians. The indictment indicates
that Mr. Gupta, along with his collaborators, dedicated extensive time,
international coordination, and $100,000 to a murder-for-hire scheme
targeting a Sikh American in New York, and that the plot had involved
``so many [other] targets,'' including at least one other American in
California. The indictment contains allegations that corroborate
India's alleged role in the assassination of Hardeep Singh Nijjar, a
Canadian citizen who was murdered in British Columbia, Canada, in June
2023. Moreover, the facts alleged in the indictment indicate that there
is an on-going threat of assassination against an unknown number of
U.S. Sikhs, and that there is an international network of individuals,
including an employee of the government of India, who are coordinating
and financing these illegal activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ United States v. Nikhil Gupta, Sealed Superseding Indictment,
S1 23 Cr. 289 (VM), https://www.justice.gov/media/1326501/dl?inline.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Subsequent events have lent further credence to the likelihood that
the government of India is directly responsible for attempts to target
Sikhs in the United States and abroad: reports of a leaked memo \5\
originally issued by India's Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in
April indicate that the MEA ``instructed its consulates in North
America to launch a `sophisticated crackdown scheme' against Sikh
diaspora organizations,'' including organizations in the United
States.\6\ The MEA memo lists the names of several members of the Sikh
diaspora, including Mr. Nijjar, who was assassinated 2 months after the
memo was issued. In the MEA memo, Sikhs' expressions of free speech and
political dissent were conflated with extremism and terrorism, and
mischaracterized its targeting of Sikhs abroad as a fight against Sikh
separatist, or Khalistani ``extremism''.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Exhibit 1.
\6\ Murtaza Hussain and Ryan Grim, ``Secret Indian Memo Ordered
`Concrete Measures' Against Hardeep Singh Nijjar Two Months Before His
Assassination in Canada,'' The Intercept, Dec. 10, 2023, https://
theintercept.com/2023/12/10/india-sikhs-leaked-memo-us-canada/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
More worryingly, the MEA memo admits India's frustration with those
who were ``actively engaged in anti-India propaganda, attempting to
degrade India's international image'' and that the United States and
Canada were ``asserting that these organizations have not committed any
crime within their territories.'' Nonetheless, the MEA memo identifies
three requests by Indian missions/consulates in the United States to
undertake the following actions:
(1) Increasing clandestine security operations, including a
``sophisticated crackdown scheme'' on Sikhs in the United
States and Canada and increased surveillance between Sikhs and
elected officials;
(2) Influence authorities, think tanks, and political figures to
foster a ``favorable atmosphere''; and
(3) Cultivate a ``vital force in the street'' through U.S.-based
organizations (including the U.S.-India Business Council,\7\
Indiaspora, among other organizations).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ We note that the MEA memo's scheme of interference in our
domestic affairs is targeting a U.S. Government organization that
resides with the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The strategies identified in the MEA memo should be alarming as
they indicate a conscious and willful disregard for not only the human
rights of Americans engaged in the lawful expressions of their freedom
of speech, but indeed our Nation's fundamental sovereignty. The MEA
memo has identified strategies to develop a street force in the United
States that can be mobilized by a foreign nation to intimidate fellow
Americans and stoke unrest for expressing their lawfully-protected
speech. The MEA memo also identifies strategies used by hostile foreign
governments to undermine trust and confidence in our Nation's
institutions, including government, law enforcement, think tanks, and
politicians. Canada has already expressed public concern that the
government of India is one of the leading nations engaged in foreign
interference within its borders.\8\ More must be done by our Federal
Government, think tanks, and law enforcement to defend against such
foreign interference campaigns. Pursuant to laws on international human
rights,\9\ communities have the right to determine if they want to be a
part of a nation-state or not, and that right should not be infringed
upon.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Dylan Robertson, ``India among top sources of foreign
interference in Canada: Jody Thomas,'' Toronto Sun, June 5, 2023,
https://torontosun.com/news/national/india-among-top-sources-of-
foreign-interference-in-canada-jody-thomas.
\9\ International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, United
Nations General Assembly Resolution 2200A (XXI), December 16, 1996,
https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/
international-covenant-civil-and-political-rights; Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, United
Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV), Dec. 14, 1960, https://
www.ohchr.org/en/instruments-mechanisms/instruments/declaration-
granting-independence-colonial-countries-and-peoples.
\10\ The demand for self-determination by Sikhs to create a
homeland called Khalistan has roots in the historical and cultural
differences between the Punjabi Sikhs and the Indian state. Sikhs have
a distinct identity and many believe that their rights and interests
have been ignored or suppressed by the Indian state for more than four
decades. Therefore, the demand for self-determination is not just a
political issue, but also a cultural and social one. Genocidal violence
by India targeting the Sikh community also plays a significant role in
legitimate requests for self-determination.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regrettably, India has criminalized the right of self-determination
for Sikhs and overbroadly deems any expression in support of this
political belief as terroristic.\11\ In a democracy like the United
States, individuals have the right to peacefully express their
political beliefs without fear of retribution. The freedom of speech
and expression of our citizens is a fundamental cornerstone that cannot
be violated by any domestic law, much less by a foreign government. The
assassination plots credibly believed to be orchestrated by India
undermine these principles by targeting individuals, including
Canadians and Americans, who are supporting an unofficial and non-
binding referendum vote to gather consensus among Sikh communities
world-wide on the establishment of Khalistan, a Sikh homeland.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ ``Support for self-determination with respect to Khalistan is
outlawed in India and considered a national security threat by the
government--a number of groups associated with the movement are listed
as `terrorist organizations' under India's Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act (UAPA),'' Paula Newton and Rhea Mogul, ``India expels
Canadian diplomat in tit-for-tat move as spat over assassinated Sikh
activist deepens,'' CNN, Updated Sept. 19, 2023, https://www.cnn.com/
2023/09/18/americas/canada-hardeep-singh-nijjar-india-intl/index.html#;
``Since June 2020, hundreds of Sikhs have been detained and
interrogated in India due to their social media activities and some
have been charged with offences related to support for Khalistan under
the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (`UAPA'),'' ``Enforcing silence:
India's War on Sikh Social Media,'' World Sikh Organization, July 2020,
https://assets.nationbuilder.com/worldsikh/pages/2479/attachments/
original/1680541803/WSO_So- cial_Media_Crackdown_Report.pdf?1680541803;
``In a chilling throwback McCarthyism in the United States, India's
Parliament has passed the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment
Bill, 2019 which will allow the Central government to designate
individuals as `terrorists' without the exercise of due process of
law,'' Rongeet Poddar, ``Constitutionality of India's Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2019: India's McCarthyism
Moment,'' Oxford Human Rights Hub Blog, August 14, 2019, https://
ohrh.law.ox.ac.uk/constitutionality-of-indias-unlawful-activities-
prevention-amendment-bill-2019-indias-mccarthyism-moment.
\12\ The Sikh Coalition does not take an institutional position on
Khalistan, but firmly believes that all people have a right to free
speech and a right to lawfully advocate for their beliefs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, it is deeply concerning that India appears to be actively
financing and promoting criminal enterprise activity in the United
States. We are alarmed by what appears to be the government of India
using criminal elements--including but not limited to recruiting an
international narcotics trafficker\13\--to target Sikhs in the United
States and other countries, a clear violation of democratic principles,
due process, and respect for the rule of law. The use of criminal
elements to kill individuals on India's hitlist further lends concern
that the targets were selected not to enact justice but to send a
message of fear to specific communities in the United States and intent
to avoid culpability for the murder of Americans. It also leads to
greater concerns as to what extent foreign governments are using
transnational crime to undermine the safety and security of our Nation,
and whether current policy is adequate to address these risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ ``In or about May 2023, CC-1 recruited GUPTA to orchestrate
the assassination of the Victim in the United States. GUPTA, an Indian
national who also resides in India, is an associate of CC-1 and has
described his involvement in international narcotics and weapons
trafficking in his communications with CC-1 and others.'' United States
v. Nikhil Gupta, Sealed Superceding Indictment, S1 23 Cr. 289 (VM),
https://www.justice.gov/media/1326501/dl?inline.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Following the murder of Mr. Nijjar, the FBI warned several Sikh
Americans of threats against them.\14\ More concerning is the fact that
India appears to be unabated by the credible allegations of
transnational repression brought by Canada and the indictment by the
U.S. Department of Justice. Beyond India ignoring the rules-based
international order by attempting to use criminal means to silence
dissidents, it is alarming to note that India's targeting of the Sikh
diaspora appears to be politically motivated leading up to India's
elections.\15\ Further undermining the legitimacy of India's claims of
combating fatal threats is the alleged strategic timing of India's
assassination plot: The indictment specifically identifies that the
Indian agent requested action that would not coincide with Prime
Minister Narendra Modi's state visit to the United States.\16\ This
allegation suggests a misuse of diplomatic relations to target
religious minorities and political dissenters abroad, including
Americans. This information also raises serious concerns about India's
commitment to democratic principles, its reliability as a strategic
partner,\17\ and its commitment to bilateral agreements with our
Nation. The 2005 New Framework Agreement focused on upholding
democratic institutions and the rule of law; similarly, the recent 2023
U.S.-India Comprehensive Global and Strategic Partnership affirms that
the rules-based international order must be respected. These actions of
India, however, run contrary to such agreements and demonstrate that
India is using its geopolitical standing with the United States to
exploit human rights abuses against not only the United States, but
also other Five Eyes nations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Murtaza Hussain, ``FBI Warned Sikhs in the U.S. About Death
Threats After Killing of Canadian Activist,'' The Intercept, Sept. 23,
2023, https://theintercept.com/2023/09/23/sikhs-fbi-canada-india-
nijjar/.
\15\ C. Christine Fair, ``India's Spat With Canada Is a Win-Win
Situation for Modi,'' FP, Oct. 20, 2023, https://foreignpolicy.com/
2023/10/20/india-modi-canada-trudeau-nijjar-khalistan-sikh-separatism/.
\16\ ``Gupta also specifically instructed the UC not to commit the
murder around the time of anticipated engagements scheduled to occur in
the ensuing weeks between high-level U.S. and Indian government
officials.'' United States v. Nikhil Gupta, Sealed Superseding
Indictment, S1 23 Cr. 289 (VM), https://www.justice.gov/media/1326501/
dl?inline.
\17\ ``On foreign policy, India is reliably unreliable,'' The
Economist, Nov. 24, 2022, https://www.economist.com/asia/2022/11/24/on-
foreign-policy-india-is-reliably unreliable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In December 2023, Human Rights Watch also raised concerns about
India's ``systemic failures to prosecute security force personnel for
extrajudicial killings'' and questioned India's willingness to address
transnational repression.\18\ Following the indictment, India stated it
would create a body to review the allegations.\19\ However, subsequent
to that announcement, Nikhil Gupta, the individual named in the
unsealed public indictment, was recently transferred to solitary
confinement by Czech authorities after they were alerted by the United
States of a threat on his life.\20\ Reporting from this week now
indicates that Sikhs in the United Kingdom ``have been warned by police
that their lives are in danger'' amid claims of escalating attempts to
target Sikh activists.\21\ Sufficient credible reporting suggests that
within its own borders India is among the most egregious offenders of
human rights. The safety, security, and rights of dissidents and
religious minorities are now also under grave threat from the actions
of India. Given on-going concerns about India's belligerence to the
rule of law and human rights we express grave concern that India will
not meaningfully address these serious matters, more must be done to
hold India and those acting with India accountable.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ ``India: Investigate Alleged Overseas Murder Plots,'' Human
Rights Watch, https://www.hrw.org/news/2023/12/15/india-investigate-
alleged-overseas-murder-plots.
\19\ Krishn Kaushik, ``India to probe US concerns linking it to
foiled murder plot,'' Reuters, Nov. 29, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/
world/india/india-forms-committee-look-into-security-concerns-raised-
by-us-2023-11-29/.
\20\ Ritika Chopra, ``Plot to kill Pannun: Czech govt moved Nikhil
Gupta to solitary after US input on life threat,'' The Indian Express,
Updated Jan. 8, 2024, https://indianexpress.com/article/india/plot-to-
kill-pannun-czech-govt-moved-nikhil-gupta-to-solitary-after-us-input-
on-life-threat-9099366/.
\21\ Fiona Hamilton, Amardeep Bassey, ``Sikhs given `threat to
life' notices fear link to India,'' The Times, Jan. 14, 2023, https://
www.thetimes.co.uk/article/sikh-leaders-in-uk-issued-with-threat-to-
life-notices-wnskwhkhb#.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
ii. concerning pattern of transnational repression by india and indian
nationalists targeting religious minorities in the united states
In September 2023, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau confirmed
that ``Canadian security agencies have been actively pursuing credible
allegations of a potential link'' between the Indian state and the
arbitrary extra-judicial killing of Sikh Canadian Hardeep Singh Nijjar
in British Columbia in June of the same year.\22\ As mentioned above,
Prime Minister Trudeau's national security advisor previously named
India as a ``top source of foreign interference in Canada,''\23\ and
these concerns were publicly raised by Prime Minister Trudeau at the
G20 Summit in New Delhi in September.\24\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Paula Newton and Rhea Mogul, ``India expels Canadian diplomat
in tit-for-tat move as spat over assassinated Sikh activist deepens.''
CNN, Sep. 19, 2023, https://www.cnn.com/2023/09/18/americas/canada-
hardeep-singh-nijjar-india-intl/index.html.
\23\ ``India among top actors for foreign interference in Canada:
national security adviser.'' CTV News, Jun. 5, 2023, https://
www.ctvnews.ca/politics/india-among-top-actors-for-foreign-
interference-in-canada-national-security-adviser-1.6428213#.
\24\ ``Trudeau leaves India after aircraft issues delayed departure
from rocky G20: Canadian prime minister's time at G20 summit in New
Delhi highlights growing tensions between India and Canada.'' Al
Jazeera, Sep. 12, 2023, https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2023/9/12/
trudeau-leaves-india-after-aircraft-issues-delayed-departure-from-
rocky-g20#.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Concerns of transnational repression, and specifically the
targeting of Sikhs, extends beyond these events in Canada. The United
States Commission on International Religious Freedom (USCIRF) has also
found that Jagtar ``Jaggi'' Singh Johal, a British Sikh man, remains
``detained [in India] for his religious belief and for documenting
religious freedom violations.''\25\ And in May 2022, the United Nations
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention declared Johal's detention
arbitrary and called for his immediate release.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ ``Jagtar Singh Johal,'' United States Commission on
International Religious Freedom, https://www.uscirf.gov/religious-
prisoners-conscience/forb-victims-data base/jagtar-singh-johal.
\26\ Calum McKay and Katie Hunter, ``UN group: No legal basis for
Jagtar Singh Johal's detention in India.'' BBC News, May 8, 2022,
https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-61371846.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, members of the Sikh American community, including
elected officials,\27\ have courageously spoken out about threats that
could be traced back to the government of India or may be the result of
India's cultivated street force here in the United States or
radicalized Hindu nationalist extremists \28\ stoked by India's
industrial-scale disinformation campaigns and open calls for the
assassination of dissidents, including individuals in the United
States. It should be very alarming that the targeting is against
American houses of worship, such as gurdwaras (Sikh houses of worship),
including one in California, reportedly using travel visas as a tool of
coercion against Americans.\29\ Similarly, India has also been
repeatedly implicated in infiltrating gurdwaras in Canada \30\ and
repeatedly convicted of spying on Sikhs by courts in Germany.\31\ Many
Sikhs, including current and former elected officials in Canada, have
also been denied visas to visit India as a result of speaking out about
human rights abuses in India.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Jenny Huh, ``Sikh lawmakers, threatened over ethnicity in
recent weeks, highlight nationwide safety concerns,'' KGET, Oct. 19,
2023, https://www.kget.com/news/local-news/local-sikh-lawmakers-
threatened-over-ethnicity-in-recent-weeks-highlight-nationwide-safety-
concerns/; Joe Rubin, ``Sikh activists in California fear being
targeted in alleged assassination plot,'' The Sacramento Bee, Dec. 1,
2023, https://www.sacbee.com/news/local/article282490123.html.
\28\ Hindu Nationalists and White Supremacists are also worryingly
becoming further aligned to advance their respective agendas of
prejudice in establishing racially pure societies. Supporters have
embraced the Aryan race mythology as well as fascism, while White
Supremacists have admired Hindu Nationalists promoting Islamophobia and
the ideals of a caste system. See Aadita Chaudhury, ``Why white
supremacists and Hindu nationalists are so alike'' Al Jazeera, Dec. 13,
2018, https://www.aljazeera.com/opinions/2018/12/13/why-white-
supremacists-and-hindu-nationalists-are-so-alike; and Audrey Truschke,
``Hindu Supremacists in a White World,'' Oxford Academic, Jun. 23,
2023, https://academic.oup.com/jaar/article/90/4/805/7205783. The
cross-pollination of extremist ideologies to inspire bigoted acts of
hatred has become a growing threat for religious minorities around the
world. See Joe Heim and James McAuley, ``New Zealand attacks offer the
latest evidence of a web of supremacist extremism,'' The Washington
Post, Mar. 15, 2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe/new-
zealand-suspect-inspired-by-far-right-french-intellectual-who-feared-
nonwhite-immigration/2019/03/15/8c39fba4-6201-4a8d-99c6-
aa42db53d6d3_story.html. The importation of extremist Hindu nationalist
ideology into the United States has the potential to spur more violence
and unrest against Sikh and Muslim communities, which according to the
Federal Bureau of Investigation's Hate Crime Statistics Program are
already among the most targeted religious communities for hate violence
in the United States.
\29\ Joe Rubin, ``California Sikhs report threats, troubling
incidents to FBI following assassination in Canada,'' The Sacramento
Bee, Oct. 19, 2023, https://www.sacbee.com/news/local/
article280306154.html.
\30\ ``WSO Expresses Concern over Indian Interference in Canada,''
World Sikh Organization, April 17, 2019, https://www.worldsikh.org/
wso_expresses_concern_over_indian- _interference_in_canada.
\31\ Germany has charged inidviduals linked to Indian intelligence
services at least three times. ``Germany charges man with spying for
Indian intelligence,'' Al Jazeera, May 13, 2020, https://
www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/5/13/germany-charges-man-with-spying-for-
indian-intelligence; IP Singh, ``Second case of Germany going after
Sikhs spying on their community,'' Times of India, April 12, 2019,
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/ludhiana/second-case-of-
germany-going-after-sikhs-spying-on-their-community/articleshow/
68841351.cms; ``German official charged with spying on Sikhs for
India,'' The Local, Sept. 20, 2016, https://www.thelocal.de/20160920/
german-official-charged-with-spying-on-sikhs-for-india.
\32\ IP Singh, ``Canadian Sikh MLA alleges India denied visa to
him,'' Times of India, Updated Dec. 27, 2013, https://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/nri/us-canada-news/canadian-sikh-mla-
alleges-india-denied-visa-to-him/articleshow/28001791.cms; and A Singh,
``India denies ex-MP visa,'' Asian Pacific Post, Oct. 25, 2011, https:/
/asianpacificpost.com/article/4732-india-denies-ex-mp-visa.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Sikh Coalition has also received reports from individuals in
the United States receiving threatening messages after attending
peaceful protests critical of the Indian government. We are also aware
of instances of Indian government agents stopping individuals
arbitrarily and with false charges to elicit information about Sikh
communities in the United States. And finally, we have been notified of
situations in which individuals in the United States who have expressed
criticism of the Indian government have had their family members in
India face harassment at the hands of Indian authorities. Regrettably,
many individuals are understandably reluctant to come forward due to
report these instances with law enforcement due to the very real fear
of reprisal against themselves or their loved ones abroad. Community
reporting of incidents faces challenges due to a lack of awareness in
recognizing signs of transnational repression.
These challenges are exacerbated by insufficient community
involvement and a lack of awareness among law enforcement agencies,
including Federal authorities. Many of these concerns regarding India's
behavior, however, were highlighted in December 2023 by the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, during their hearing on ``Transnational
Repression: Authoritarians Targeting Dissenters Abroad.''\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ ``Transnational Repression: Authoritarians Targeting
Dissenters Abroad'' Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Dec. 6, 2023,
https://www.foreign.senate.gov/hearings/transnational-repression-
authoritarians-targeting-disssenters-abroad.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These disturbing reports highlight that Sikh Americans of all walks
of life are being targeted, whether they are dissidents, elected
officials, or simply attending houses of worship across the country.
This pattern of intimidation and harassment against a religious
minority community is deeply troubling and poses a significant threat
to the safety and well-being of our nation and the rights of Americans.
Recent reporting also indicates that a complex web of misinformation
has sought to discredit foreign critics of the Modi government, and was
set up and is run by an Indian intelligence officer.\34\ The reports
from this entity, Disinfo Lab, have been cited by Indian officials on
television and presented on Capitol Hill.\35\ Disinfo Lab often
perpetuates ``unsubstantiated claims to paint U.S. Government figures,
researchers, humanitarian groups and Indian American rights activists''
as part of a global conspiracy.\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Gerry Shih, Clara Ence Morse and Pranshu Verma, ``Covert
Indian operation seeks to discredit Modi's critics in the U.S.,'' The
Washington Post, December 10, 2023, https://www.washingtonpost.com/
world/2023/12/10/india-the-disinfo-lab-discredit-critics/#.
\35\ Id.
\36\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iii. the history of religious oppression by the indian government
indicates a move toward authoritarianism with international aspirations
These egregious actions by India, including attempting to murder
Americans, not only violate our democratic ideals but are part of a
broader pattern of India's suppression of religious minorities both
domestically and abroad. When Sikhs and other religious minorities
peacefully dissent, the response from the Indian government has too
often been marked by attempts to suppress their freedoms of expression
through internet shutdowns, media censorship, intimidation, arbitrary
arrests, escalation of violence, and characterizations of peaceful
dissidents as terrorists. Actions like these contradict fundamental
human rights and risk exacerbating civil unrest and alienation of an
entire religious minority community.
In March 2023, Indian authorities executed weeks-long massive
mobilizations of paramilitary and police forces, conducted multiple
coordinated arbitrary arrests with brutal violence, imposed mobile
internet data blackouts, blocked SMS services, censored media, and
disproportionately targeted Sikhs and political dissenters across
Punjab.\37\ Similar oppressive tactics were also displayed during the
historic Farmers' Protests that began in India in September 2020.\38\
The Indian government's censorship of certain aspects of the country's
national conversation evoke grave concerns of fostering a climate that
could lead to mass violence against Muslims, Sikhs, and other
minorities, especially given that India is considered a country at high
risk for mass killings.\39\ USCIRF Chair Abraham Cooper also reiterated
last year that ``[r]eligious freedom conditions in India have notably
declined in recent years,'' specifically citing that ``Muslims, Sikhs,
Christians, Dalits, and Adivasis are experiencing increased levels of
attacks and acts of intimidation.''\40\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ Letter to Secretary Antony Blinken, The Sikh Coalition, March
21, 2023, https://www.sikhcoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/
Support-for-Sikhs-and-Democratic-Norms-in-India-March-21-2023.pdf.
\38\ Mujib Mashal and Sameer Yasir, ``Modi's Response to Farmer
Protests in India Stirs Fears of a Pattern,'' New York Times, Feb. 3,
2021, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/03/world/asia/india-modi-farmer-
protest-censorship.html.
\39\ ``Rising Mass Atrocity Risks in India.'' United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum, Mar. 30, 2022, https://www.ushmm.org/
genocide-prevention/blog/rising-mass-atrocity-risks-in-india; ``India:
2023-24 Statistical Risk Assessment for Mass Killing,'' Early Warning
Project, https://earlywarningproject.ushmm.org/countries/india.
\40\ ``USCIRF Reiterates Concerns on Religious Freedom in India,
Calls for Release of Religious Prisoners of Conscience,'' United States
Commission on International Religious Freedom, Oct. 3, 2023, https://
www.uscirf.gov/news-room/releases-statements/uscirf-reiterates-
concerns-religious-freedom-india-calls-release#.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Non-governmental organizations (NGO's) like Amnesty International,
which monitor human rights conditions world-wide, were forced to shut
offices across India after being financially paralyzed by the Indian
government.\41\ Oxfam and Khalsa Aid have also been subjected to raids
by the Indian government.\42\ Similarly, the offices of BBC and other
media organizations were subject to government raids.\43\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ Hannah Ellis-Petersen and Ben Doherty, ``Amnesty to halt work
in India due to government `witch-hunt'.'' The Guardian, Sep. 29, 2020,
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/sep/29/amnesty-to-halt-work-in-
india-due-to-government-witch-hunt; ``NIA teams raid Khalsa Aid's
Patiala office, question MD Amarpreet Singh,'' The Tribune, Aug. 2,
2023, https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/nia-teams-raid-khalsa-
aids-patiala-office-question-md-531112#top.
\42\ Astha Rajvanshi, ``How the Indian Government Uses Raids to
Silence Critics,'' TIME, Feb. 14, 2023, https://time.com/6255425/india-
raid-bbc-modi-documentary/.
\43\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Indian Government's control and manipulation of the media to
advance their ideological purposes is also no secret. Since 2020, India
has regressed further down the Reporters Without Borders World Press
Freedom Index. It is now ranked among the worst for global press
freedom with the likes of Russia, China, and Iran.\44\ India has
expelled foreign journalists due to work critical of Prime Minister
Narendra Modi,\45\ and imprisoned a growing number of journalists in-
country for their reporting.\46\ Additionally, even journalists in the
United States who ask simple questions about India's human rights
record face on-line threats and harassment.\47\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\44\ ``India: Media freedom under threat.`` Reporters Without
Borders, Mar. 5, 2023, https://rsf.org/en/india-media-freedom-under-
threat.
\45\ ``VICE journalist Angad Singh deported from Delhi.'' The
Hindu, Aug. 25, 2022, https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/vice-
journalist-angad-singh-deported-from-delhi/article- 65810246.ece.
\46\ Kavitha Iyer, `` `They Can Target Anybody': India's War on
Free Press Is in High Gear,'' TIME, Aug. 1, 2022, https://time.com/
6202430/zubair-modi-muslims-target-media-free-press/.
\47\ Amy B Wang, ``White House defends WSJ reporter facing
harassment over Modi question,'' The Washington Post, June 28, 2023,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/06/28/white-house-modi-
reporter-wall-street-journal/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Additionally, social media users critical of India's draconian
policies routinely have their accounts restricted at the request of the
government.\48\ Any criticism of the Modi government can lead to bans
and attacks by trolls. Individual users have been targeted for
something as trivial as sharing a BBC documentary that is critical of
Mr. Modi;\49\ there have also been coordinated campaigns to restrict
trending topics that peacefully acknowledge India's genocidal violence
against Sikhs in 1984.\50\ When American social media companies such as
Meta and Twitter do not comply with takedown requests, their employees
risk arrests and raids in India.\51\ Former Twitter CEO Jack Dorsey
alleged that the Indian government threatened to ``shut Twitter down''
if Twitter did not censor accounts commenting on the Farmers
Protest.\52\ The Sikh Coalition is also aware of media reporting from
India that improperly attempts to label Sikhs as terrorists for their
peaceful political views. Such segments are then immediately followed
by commentators who advocate for the global extrajudicial murder of
``terrorists.'' We are deeply alarmed by India's attempts to silence
journalists, advocates, and nonprofits around the world who are
critical of the Indian government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\48\ Yashraj Sharma, ``Twitter accused of censorship in India as it
blocks Modi critics,'' The Guardian, Apr. 4, 2023, https://
www.theguardian.com/world/2023/apr/05/twitter-accused-of-censorship-in-
india-as-it-blocks-modi-critics-elon-musk.
\49\ Rhea Mogul, ``India bans BBC documentary on PM Modi's role in
Gujarat riots.'' CNN, Jan. 23, 2023, https://www.cnn.com/2023/01/23/
business-india/india-modi-bbc-documentary-twitter-youtube-censorship-
intl-hnk/index.html.
\50\ ``India attempts to censor tweets commemorating `1984 Genocide
of Sikhs,' '' Tamil Guardian, Sept. 20, 2020, https://
www.tamilguardian.com/content/india-attempts-censor-tweets-
commemorating%E2%80%981984-genocide-sikhs%E2%80%99.
\51\ Ryan Grim and Murtaza Hussain, ``Elon Musk's Twitter Widens
Its Censorship of Modi's Critics,'' The Intercept, Mar, 28, 2023,
https://theintercept.com/2023/03/28/twitter-modi-india-punjab-amritpal-
singh/.
\52\ Zoya Mateen, ``Jack Dorsey: India threatened to shut Twitter
and raid employees.'' BBC, Jun. 13, 2023, https://www.bbc.com/news/
world-asia-india-65886825.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is not only international NGO's and media suppression that
indicate India has embraced and continued to permit authoritarianism.
Prior human rights reports on India from the Department of State,
spanning at least a decade, indicate long-standing concerns regarding
India's major human rights issues concerning ``police and security
force abuses, including extrajudicial killings, torture, and
rape.''\53\ USCIRF has also detailed religious freedom violations by
India and made persistent recommendations over the past 4 years to
designate India as a Country of Particular Concern (CPC).\54\ Earlier
this month, USCIRF called for a Congressional hearing after reiterating
its disappointment that the U.S. Department of State yet again failed
to designate India as a CPC, despite India repeatedly meeting the legal
standard.\55\ Recommendations made by USCIRF must be adopted without
political favoritism to ensure that countries such as India are put on
notice that they cannot operate with impunity. Despite these warning
signs, the United States is permitting the most egregious perpetrators
of religious persecution to disregard human rights and democratic
ideals that promote stability and security in the world.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\53\ ``India 2011 Human Rights and Labor Report: India.'' U.S.
Department of State, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, May
24, 2012, https://2009-2017.State.gov/documents/organization/
186675.pdf.
\54\ ``USCIRF Reiterates Concerns on Religious Freedom in India,
Calls for Release of Religious Prisoners of Conscience,'' U.S.
Commission on International Religious Freedom, Oct. 3, 2023, https://
www.uscirf.gov/news-room/releases-statements/uscirf-reiterates-
concerns-religious-freedom-india-calls-release.
\55\ ``USCIRF Calls for Congressional Hearing after State
Department Fails to Designate Nigeria and India as Countries of
Particular Concern,'' United States Commission on International
Religious Freedom, https://www.uscirf.gov/news-room/releases-
statements/uscirf-calls-congressional-hearing-after-state-department-
fails.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
iv. conclusion
India's credibly suspected role in the recent unjustified killing
of a Canadian citizen without legal process, along with the thwarted
scheme to eliminate more Sikhs, including those in the United States,
through illicit methods, suggests that India is attempting to extend
its authoritarian and religious oppression practices world-wide. This
alarming trend of disproportionately targeting Sikhs and ignoring the
rule of law is further substantiated by historical and recent reports
indicating India's active involvement in establishing similar
oppressive networks in other countries (such as Canada, the United
Kingdom, and Germany). It is a clear violation of international norms
and human rights that cannot be overlooked or tolerated, especially
within the United States.
v. recommendations
In light of the growing body of evidence and credible reports of
transnational repression propagated by the government of India, the
Sikh Coalition recommends the following actions:
Congress:

Pass legislation and enforce existing laws to address the
threat of transnational repression.

Protect the rights and safety of all individuals,
especially those targeted by the malicious behavior of
foreign governments, by passing the Transnational
Repression Policy Act (H.R. 3654/S. 831).

Strengthen enforcement mechanisms to hold offenders of
transnational repression responsible beyond visa
restrictions. The Khashoggi Ban permits visa bans and is
the only Federal statute that addresses transnational
repression directly. However, more must be done to
explicitly authorize sanctions against individuals and
entities engaged in transnational repression.

Provide institutional support and oversight to effectively
combat transnational repression.

Support the documentation efforts of USCIRF by permanently
reauthorizing the Congressional body, and passing
legislation to reduce Presidential authority to waive
taking action against Countries of Particular Concern based
on long-standing human rights concerns. USCIRF must also be
encouraged to document and report instances of
transnational repression committed against religious
minorities.

Ensure greater Congressional oversight into transnational
repression by amending Section 6 of the Arms Export Control
Act to include a reporting requirement of any instances
where the President declines to enforce the law that would
prohibit arms transfers to any country determined to be
engaged in a consistent pattern of acts of intimidation or
harassment against individuals in the United States.

Prioritize measures that protect all Americans against
transnational repression and limit foreign government
interference.

Craft legislation that prohibits a government from
employing a registered lobbyist if its country has been
designated as a Country of Particular Concern or has
engaged in transnational repression to intimidate or harass
individuals in the United States.

Provide asylum pathways for permanent legal status for
individuals targeted for transnational repression.

Provide greater protections for Americans who are targeted
for transnational repression but have not yet obtained
citizenship. This loophole leaves Americans who are
targeted by transnational repression while traveling abroad
left with reduced assistance from the U.S. State Department
and may require the individual to seek assistance from the
nation that is perpetrating the transnational repression.
Congress and the Administration:

Hold offenders of transnational repression accountable
through multilateral actions.

Similar to actions already taken by Canada, the United
States must hold India accountable and suspend trade
pending a thorough and complete investigation into India's
alleged covert activities against Sikhs.

Ensure that no foreign government's self-investigation
will absolve it of accountability, and obtain concrete
assurances that India will cease its transnational
targeting.

Commit multilateral support to Canada and the United
Kingdom in efforts to have India comply with investigations
requests to determine India's role in transnational
repression and foreign interference into domestic affairs
at the national, State, and local levels.

Publicly condemn India's hostile actions and flagrant
violations of human rights, the rule of law, and the
sovereignty of our Nation. It is also critically important
that the United States Government provide public assurances
to address the safety and security concerns of Sikhs, other
Indian diaspora communities, journalists, human rights
advocates, dissidents, and religious minorities in the
United States.

Allocate greater resources to permit the United States to
share resources between agencies, law enforcement, and the
public to defend and counteract against foreign acts of
transnational repression against Americans.

Grant programs like the Non-Profit Security Grant must
provide greater support and access to communities and their
houses of worship that are being targeted by foreign
nation-states, their criminal proxies, and recruited street
forces.

Appropriate greater resources to Federal agencies tasked
with addressing transnational repression to permit these
agencies to carry out their duties in defending our Nation
and people. These resources must also include public
outreach programs, local law enforcement training
initiatives, and meaningful allocations for ensuring that
the civil rights of Americans are adequately protected.

Improve and clarify public grant resources to authorize
use for defending against acts of translational repression,
including the Non-Profit Security Grant Program and other
Federal victim support services.
Administration:

Enforce current laws to better address security threats
transnational repression poses to our Nation and its people.

Pursuant to the Khashoggi Ban, 212(a)(3)(C) of the
Immigration and Nationality Act, and the Global Magnitsky
Human Rights Accountability Act, prohibit entry into the
United States and U.S. property transactions for the
individuals involved in the attempted assassination of a
Sikh American in New York, including but not limited to the
identified government of India employee who is alleged to
have directed the attempt.

Implement the recommendations of the U.S. Government
Accountability Office on preventing and addressing
transnational repression.

Address international human rights violations meaningfully
and decisively.

Adopt the recommendation that USCIRF has made for at least
the past 4 years to designate India as a Country of
Particular Concern.\56\ For the program to have any
meaningful impact the President must cease the issuance of
waivers to any CPC countries.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\56\ USCIRF Reiterates Concerns on Religious Freedom in India,
Calls for Release of Religious Prisoners of Conscience,'' U.S.
Commission on International Religious Freedom, Oct. 3, 2023, https://
www.uscirf.gov/news-room/releases-statements/uscirf-reiterates-
concerns-religious-freedom-india-calls-release.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is imperative that the U.S. Government take a strong stand
against India's escalating violations of human rights and U.S.
sovereignty. Congress' leadership in this matter is crucial to
safeguarding not only the Sikh community but also the foundational
values of our Nation. We thank you for your urgent attention to these
matters, and welcome any questions or follow-up requests you may have.
Appendix.--Exhibit 1
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Fu, I'll start with you. Thank you for
being here. You mentioned several recommendations, you know,
and the story of being surrounded and hearing the chanting of
``elimination of Bob Fu'' outside your home. I mean, I just
can't imagine how that feels and the impact that that has on
you and your family.
In one of your recommendations--and I didn't think I was
going to go this way, but you talked about the elimination of
the ability for the CCP or its entities to be able to purchase
property in the United States.
Can you tell us why that's a recommendation and how that
helps with transnational repression?
Mr. Fu. Thank you, Chairman. First of all, I want to
respectfully request the Chairman to allow me to submit that
document I sent to the committee staff. It was a filed document
to the U.S. District Court for west Texas documenting the full
detail of what had happened to my house and the, you know,
evacuation. I want to submit that as a permanent record for
this hearing.
In regard to the--my recommendation on the legislation to
ban the CCP to build permanent operation bases in the U.S.
soil, we have witnessed how the Chinese, you know, the CCP
operating a spy balloon, hovering, you know, in our sovereign
sky. That, I think, the more dangerous thing is we allow them
to buy strategic assets, especially the physical--you know, the
lands and many--even in our Texas soil, we have seen hundreds
of thousands of acres were purchased. Some were next to--right
next to our military base.
I think, I mean, for the CCP, they are not satisfied with
just self-power kind of posturing. They are--as multiple FBI
chiefs from our region told me, that they are very patient.
They can just start planting a small tree, a small plant in
west Texas and but with the purpose to infiltrate, to harass,
then to make destructive efforts. Even in the city of Midland,
Texas, they do that.
I remember the one--the first year when I moved to west
Texas, our local FBI chief showed me names on his palm, I mean
written, which, of course, he walked me on the street and said,
do you know these people?
These are White Caucasian Americans in different--with
different organization associations around Texas. The FBI said
they had intercepted their messages. So, these people are hired
by the Chinese Government, CCP funded directly, in order to
disrupt China Aid and our communication and our freedom
advancement effort.
So we can't allow, I think, them to build these permanent
bases. It's nothing to do--again, I mean some try to frame it,
including the CCP, as a propaganda, like this somehow is
Chinese racial profiling or racist, ethnic bias. No, this is
about our national security.
So that's why I think it's time for Congress to pass
legislation. I applaud some States have taken the initiative
already.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you very much.
I'll move to Mr. Freedom. I know time runs very quickly. We
previously held a hearing in Energy and Commerce on TikTok.
Your account was banned previously in the middle of that while
I was questioning you. The Chinese Communist Party and their
alliances with TikTok immediately reinstated it.
Can you tell us how digital authoritarianism has affected
you and how it affects other people in this repression?
Mr. Freedom. Of course. You know, we were worried about,
you know, the Chinese spy balloon over our head, but people
need to understand that we literally have 160 million spy apps
in our phone listening to every conversation that we have.
I actually got a second phone and downloaded TikTok to just
post things about, you know, China's human rights violations.
Literally, a week later they banned my account. I was like,
Well, I thought they were pro-free speech and pro-freedom.
I mean, as you guys know, that you guys had a hearing about
with the CEO of TikTok. While you guys were asking him the
questions, why did you guys, you know, ban Mr. Freedom's
account, they unbanned me, you know.
Later on, Washington Post actually did a whole
investigation. They found out that they did ban me. Also, the
CEO of TikTok was lying and said, we would not--we didn't ban
his account and everything.
But it's a shame, because right now there are millions of
kids out there in America being brainwashed by the Chinese
Communist Party, and TikTok is literally ruining the
generations.
Mr. Pfluger. My time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes Ranking Member Mr. Magaziner for
his questioning.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman.
You know, on this topic, 5 minutes is not nearly enough,
but we're doing our best here.
Ms. Boyajian, can you just give us sort-of a high level: In
the United States, which is the jurisdiction of this committee,
what are the most typical forms of transnational repression?
What are the most prevalent tactics that we should be focusing
on on U.S. soil?
Ms. Boyajian. Thank you for the question. I would note that
we do have a country case study on the United States if anyone
is interested in learning more. In terms of our database, which
is looking at those direct physical threats, the number of U.S.
cases is actually low, in part, because we are more protected.
So that case study does describe some of the typical tactics.
So we hear all the time from activists that we work with,
like folks sitting next to me, that they receive threatening
messages via social media or even via phone call, that their
family members back home are threatened, sometimes even beaten
up or jailed. It is common to be surveilled. Individuals in the
United States were targeted with Pegasus spyware.
We actually had a case of one activist. He's Hong Kong-
American, wanted for arrest in Hong Kong because of his own
activism to the U.S. Government about human rights abuses in
Hong Kong. So he was at home in his apartment in California,
heard a strange noise, looked outside and saw a drone hovering
outside his apartment, apparently taking pictures. That is the
only story we've heard like that. Of course, he didn't leap off
his balcony and tackle the drone and prove that it was linked
to the government, but it's certainly suspicious.
So those are common tactics, but we do see governments
being increasingly brazen. The recent India case, Masih
Alinejad, folks being beaten up in California that I talked
about.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you.
Ms. Nia, you, in your testimony, spoke about the legal
steps that we could take to give prosecutors more tools to go
after transnational repression. I want to give you some time
now to expand on that.
You referenced a couple of pieces of legislation that are
already pending. Do they incorporate your recommendations, or
is there more that we could be doing and should be looking at
legislatively in order to incorporate your suggestions into the
code?
Ms. Nia. Thank you. Yes, the Stop Transnational Repression
Act actually deals with many of the recommendations that I've
made in the past and that others have made, including a
provision on extrajudicial killings and also having that
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
I think a few things may need to be workshopped as it goes
along and also in consultation with prosecutors at the DOJ and
so on, but that pretty adequately covers a lot of those
provisions. So I definitely recommend folks looking at that.
I'll also note that there are civil litigation options that
are also available that I think we need to touch on and that
could be important. So under the terrorism exception to the
Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act, individuals, of course, can
sue state sponsors of terrorism. That includes the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Syria, North Korea and Cuba, all of whom do
engage in this sort of activity.
But right now it's only possible if the plaintiffs were
U.S. nationals at the time the Act occurred. There is a
legislative proposal that some offices here have been briefed
on and that others have been briefed on that would allow
individuals to sue if they are U.S. nationals or lawful
permanent residents at the time the claim is brought.
Because that provision deals with torture, extrajudicial
killing, and hostage-taking, that could allow newly-arrived
dissidents who are the target of transnational repression to
hold the governments of their origin countries accountable.
The other quick thing I'll touch on is that in terms of
exceptions to the FISA, the Homeland and Cyber Threat (HACT)
Act has been introduced and reintroduced before the House since
2019. That would partly address transnational repression by
allowing dissidents who are U.S. nationals to sue foreign
states that launch cyber attacks against them.
But I'll note that this does not account for private
companies and their facilitation of the sale of spyware used
against dissidents, which is one of the hallmarks of the
transnational repression patterns we look at.
A series of judgments from the U.S. Supreme Court have
restricted the possibilities for corporate liability, and this
negatively impacts the ability of U.S.-based noncitizen
dissidents to sue companies involved in surveillance. So I
would recommend that those hurdles in U.S. domestic law be
addressed and removed.
Mr. Magaziner. All right. Thank you.
My time is expired. I'll yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Bishop, for his questioning.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to particularly acknowledge the examples of Dr. Fu
and Mr. Freedom, your personal examples to the world. You
inspire others to embrace and stand courageously for freedom in
the face of these threats from nation-state actors abroad.
You know, I was listening with interest to your testimony,
Dr. Fu, about the things we allow, the allowance of purchasing
land next to military bases. I've listened with interest to the
proposal, the legislative proposals for change.
One of the things that's interesting to me--and your
example, Mr. Freedom, speaks to it loudly--is some of the
most--some of the wealthiest American business interests that
engage and advance their own economic success with the Chinese
Communist Party, or in China, seemingly without regard to the
abuses that you're describing.
Some think that you've been retaliated against by the NBA.
When I was a legislator in North Carolina, the NBA moved its
All-Star Game out of my own hometown of Charlotte over a bill
that was designed to provide privacy and protection for women
in particular in private circumstances.
Yet the NBA--what you're describing is that the Chinese
Communist Party is engaged in repression at home and abroad. Is
that correct, sir?
Mr. Freedom. Yes, it's correct.
Mr. Bishop. Why do you believe that a business as powerful
and world-renowned as the NBA would condemn things like that at
home, but say nothing about the abuses by the Chinese Communist
Party that reach out across the world?
Mr. Freedom. Thank you for your question. So during COVID
in 2020, you know, NBA took us to our we call it NBA bubble.
Every coach, every assistant coach, everyone from the NBA said,
we are not here to play basketball. We are here to talk about
social justice that are happening in America. That's all we
care about.
Mr. Bishop. OK.
Mr. Freedom. They put BLM logos on the floor. They put
phrases behind our Jersey, which was controlled by the NBA. We
couldn't pick. So if you wanted to take a stand with Taiwan,
stand with Hong Kong, we were not allowed to pick it. So they
were controlling every word. Every after game, we were having
conversation about social justice that were happening in
America. We even said, You know what, we are not even playing
basketball.
So a few years later, I started to call out about, you
know, China for their human rights violations and political
prisoners and stuff. I mean, right now, there are close to 2, 3
million Uyghurs in concentration camps getting tortured and
raped every day. I mean, look at what's happening in Tibet. You
know, it's pretty much a cultural genocide. I'm sure you guys
know about what's happening in Hong Kong and Taiwan.
So I started to, you know, put these messages on my shoes,
because if you are a kid and if you're watching NBA, you're not
watching the game, you're watching the shoes and see which
shoes is the coolest so you can buy those shoes.
So I literally put this simple message on my shoes: Free
Tibet, free, you know, Uyghurs, stand with Hong Kong, stand
with Taiwan. I remember a minute before the game, two gentlemen
from the NBA that were working for Boston Celtics came to me
and said, Take your shoes off. I was like, Excuse me? They
said, Your shoes has been getting so much attention
internationally, you got to take them off. I was like, am I
breaking any rules? They said, No, but you have to take them
off.
So it was the perfect moment for me, because I was just
getting ready for my citizenship test. So I closed my eyes. I
was like, OK, there are 27 amendments, my First Amendment
freedom of speech. I turned around and said, No, this is my
freedom of speech. I'm not taking them off.
The first half, I went back to my locker room and I saw the
text message from my manager. He said, every Celtics game is
banned in China. It literally took them 24 minutes--first half,
you know, first quarter 12 minutes, second quarter 12 minutes--
24 minutes to ban every Celtics game on television.
So the second half started. That game I played zero
minutes, which I played every game before that. Obviously, we
lost the game. After the game--after the game, right, there was
this huge media storm. Every media outlet wanted to talk to me.
I was like, You know what, I'm not doing this for attention.
I'm not going to do it. I'm not going to do any media.
So after the--you know, after the game, NBPA called me, the
Players Association. They said, you know what you did. You
cannot wear those shoes ever again. We've been getting so much
pressure from the NBA. It literally said, ``Free Tibet.''
I was like, am I breaking any rules? They said, no, but
they said, you cannot wear them ever again. So they pressured
me so much. I was like, you know what, I promise you I'm not
going to wear Free Tibet shoes ever again. They said, promise?
I said, promise.
So the next game I wore Free Uyghur shoes. So they called
me after the game. They said, you're a liar, you lied to us,
how could you do that to us? I was like, first of all, I never
lied to you. I never said, I'm not going to wear Free Uyghur
shoes. I just said, I'm just not going to wear Free Tibet
shoes.
Then later on I realized that, you know, between the
relationship between NBA and China is around like $5 billion.
More people watched NBA games in China than our American
population last year. So I was like, you know what, I want to
call out the hypocrisy. I want to expose them. I know it's
going to, you know, cost me my career, but it is what it is.
Someone has to do it.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Freedom.
Dr. Fu, thank you for lighting the flame of freedom and
protecting it.
Mr. Chairman, I have to yield. My time is expired. But I
want to ask unanimous consent to submit for the record the
document that Dr. Fu referred to in his testimony.
Mr. Pfluger. So ordered.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Bishop. I yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentleman's time is expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from California, Mr.
Correa, for his questioning.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the Ranking Member for holding the most important hearing.
I also want to associate myself with the comments made by my
colleagues here about the importance of this hearing.
Your bravery, your integrity, showing up at this hearing,
is much appreciated. Members of Congress, Congress, I came here
a number of years ago and I found out that as much as we want
to plan long-term, we end up managing by crisis. We are trying
to catch the next one and put out that fire before the other
two or three light up.
We need good information to make good decisions here. The
American public needs to know also, needs to have good relevant
information. I think that this country, we are blessed because
the way we founded, the way we wrote our Constitution, the
First Amendment guarantees freedom of speech, freedom of the
press. That's sunshine, transparency, that helps a lot in
keeping corruption at the minimum and also helps us in making
good decisions.
So, you know, as I've traveled, as I looked at other parts
of the world, I notice the one thing that is in danger out
there are the lives of reporters. Every time you turn around, a
reporter is getting assassinated, imprisoned somewhere around
the world because they've criticized a local government, a
narco-trafficking organization. They've stepped on somebody's
toes.
So my thought, my question to you is, knowing that we
didn't know about your stories here, but people need to know
about your stories. How can we get them out into the public?
How can we essentially help reporters do their job and
hopefully they don't get knocked off or assassinated somewhere?
The same could be said about our social media platforms.
How can we make sure that the social media--Mr. Freedom, you
talked about some instances of essentially, you know, your
comments, your statements, your image being essentially
filtered out. Thoughts about how we can move ahead and make
sure that, you know, that doesn't happen.
Mr. Freedom, I'll start with you.
Mr. Freedom. So about the journalists right now, it is real
because----
Mr. Correa. It's a big issue.
Mr. Freedom. Very big issue, because Turkiye, for example,
my home country, right now, you know, Turkiye is, I believe,
leading the jailing journalists in the world. These people are
just--their job is to just write. They're innocent people, you
know. And actually, I have many friends in jail right now
suffering just because they were innocent journalists.
But the social media danger is actually real, because I
remember the first time I started to have a conversation about,
you know, the China and their human rights violations, I had
some conversation with some people in government and they said,
Listen, you're an NBA player. You're a single NBA player. From
now on going forward, you will be getting text messages, you
will be getting WhatsApp calls, Instagram DMs, or social media
DMs from one of the most beautiful girls in the world. Do not
answer them. They're Chinese spies.
I promise you, for the last year-and-a-half I have been
getting lots of messages from girls, very beautiful girls, and
I don't even know if they really want me for me or they're
spies, you know. So it's very confusing. The danger is real.
But breaks my----
Mr. Correa. I want to hear from the others as well, if I
can. Ms. Boyajian.
Ms. Boyajian. Yes. I would just expand on your very
excellent and correct point. We had a report come out in
December that was focused on transnational repression against
journalists. It is a tactic that we see increasing.
So, of the 854 cases in our database, 112 of those, 13
percent of all of our cases involved journalists. They are
under extreme threat. So, a key way that we can support free
speech is helping support these journalists when they face
threats.
We have a Freedom in the World report that looks at
political rights and civil liberties around the world. We just
had the 50th anniversary of our report last year. That report
showed that freedom of expression is one of the first areas
targeted and has seen a steep decline.
So I think----
Mr. Correa. Ms. Nia, in my 17 seconds left?
Ms. Nia. I was just going to say that, on the topic of
journalism, we also need to recognize, sort-of, new-media
journalists that don't always fall into the definition of
traditional journalists but who face those very same exact
risks. So I would recognize that under the law.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I'm out of time, so I
yield.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
D'Esposito.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think what we've realized today is that the Chinese
Communist Party is a threat. Most certainly it's a threat to
Mr. Freedom's love life, but it is also a threat to our
freedom, it's a threat to your freedom, and it's a threat to
national security.
Before coming to Congress, I was blessed and lucky enough
to serve as a member of the New York City Police Department,
retired there as a detective, and had a pretty good
understanding of the men and women who were law enforcement
professionals in New York. Never once did I see a patch on
anyone's uniform from the Chinese Communist Party. But, as you
all know, we discovered a Chinese police station where the
purpose was for officers to monitor, harass, and intimidate
Chinese dissidents.
Dr. Fu, in your testimony, you shared the things that you
and your family have endured back home. As someone who has been
targeted by the Chinese Communist Party, not only do these bold
actions surprise you, but if you could imagine, I mean, how
many other cities and places throughout this country is this
happening?
Mr. Fu. Thank you, Congressman.
This kind of activities by the CCP, I think, has been
happening to multiple, multiple cities, actually, even during
the period of time where my house was being surrounded, you
know, by those mask-wearing thugs, from San Francisco to New
York and Houston. They were bussed there, living in luxury
hotels in Odessa, Texas. They are--it happened in Toronto;
happened in Los Angeles; San Francisco; Washington, DC;
Virginia.
I have a friend, actually, who's a social--YouTuber, a
broadcaster, who has a huge following. His name is Wu Jianmin.
He was a former Tiananmen Square student leader. His house was
being also surrounded in California. The California police
basically went to--told him, when his house was totally
surrounded--and his children could not even go to school. He
was told, if you stop broadcasting your dissident program on
YouTube, these people will leave.
So that's their sole purpose. They want to silence our
voice.
Mr. D'Esposito. I think what's scary about it, it's not
being hidden. This is right out in the open, and they are very
clear about the threats that they're posing to all of us.
I appreciate that.
I just want to switch gears for a second.
Ms. Boyajian, you mentioned in your testimony the
possibility of a Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
training on transnational repression. I know that FLETC does a
lot of work across the Nation. As a matter of fact, they--I
partnered with them this morning, back home on Long Island,
with Congressman Garbarino and LaLota, hosting a human-
trafficking awareness training.
What would the benefits of developing a FLETC training
specific to this--what benefits would it serve to local law
enforcement agencies?
Ms. Boyajian. I think if you develop a course at FLETC, you
have the benefit of being able to get standardized training to
a high number of individuals. Because it's not just local law
enforcement coming through, obviously. It's other Federal
agencies. It's even partners, State-level.
Being able to have that standardized training--I think
there are a lot of ways you can do the training also. It could
be flexible. It could be in person, could be virtual. You know,
it could be--I think it is very important--when folks are new,
they are inundated with training, so being able to have
training throughout the course of someone's career would also
be very important.
Mr. D'Esposito. So I agree with you. I think that there's--
there needs--there's a need for standardized training in law
enforcement and when it comes to other issues as well.
Can you talk briefly--we've got about 40 seconds to go--how
familiar--I know we mentioned Federal law enforcement agencies,
but, obviously, communication is key. How familiar is State and
local law enforcement with the issue of transnational
repression?
Ms. Boyajian. Not very. I would say it wildly varies.
So, for the State and local folks who have diaspora
communities that are targeted--New York and California, for
example--the FBI has been working extensively with them. DHS is
also doing community engagement.
But our Federalized system makes it tricky, and so it--bang
for your buck. If there's a way to get a high number of
individuals at once, there's much more that needs to be done
there.
Mr. D'Esposito. There's only so much they can do with the
resources they have. So it seems like we have work to do.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Goldman.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
for putting together this hearing. I appreciate--I think it's a
very important issue for all of us and all of our districts,
and it's nice to have some bipartisanship here.
I come from the 10th District of New York, lower Manhattan
and northwest Brooklyn, home to Manhattan's historic Chinatown
and Brooklyn's growing Chinatown. It's also the district where
those two arrests were of the, sort-of, outpost police--CCP
police station.
It is of significant concern to many members of my
community, because, Mr. Fu, as you just said, the point is to
silence people. It is not necessarily to have people removed or
to send them back to China, but it is just simply to make sure
that they are not speaking out against the Chinese Government,
and in my district often that also means in support of the
Taiwanese Government.
Several of you have talked about the two bills that are
pending or have been introduced in Congress, the Stop
Transnational Repression Act, and the--I always get them mixed
up--the Transnational Repression Policy Act, both of which I am
a cosponsor of.
One of the things that I wanted to ask you about is the
importance of allowing the Department of Justice to take the
lead because of connections between some of these dissident
police stations with organized crime.
Maybe, Ms. Boyajian, you can address, you know, what
research you have done on those connections.
Ms. Boyajian. Sure.
So there's an organization called Safeguard Defenders that
did the police stations report that many of you are referring
to.
I would say, in terms of which law enforcement entity is
best placed, I think this is an issue that crosses
jurisdictions, and there's a very important role for DOJ, for
the FBI, for Homeland Security Investigations.
We don't have access to the information that would let us
say, ``A-ha, these folks are best,'' but there is an absolute
need for folks to coordinate.
I don't know, Gissou, perhaps you have more you'd want to
add on that component.
Ms. Nia. I would just say that--I mean, I--you know,
honestly, I yield my time, because I'm sure other people have
more things to say on this. Yes.
Mr. Goldman. I appreciate that.
I think it's very noteworthy that we do have two pieces of
legislation that are bipartisan. I certainly would hope that,
as we move past these budget discussions, that some of these
bipartisan pieces of legislation can come to the floor and
become law. Because, as you all have explained, I think, very
well, the need to address this issue is becoming more and more
acute.
Ms. Boyajian, the interesting thing is, if we move away, I
think, from China, where else do you see the transnational
repression growing?
Ms. Boyajian. So we actually are going to be releasing
updated database numbers in mid-February. I'm very sorry; I was
not allowed to leak it today.
I would say, we do see an increasing number of governments
engaging in transnational repression. This is, in part, because
technology makes it so cheap and easy to target folks even
after they have fled abroad.
But we do have concerns in the United States, particularly
with some of the countries I mentioned--so Saudi Arabia,
Rwanda, China, Belarus, Turkiye. We hear first-hand accounts
from folks from those countries being targeted, primarily for
surveillance and harassment and threats.
Mr. Goldman. Then, finally, Mr. Freedom, I want to go to
you, because Turkiye has been and Mr. Erdogan, in particular,
has been increasingly in the news as he continues to crack down
on your fellow native Turkish folks.
I guess, from your perspective, what should we be paying
close attention to as it relates to Mr. Erdogan and the Turkish
Government?
Mr. Freedom. So thank you for your question.
So Turkiye is a NATO ally, but I feel like it does not act
like a NATO ally. I believe Turkiye is the Trojan horse for
Putin in NATO.
Actually, just very recently, Erdogan started to put bounty
on people's heads. These are innocent journalists, these are
innocent civilians. Many of them is actually American citizens
that lives in the United States.
I think, you know, condemning this kind of, I'll say,
dictatorship is not enough. I believe we need concrete actions.
I believe we need to put Magnitsky sanctions on individuals in
Turkiye, and I believe that will shake up the whole regime. You
know, because Erdogan, I don't think he understands from a--
soft talk. Soft talk against the dictatorships never worked.
So there's actually a bill that we are going to put out
there, this Turkey Human Rights Promotion Act. So, once we put
it out there, I hope that many Members of the Congress will
sign it and pass it. It's asking to put Magnitsky sanctions on
individuals and asking to care about human rights and literally
free the political prisoners over there.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, appreciate it. Yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Arizona, Mr.
Crane, for his questioning.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for holding this
hearing today.
Thank you guys for coming.
I want to especially thank Dr. Fu and Mr. Freedom for your
leadership and courage on this issue. I know it can't be easy
to do that.
I hope that Americans that are watching this--I mean, a lot
of Americans, Mr. Freedom, look up to you because you play--you
were good at basketball, and God blessed you with, you know,
height and skill and all that. But I hope Americans watching
this really appreciate your courage, because you're one of the
few that actually is willing to set aside their own personal
career and their ability to gain, you know, resources and fame
and all that for something bigger. So thank you for doing that.
Now I want to ask you guys some serious questions.
Neither of you guys were born here, Dr. Fu or Mr. Freedom,
right? You guys weren't born here in America, but you came here
to this country, right, hoping to, you know, maybe have a
better life? Is that--would you say that?
Mr. Freedom. [Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Fu. [Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Mr. Freedom, did you ever think that when you came to the
United States of America you'd see Chinese spy balloons flying
over the country?
Mr. Freedom. Definitely not.
Mr. Crane. Did you think that you--you or--this is for you,
too, Dr. Fu: Did you think you would encounter this type of
repression from the Chinese Communist Party? Did you think it'd
be allowed here in the United States of America?
Mr. Fu. Definitely not. It was very surreal when those
people showed up in west Texas. I remember some of our cowboys
tried to work something out, but our church actually
encouraged----
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Fu [continuing]. To give them water, to love them----
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Fu [continuing]. Instead. But this is very surreal. I
think----
Mr. Crane. Yes, I bet.
Mr. Fu. Yes.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Freedom, why do you think it's allowed here?
Why do you think this--we allow Chinese police stations here in
the United States of America? Why do you think you see Chinese
spy balloons flying over the United States? Why do you think
individuals like you and Dr. Fu are oppressed here as American
citizens?
Mr. Freedom. The more I research, the more I realize the
NBA is not the only one. I mean, you see Hollywood, Wall
Street, academias, Big Tech, you know, Wall Street, many of
them is pretty much--is partly controlled by the Chinese
Government because of money.
Mr. Crane. Money. That's right. That's what it is, isn't
it, sir? It's not just the NBA.
Mr. Freedom. Not just NBA, no.
Mr. Crane. It's--both of you guys count on the U.S.
Government, to some extent, for your own protection. Is that
correct?
Mr. Freedom. Sure. Yes.
Mr. Fu. [Nonverbal response.]
Mr. Crane. Yes. Money.
Does it bother either of you guys--and you guys are both
truth-tellers, and you guys have a lot of courage to be here.
But I'm going to take it one step further: Does it bother
either of you guys that this current administration and the
family of this current administration has taken money, millions
of dollars, from the CCP?
Does that bother you, Mr. Freedom? Does it concern you?
Mr. Freedom. Yes. Of course.
Mr. Crane. Dr. Fu, does it concern you?
Mr. Fu. Of course it is very concerning. This is just a
reflection of how--the CCP's effort for years. It's not just
for, you know, in the past few years.
But I just feel it's very concerning to see, when a group
of dissidents, you know, welcoming the Taiwan President in
Manhattan, on the streets of Manhattan, in New York, and 5 were
beaten violently and sent to hospital by the Chinese Government
hard thugs on our soil, and, so far, no one is being held
accountable, not----
Mr. Crane. Yes. That's interesting.
Mr. Fu [continuing]. A single one. Why?
Mr. Crane. Dr. Fu, do you think that--we have the Hunter
Biden laptop, which has all sorts of, you know, very, you know,
disturbing information--photographs, text messages, emails--on
it. Do you think the CCP might have their own copy, their own
information on the President's son, Mr. Freedom?
Mr. Freedom. Of course. Not only him but whoever is using
TikTok, yes, they have all their informations----
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Freedom [continuing]. One hundred sixty million people.
Mr. Crane. Yes. That's interesting.
Mr. Freedom, are you familiar--aware of the fact that
Hunter Biden; James Biden; Sara Jones Biden; Hallie Biden;
Kathleen Buhle; Melissa Cohen, Hunter Biden's current wife; two
children of Joe Biden's sons; Joe Biden's brother's child have
all received money that was doled out from--that originated
from foreign countries?
Mr. Freedom. I know some of it, but I didn't know the whole
thing.
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Are either of you familiar with the term ``elite capture''?
``Elite capture''?
Mr. Freedom. No.
Mr. Crane. That's where a foreign country uses money and
other things to influence and often co-opt high-ranking
officials. Are you guys familiar with that?
Mr. Freedom. Well, I actually tried to have a meeting with
President Biden and also someone from the administration, and I
got turned down every time.
Mr. Crane. Imagine that.
Mr. Freedom. Turkish Government put a bounty on my head,
actually. I was like, I'm a U.S. citizen, and a foreign
government is doing it in U.S. soil. This is unacceptable, and
I would like to talk to my President or someone from the
administration.
One of the Senators, who's a Democrat, said, this is not
going to happen, because, unfortunately, the President is
scared of Erdogan because of Erdogan is a NATO ally and he
doesn't want to piss him off.
Mr. Crane. Well, the last thing I want to say--and thank,
Mr. Chairman, for giving me extra time--again, thank you guys.
What you are doing is monstrously courageous, and we appreciate
you guys. I think it's pathetic that you've come here to the
United States and this is what the country has turned into. So
thank you guys for doing what you're doing.
I yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms.
Titus.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to the witnesses.
Nice to see you again, Mr. Freedom.
You know, before we get too carried away throwing out
accusations about children taking money because they're part of
the Biden family, let me remind you, it's not just about taking
money; there is situations where the person who is in the White
House has rented rooms to people from foreign countries in his
hotel; whose daughter has made franchise deals with certain
foreign powers; who has sold products and scholarships to
certain foreign powers.
So let's be a little careful about how we throw out those
accusations. People in glass houses--you know the saying.
But what I wanted to talk about is my district, Las Vegas.
You know, we're the home of a lot of big events--New Year's
Eve; we had the F1 race; we're going to have--the Super Bowl is
coming up. So there's a lot of transit, a lot of people in and
out, a lot of people from all over the world.
So what's happened is that the FBI and Las Vegas has
announced a new awareness program. It's in coordination with
our U.S. attorney and a digital solutions company to try to put
out information, try to gather information, try to see if some
of this, kind-of, transnational repression might be going on or
passing through the district.
I just wonder if any of you--and we'll start with you, Ms.
Boyajian--is that close enough?--are aware of these kind of
programs in other major cities, if they work, how we could do
them better, how you see that playing out.
Ms. Boyajian. Public-private partnerships on this issue in
coordination with law enforcement are very important. Our
understanding is that, actually, the billboards in Las Vegas
are some of the first of its kind in terms of an awareness-
raising effort.
It can be a challenge for communities that have
traditionally been targeted by law enforcement in their home
country to then have law enforcement as the primary
interlocutor with them. It can be a very scary thing.
So government has been making an effort to partner with
trusted civil society organizations and do some of this
community outreach. That is an effective way. You know,
there's--that's a one-off, and it can be slow, but that can be
very effective, yes.
Ms. Titus. Uh-huh.
We have a center, like, a fusion center, where a lot of
this information is shared and law enforcement goes on across
government bodies--State, local, Federal--as well as with
private entities. Because Las Vegas probably has the best eye-
in-the-sky private security of anyplace around. So to take
advantage of that, I think, is a good idea.
Ms. Boyajian. Yes. It's great for folks to understand, OK,
these are the rights I have here in the United States, here's
digital security trainings I can take, this is where I report
if I'm targeted.
Ms. Titus. I believe you also mentioned that there are some
steps that Congress can take, and one of the things would be
codifying what transnational repression is so we can go after
it through more legal means.
Would you talk a little more about that and what are some
of the legal things we can do besides, maybe, sanctions or----
Ms. Boyajian. Establishing a definition is very, very
important, because everything else you do stems from that. What
is transnational repression? All of your trainings, your
criminal law will stem from that. Your ability to support folks
who have been targeted, your ability to welcome people who
might need emergency visas--all of that stems from that
definition.
I would also, if I may--accountability has come up a lot
during this hearing and rightly so. It's a very important
point. I would say, there are two big ways that we can
strengthen accountability in the United States.
As we are more aware of this issue happening on U.S. soil,
it is very, very important that we impose meaningful measures
of accountability. So, when we can charge with criminal law, we
should. When we can impose sanctions, we should.
You know, I do wonder, if the United States and other
democracies had imposed more meaningful accountability measures
on folks involved in the murder of Jamal Khashoggi from Saudi
Arabia, would we have seen India allegedly doing what it was
doing?
I think the other key piece that I know you are also
engaged on is, there is the misconception that abuses abroad
have no impact on us here in the United States. In fact, as you
can see, transnational repression, it illustrates starkly how
that is not the case.
So you all are dealing with the budget now. Investment in
human rights and democracy overseas will help strengthen the
security of Americans.
Ms. Titus. Do some other countries have some definitions
that they use that we might find helpful?
Ms. Boyajian. So there is some interesting work. Sweden has
a law on refugee espionage, so that is--it is illegal there if
you're coming and specifically surveilling refugee communities,
and we have shared that. Some countries deal with this as
foreign interference.
But, actually, the United States really is looked to as the
leader. As we engage with other governments, they have also
been engaging with FBI and others to really figure out what
should a definition look like.
Ms. Titus. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentlelady's time has expired.
We will now enter a second round of questioning. I have
been very lenient on the time; however, I know there are
multiple other hearings and Members have other commitments, so
I will end it right at 5 minutes. Just a fair warning to
everybody when you hear the gavel.
I'll now recognize myself.
We talked about, you know, some of the other things that
can be done. I think this highlights--and, especially, my
colleague Mr. D'Esposito was talking about some of the efforts.
I think this highlights why DHS, specifically HSI, should be
involved in combating transnational repression and how they can
work with the FBI. So we're going to continue to look at that
and already have a plan here in this committee.
Mr. Freedom, I will ask my Democrat colleagues to help you
get that meeting with the President. I think it's incredibly
important. I think he would want to hear what you have to say.
Very briefly, I mean, what's the message, in 30 seconds or
less, that you want to deliver?
Mr. Freedom. It actually really, you know, shocked me and
broke my heart, because I asked the Senator, I was like,
listen, I want to talk to him about my family, my family
situation, what can we do to help people over there. Because
there are thousands of people are suffering over there. I don't
want to talk about the politics side of it; I want to talk
about the human rights and political prisoners over there.
When he turned around and said to me, well, just because of
Turkiye is a NATO ally and, pretty much, President Biden is
afraid of, you know, Erdogan, this meeting is not going to
happen.
I started to ask this question myself: We are in America.
We are talking about the most powerful man in the world. We're
talking about the most powerful house in the world. How can
this happen, you know?
But if I have a conversation with him, I will definitely
sit down and talk about my family situation, because I have not
seen them for 10 years just because of I wanted to talk about
the violations over there, you know?
But I hope this meeting can happen and we can sit down and
find some concrete actions. Because these kind of
dictatorships, they don't care about, you know, condemning or
soft talk.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, thank you for that.
In your testimony previously, you mentioned how the
different areas are being used, whether it's Wall Street,
potentially academia. This is something that this committee has
actually studied, which is the Confucius Institutes. We have
legislation that would limit those institutes that are taking
money from CCP-linked entities--that they would not be able to
receive Federal aid.
So I want to start with--actually, I'll start just down the
line. We have 2\1/2\ minutes left.
So, Ms. Boyajian, can you tell us the link between
Confucius Institutes and transnational repression and give us
examples?
Ms. Boyajian. I can't give you super-detailed examples. But
we have done work looking at Confucius Institutes, and, also,
there are Confucius Classrooms, which is the K-12 age group.
There have been reports--you know, in order to get hired there,
you have to be vetted by folks linked with the PRC. So freedom
of speech is limited, and there have been anecdotal reports of
folks being surveilled when they participate in those.
Mr. Pfluger. So do you believe that Confucius Institutes
are or have been used in order to repress thought, ideas, and
even students?
Ms. Boyajian. Certainly to repress freedom of expression,
and it's theoretically possible beyond that.
Mr. Pfluger. Dr. Fu.
Mr. Fu. The whole Confucius Institutes and the--is a
mechanism, and including the so-called Confucius Classrooms.
They even proposed to establish every--establish a Confucius
Classroom in every Texas public school, and it was--
fortunately, it was killed.
But the whole thing was totally, fully, completely funded
by the Chinese Communist Party's funding. All their teachers
had been vetted; recruited the Communist Party loyalists with
an ideological-driven agenda to come here.
So it is a very clear state-sponsored. To say the least,
it's propaganda, but it's more even than--more than that. More
likely, it's intelligence-gathering. They wouldn't----
Mr. Pfluger. I'll go to----
Mr. Fu [continuing]. Invite me and Mr. Freedom to be there
to do a lecture.
Mr. Pfluger. I'll go to Ms. Nia now.
Any insight onto this?
Ms. Nia. Yes. I agree with what my fellow witnesses say. I
also want to say that this playbook is replicated by other
countries as well. So the Islamic Republic of Iran has cultural
centers here that are very much intended to carry out a lot of
the same activity. We can go down the list. But it's very
important to keep that in mind.
The other thing that I'll say is, just on the global point,
that because we have such a focus here on what the CCP is
doing, and to protect Uyghurs and others who are in their line
of fire, we also have to look at U.S. allies, like Saudi Arabia
and Egypt, who are repatriating Uyghur dissidents back to
China. This is why the global coordination piece along with our
allies is so key.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you believe it's important for President
Biden to meet with Mr. Enes Kanter Freedom?
Ms. Nia. Of course.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
My time has expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Magaziner.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman.
Ms. Nia, in your testimony, you wrote about use of Red
Notices, INTERPOL Red Notices, to try to force detention and
extradition of targets of transnational repression. I believe
this--if I heard correctly, I believe that Mr. Freedom has
experienced this.
Can you explain just a little bit more about how that works
and what, if anything, can be done about it?
Ms. Nia. Absolutely.
There is a lot of discussion of reform of INTERPOL.
INTERPOL's leadership is also headed by human-rights violators.
So I should note that this is sort-of an institutional problem,
because we don't really have people at the helm that are, sort-
of, espousing the values that we'd like to see there.
But a typical example of this would be, if a country issues
some sort of extradition notice or requests that somebody come
back to their country, normally the charges are terrorism or
something that might be trumped up and not fully supported, and
then these, sort-of, Red Notices are issued. So, a lot of
times, the institution is weaponized.
A lot of Hollywood movies have made it seem like there's a,
sort-of, INTERPOL law enforcement. You know, that's not really
how this goes, right? So we know that it's really reliant on
the national authorities in the different countries where they
allege perpetrators or suspects are to take action.
So that's why it's so important to inform from the local to
the national levels around the world about what transnational
repression is, why a Uyghur dissident is not a terrorist, you
know, and to really go through that understanding, because a
lot of law enforcement is just not aware.
Mr. Magaziner. OK. Thank you.
Then, you know, Dr. Fu and Mr. Freedom, again, we thank you
very much for your courage in telling your stories, but, as you
both have noted, you are hardly the only people in the United
States or elsewhere who have been the victims of this type of
harassment.
Using this public platform that we have, just from a human
level, what advice or encouragement do you have to others who
may be experiencing similar things and don't know what to do
about it?
Dr. Fu.
Mr. Fu. Thank you.
I would encourage, No. 1, better coordination between the
Federal and the local law enforcement. I think whenever this
happens, these cases of transnational repression, on the street
of Manhattan or San Francisco, there should be real law
enforcement follow-up. I mean, those perpetrators should be
held accountable.
Also, I think the Members of Congress should not be hired
by the CCP to lobby for, you know, their repression tools. I
mean, I'm not talking--this is not really a partisan issue, and
the CCP really, I mean, hired Members from both parties. I
mean, you have former Speaker John Boehner, a Republican; you
have this former Senator, Joe Lieberman. They're all hired as a
CCP lobbyist to really engage in this kind of campaign. I think
that's really an embarrassment. I think we should discourage
them to do so.
Mr. Magaziner. Well, thank you, Dr. Fu.
Mr. Freedom, you know, I'm a big Boston Celtics fan, so
I've rooted for you on the court, and we're all----
Mr. Freedom. I appreciate that.
Mr. Magaziner [continuing]. We're all rooting for you off
the court now.
Mr. Freedom. Thank you.
Mr. Magaziner. So, to others who have experienced the type
of harassment that you have, what would you say to them, and
what advice would you have?
Mr. Freedom. Well, first of all, I want to say, you know,
just speak up. Unfortunately, many of my teammates are scared
to speak up.
I remember, once we were going through this stuff, many of
them come up to me and said, you know, we love you, we support
you, you know, keep doing what you're doing, but don't expect
us to go out there and, you know, speak up for you, because--I
was like, why? They said, well, we have shoe deals, endorsement
deals, we want to get another contract.
I asked them one simple question. I was like, put yourself
in their shoes. If your mother, if your sister, if your
daughter was in those concentration camps getting tortured and
raped every day, would you still pick money and business over
your morals, values, and principles? They usually turn around
and leave the room.
So I feel like we have to put some kind of, you know,
pressure on these organizations and, you know, companies.
Because look at what Nike is doing. Nike speaks for Black Lives
Matter in America, Latino community, LGBTQ community, you know,
No Asian Hate. But when it comes to China, everybody knows
about, you know, the slave labor.
So we've got to do whatever we can to hold these companies
and organizations accountable, because they're making billions
of dollars. They care about the problems that are happening in
America, but anywhere else they're silent. Whoever speaks up
about these issues, you know, they are trying to shut them off.
So we've got to put some kind of, you know, pressure on these
organizations.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent for Ms. Jackson Lee
to sit with the subcommittee and question today's witnesses.
Mr. Pfluger. So ordered.
The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from North Carolina,
Mr. Bishop.
Mr. Bishop. This hearing gets more and more interesting.
I'm going to sort-of return to the subject, Mr. Freedom,
that you spoke about. The last time, I had an opportunity to
ask questions about--and you've spoken about it more--the NBA's
role, but not just the NBA.
Before I ask you a question, Dr. Fu, I'm going to actually
go to you. In the moment--or, the time since we asked last
questions, I had an opportunity--staff brought me the complaint
that you described in your testimony about the people who were
incited to protest outside your house.
I see that the defendant in that--and I hate even to say
this in public, but--it's Guo Wengui? Is that how you say the
name? ``Miles Guo,'' as we say that name.
Mr. Fu. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. As I've just done a little research on him, I--
he appears in my social media thread a lot. I mean, not him
personally, but people advocating for this person. I don't know
anything about him. I looked him up, and I understand he's a
Chinese billionaire. He's under indictment. He just pleaded not
guilty to a number of accusations in a superseding indictment.
But he got out of your lawsuit when he filed a bankruptcy
case in the district of Connecticut. Subsequently that didn't
go too well for him, so he sort-of put that on ice. He's
alleged to have incited the same sort of harassment that you
describe against the United States trustee in the bankruptcy
proceeding that he was involved in.
So, now--but do that I understand you contend that Mr.
Miles Guo, Guo Wengui, is acting on behalf of the Chinese
Communist Party? Is that your allegation? I'm not saying
whether it's right or wrong, but is that your allegation?
Mr. Fu. Yes. When those people were sent by him from all
over the United States to attack and harass me and my family, I
was searching really, very hard, like, what did I do to him?
How much--I mean, I have nothing, no business dealings, no
relationship with him prior at all. So the only conclusion is,
he must have a task to destroy our work of human rights and
religious freedom.
Mr. Bishop. You believe he does that on behalf of the
Chinese Communist Party?
Mr. Fu. I'm pretty sure he has a task.
Mr. Bishop. So it gets to be--this gets to be very
complicated.
Ms. Nia, Ms. Boyajian, you have--I mean, to the point,
NBA--one of the things you spoke out about, Mr. Freedom, is
that Nike, according to reports, came to the Hill and lobbied
to weaken the Uyghur Forced Labor Protect---Prevention Act----
Mr. Freedom. Prevention Act.
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. That passed a couple of years ago.
Mr. Freedom. Yep.
Mr. Bishop. So was Nike acting on behalf of the Chinese
Communist Party in trying to weaken that legislation as it was
being considered by Congress?
Mr. Freedom. I mean, yes. Look at the numbers. You know,
there are, you know, really good players in the NBA, and many
of them are signed by Nike. Think about all the jersey sales,
TV deals, think about all the shoe sales and product sales in
China, you know? So, yes----
Mr. Bishop. Yes, yes. Oh, no, I get it. I get that their
economic interests are linked. I think it's reprehensible. I
mean, I think corporate America needs to show the courage that
the two of you have shown.
Mr. Freedom. Uh-huh.
Mr. Bishop. I appreciate what you've done.
But it begs this very interesting question: Ms. Nia, you're
familiar with the FARA, Foreign Agents Registration Act, right?
The definition of what a foreign agent is, what an agent is, in
that legislation, is quite broad compared to what an agent is
considered in State law.
Mr. Freedom. Yep.
Mr. Bishop. So it can be somebody who's just carrying on
the agenda of a foreign hostile power, right?
Ms. Nia. Yes. I'll note that there are some proposals for
FARA reform in terms of----
Mr. Bishop. Sure.
Ms. Nia [continuing]. Wanting to have lawyers disclose, you
know, who they're representing and things like that.
Mr. Bishop. Yes, yes, yes.
Ms. Nia. But on the question of corporate liability, it
gets quite sticky. In this country, we've had a lot of high
court rulings, so the U.S. Supreme Court has ruled over and
over again in a way that actually restricts the ability to hold
corporations accountable for human rights violations and
atrocity crimes, which do comprise a lot of the components of
transnational repression that we're discussing here.
Mr. Bishop. Would those conclusions be affected by the
legislation that you've made reference to that's pending before
Congress or not?
Ms. Nia. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. Interesting. So that--it gets--it gets pretty
complicated. But at the end of the day, it works out to be
probably a question of courage and of integrity.
Well, you see a lot of actors in the picture, a lot of very
wealthy people who are pursuing, as Mr. Crane said, money. But
they allow, in the name of their making money, grotesque acts
by hostile actors across the world.
I appreciate the degree--you know, the way in which all of
you have devoted your efforts to resisting that, and you're to
be congratulated for it.
Thank you very much.
Ms. Boyajian. Briefly, on the point of proxies, very
quickly, if I may?
I would just flag two things for the committee. We do see
an increasing use of, sort-of, bad guys for hire. We also see
the Government of China, for example, engaging private
investigators, who did not know that they were involved in the
commission of transnational repression.
We would certainly say that corporations have a role to
play. We see this through the use of spyware, where people are
indiscriminately selling their products. Commerce has listed
some of these corporations on the Entity List, but much more
can be done there.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you.
Mr. Pfluger. Very interesting.
The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
D'Esposito.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Freedom, so in 2019 you posted, or you tweeted--now X--
listing some of the issues that you were facing at the time as
a result of repression from the Chinese Communist Party.
Mr. Freedom. Uh-huh.
Mr. D'Esposito. You said, and quote, ``Haven't seen or
talked to my family in 5 years. Jailed my dad. My siblings
can't find jobs. Revoked my passport. International arrest
warrant. My family can't leave the country. Got death threats
every day. Got attacked, harassed. Tried to kidnap me in
Indonesia. Freedom is not free.''
Now, as was asked by my good friend Mr. Crane, you
mentioned that you weren't born in the United States of
America. Why did you come to the United States?
Mr. Freedom. For the American Dream, for freedom, for
democracy. Because, you know, growing up in Turkiye, people
look at America as the example of democracy, example of
freedom, you know, example of opportunity. So that's why I was
here--I came.
Mr. D'Esposito. How old were you when you came to the
United States of America?
Mr. Freedom. Seventeen years old.
Mr. D'Esposito. At 17 years old, maybe you weren't thinking
about Twitter, but did you ever think that you would be putting
out or thinking that statement that you put out on Twitter?
Mr. Freedom. Never, because all I cared about was, you
know, playing basketball and just having fun with my teammates.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right. Who would've in a million years
thought that you'd come to the United States of America for
freedom, for that thirst of democracy, for a better education,
for opportunity, to give a better place for your children, your
grandchildren, your family----
Mr. Freedom. I'm----
Mr. D'Esposito [continuing]. But because of things that you
said, clothing that you wore, feelings that you had, and the
truth that you were telling, you were being targeted by the
Chinese Communist Party?
You came to America, and I have to ask you: At that point,
when you're feeling all those things, who do you turn to?
Mr. Freedom. I remember having a conversation with my agent
after my third game wearing my, you know, anti-CCP shoes. He
called me. He called me and said: Listen, I work for you, I
don't work for the NBA, so I have to be honest with you. If you
say another word--you're 29 years old--you will be kicked out
of the NBA. You're never going to be able to dribble a
basketball ever again in this court. Also, this is going to
cost you between $40 million to $50 million.
I thought about myself: This is America. The biggest
dictatorship in the world cannot control a 100-percent
American-made company like NBA and fire a U.S. citizen. So I
was like, this is--there's no way.
Literally, that's what happened. Just because of I talk--I
don't talk about politics; I talk about human rights. Human
rights is above politics. So, just because I talk about these
issues, I got kicked out of my, you know, dream job that I
worked so hard my whole life to get to that point--a lot of
sweat, a lot of blood, a lot of effort.
But you know what? In the end, people needs to understand
this is bigger than myself, this is bigger than basketball, and
this is bigger than NBA. So I definitely don't regret it.
Mr. D'Esposito. How's your family doing now?
Mr. Freedom. I have not seen them over 10 years now. I
cannot--I'm not even allowed to talk to them, because when I
started to speak out about it, you know, to Erdogan, you know,
they came to my house and they raided the whole house and they
took every electronics away, because they wanted to see if I am
still in contact with my family or not. They couldn't find no
evidence, but they still took my dad in jail for a while. But,
you know, thanks to you guys, you put so much pressure from
here to Turkiye, they let him go.
But right now there is no communication, because if they
communicate with me, that's an act of terrorism. So they don't
even--they can't even get a job in Turkiye. I have to send my
brother money, and my brother has to send my family money, you
know?
So it's been very tough for my family, but I'm sure they're
proud.
Mr. D'Esposito. I have to say that there's probably going
to be a lot that comes out of this subcommittee hearing today,
but one of the things that I hope that we can work on
together--and I will speak to the Chairman when this is over.
In a bipartisan fashion, I mean, this is the message that we
should be sending to the youth of this country: that engaging
in social media entities like TikTok----
Mr. Freedom. Yes.
Mr. D'Esposito. This is what you are opening yourself up
to.
I mean, if there is a message, if there is a lesson that
should be learned, for everything that you have gone through,
for all of the risks that you have taken, for all the truth
that you have told, I hope that we can relay this message to
the youth of the United States of America and let them
understand the real threats that this country is facing and
that they are opening themselves up to when they're logging on
to some bogus app on their phone.
Mr. Freedom. Yes.
You know, I want to say, I'm really thankful for America.
Because when literally my home country Turkiye labeled me as a
terrorist and revoked my passport and put my name on INTERPOL
list, American people and America opened their arms from Day 1
and gave me a home, gave me a warm welcome. So I cannot thank
enough for this country.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well----
Ms. Boyajian. To that excellent point about welcoming those
who need to flee, could not agree more. It's one of the
greatest things about our country.
I would just flag for this committee, there are a number of
Uyghurs whose applications for asylum and immigration cases are
still pending, and they have fled here and are at risk, with
status in limbo. So that may be something you all want to look
at. We've heard it's as many as several hundred.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, Mr. Freedom, thank you for your----
Mr. Freedom. Of course.
Mr. D'Esposito [continuing]. The questions that you
answered. I am happy to hear that you're thankful for this
great country, because I know I am. I'm thankful for your
truthfulness.
Mr. Freedom. Thank you.
Mr. D'Esposito. So, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes our final Member to ask questions,
the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee.
Mr. Jackson Lee. Let me thank the Chairman for his courtesy
and the Ranking Member for your courtesy. You've always
extended it to me. This is a committee that I've served on
previously.
Let me thank the witnesses, as well, for their commitment
and passion. As well, to hear you say what I will repeat and my
colleague just repeated, which is, I am very happy to be here
in America and to be able to have, as its basic infrastructure,
democracy and the protection of dissident voices, those that I
may disagree with, which is what we fight for. Democrats have
taken that as one of their chosen issues, and we embrace our
brothers on the other side of the aisle, and sisters, for them
to also work with us.
Democracy is precious. I think, Mr. Freedom, you have seen
that even as a 17-year-old when you came to play basketball. We
enjoyed you a lot. So I want you to know that your records,
your success will not be forgotten. Basketball has now become a
world-wide, international sport. So you are world-wide and
international. The fact that you're using your voice is most
crucial.
I'd like to think that what we came today to do is to deal
with America's reputation as a beacon of hope and freedom to
the world, and however we can make that even brighter, we
should do that.
On the Uyghurs, I am a strong supporter of their plight and
certainly will look at their issues. Because, obviously, they
are in an isolated position, where the only voices that can aid
them are voices that are outside of the country. We should
speak for them, because they speak for the idea of democracy.
Let me ask Mr. Freedom--and I do want you to believe that
you have a home on both sides of the aisle, and what that
means--and Democrats and Republicans. Whether or not there have
been any encounters or meetings, please know--because I know
you from my previous work on Judiciary; we've seen each other.
I know you meet many people, but I can assure you you have
advocates on both sides of the aisle.
We are well aware of what is transpiring with the--how
should I say it--the treatment in Turkiye of those who are in
Turkiye and those who are Turkish outside.
So help me know what you think would be the best step
forward in a particular country that, as you well know, is
called upon to be an ally in--and I'm sure you've heard that,
so that's why I want to give you that opportunity--in regions
like--in areas like Syria and other places.
There was a moment when people were fraternizing on the
streets of Turkiye, drinking coffee, and----
Mr. Freedom. Yes.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. The word ``secular'' was a
welcome word, and it was just a beautiful place to be.
I've been to Turkiye on a number of occasions. I think it's
called the Blue Mosque----
Mr. Freedom. Blue Mosque.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. Just--just enjoyable. Then
something happened.
Give us what you think can be most effective, particularly
when you speak about what is happening to your relatives----
Mr. Freedom. Of course.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. Who are innocent.
Then I'd just like to follow up with--my time is going--Ms.
Nia on this whole issue of the reach that other countries would
have to be oppressive, either outside the United States or try
to reach to guide our Government policies for us to oppress on
their behalf, and that we can find the best route not to do
that but to continue to focus on democracy in the United
States.
If the two of you would--Mr. Freedom, if you would, and
then Ms.--is it ``Nya'' or ``Nia''? Sorry.
Ms. Nia. ``Nia.''
Mr. Jackson Lee. ``Nia.'' Thank you.
Mr. Freedom. So Turkiye could've been a bridge of Islam and
West, but just because of Erdogan's policies, it's impossible.
You know, Turkiye was once a democratic country, but now it's
pretty much the Trojan horse for Putin in NATO.
Turkish Government and Erdogan was the first government
ever that came out and publicly supported Hamas and said, ``We
support Hamas.'' First, when I heard about that news, I thought
it was an Onion news. I really didn't want to believe it. But
it happened to be true.
Right now, there are thousands of people in jail right now
suffering. I believe the last number, if I'm not mistaken,
close to 17,000 innocent women, and with their kids and babies,
in jail right now, waiting for help, you know?
You know, it's--this has only happened in Turkiye, but
outside of Turkiye, if you are a journalist and writing
anything against the Turkish Government, you will be on
INTERPOL list. In one day, Turkish Government put 65,000
names--65,000 people's name on INTERPOL list. Now they are
having a very tough time to travel around.
So we've got to do whatever we can to put pressure on these
governments, because enough with the condemning. Because this
kind of, you know, dictatorships is not going to understand
from condemning, so we have to take concrete actions by
sanctioning them.
I understand they are a NATO ally, but they don't act like
a NATO ally. They literally go around shaking hands with Putin
and shaking hands with people like Khamenei. So enough is
enough. We have to pass a bill, put Magnitsky sanctions on
individuals around Erdogan, so we can actually show that, you
know, we are not--we are a strong country that cares about
human rights.
So that breaks my heart, to see what's happened over there,
because my family is affected by it. I literally haven't seen
them for 10 years. If they spoke to me, it's an act of
terrorism, and they'll be in jail the next day. I can't even
send them money. I have to send my brother money, and my
brother has to send my family money because of act of
terrorism, you know?
So it is unacceptable, but we've got to do whatever we can
to put pressure on these governments with concrete actions.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Jackson Lee. Would you just allow her to answer?
Mr. Pfluger. I--I'm going to go ahead and close it down at
this point.
Mr. Jackson Lee. All right.
Mr. Pfluger. The gentlelady's time has expired.
Mr. Jackson Lee. Well, can I put this into the record? I
was given--I ask unanimous consent to enter into the record a
statement from the German Marshall Fund.
Mr. Pfluger. So ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]
Letter Submitted by Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee
January 17, 2024.

Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Counterterrorism, Law Enforcement, and Intelligence,
U.S. House of Representatives, H2-176 Ford House Office
Building, Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, and Members of the
House Homeland Security Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to submit a brief statement at
today's hearing on addressing transnational repression. Foreign state-
sponsored actors' attempts to silence, harass, and, in the most extreme
cases, kill members of exile and diaspora communities on American soil
are part of an insidious campaign to chill dissent and punish perceived
enemies of foreign governments.
Transnational repression often captures headlines in extreme cases
like assassinations and kidnappings where a ruling government targets
members of exile and diaspora communities who are perceived as threats
to that government's stability. Yet, transnational repression is more
than extraterritorial score settling. In many cases, it represents
attempts by foreign state actors to interfere or exert malign influence
in American democracy as well.
The victims of transnational repression in exile and diaspora
communities are often American citizens who participate in American
civic life, vote in elections, run for office, and help shape views in
the United States of their countries of origin. From the perspective of
a hostile government like the Chinese Communist Party, this makes
exiles and diaspora groups potentially dangerous constituencies in
American society, due in large part to their insight into the workings
of authoritarian regimes and their perspective on the threat that they
pose.
Indeed, among the many governments that have perpetrated acts of
transnational repression in the United States, the Chinese Communist
Party pursues campaigns of intimidation and information manipulation
against exile and diaspora communities to subvert American civil
society and interfere in American politics. For example, the CCP has
attempted to co-opt a pro-democracy movement within New York's Chinese
diaspora and sought to derail the career of a Chinese American
Congressional candidate who was a leader during the Tiananmen Square
protests in Beijing in 1989. Promoting more favorable policies toward
China and silencing negative views of the CCP are at the core of
China's targeting of these communities.
Authoritarian adversarial regimes like China's, Russia's, and
Iran's are not the only perpetrators of transnational repression. Even
some of the United States' allies and partners, such as India and
Turkey, have engaged in this activity on American soil. In November,
the White House revealed that an Indian national with alleged links to
the Indian government was charged with attempting to hire an undercover
DEA agent to kill a prominent Indian dissident in New York City who is
himself a U.S. citizen. For a democracy like India to attempt such an
act on American soil is an affront to the values that our countries
share, and a threat to the world order on which we both rely. It also
provides further evidence that this problem is growing and that global
norms against transnational repression are weakening, and that the
risk-reward calculus of foreign governments increasingly appears to
favor taking risks. Foreign governments conclude they either can engage
in this activity with impunity or they will tolerate the consequences
the United States imposes--often through limited sanctions and visa
bans.
Congress can play an important role in strengthening U.S. responses
to transnational repression. First, Congress can pass a resolution
calling on the administration to issue a declaratory policy for
transnational repression. Such a policy should make clear the United
States will not tolerate foreign government efforts to target American
citizens and exert malign influence on American civil society, and
stipulate that the United States will use tools at its disposal to
deter and raise the costs on this activity. A resolution should also
call on the administration to appoint a senior-level official at the
National Security Council or Homeland Security Council who has both the
authority and the staff to coordinate policy responses across U.S.
agencies and to work with U.S. allies on addressing this activity.
Second, Congress should call on the Department of Homeland Security
to provide trainings on transnational repression that are tailored to
each individual agency's mandate. Customs and Border Patrol officers,
for example, are often the first line of defense in deterring foreign
state-sponsored actors who are coming to the United States to harass,
infiltrate, and threaten exile and diaspora communities from entering
the country. What CBP officers need to know to defuse threats at the
border is different from what other DHS agencies, like the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, must address.
Training on the subject should also extend to Department of State
Foreign Service Officers who serve in consular positions in U.S.
embassies and consulates overseas and adjudicate visas to foreign
nationals.
Finally, Congress should call on the administration to establish
bilateral and multilateral forums for information sharing and
coordination on transnational repression issues with allies. Foreign
governments that engage in transnational repression exploit
multilateral channels like Interpol to target exiles and dissidents.
They also leverage proxies based in U.S. allied nations to conduct this
activity in the United States and elsewhere. DHS and the Department of
State should have established channels with their agency counterparts
in allied countries. Furthermore, the United States should propose
creating working groups on countering transnational repression and
foreign malign influence with the European Union, the G7, and other
appropriate multilateral bodies with allies and partner nations.
Chairman Pfluger, Ranking Member Magaziner, thank you again for the
opportunity to submit this statement today.
Respectfully,
David Salvo,
Managing Director, Alliance for Securing Democracy,
The German Marshall Fund of the United States,
1744 R Street, NW, Washington, DC 20009.
Nathan Kohlenberg,
Research Analyst, Alliance for Securing Democracy,
The German Marshall Fund of the United States,
1744 R Street, NW, Washington, DC 20009.

Mr. Pfluger. I thank the witnesses for your valuable
testimony, for your courage, and for your time today. I think
this has been an excellent hearing.
I thank the Members for their questions as well.
The Members of the subcommittee may have additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to
please respond in writing to these.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:12 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
