- PROTECTING THE HOMELAND_EXAMINING TSA'S RELATIONSHIPS WITH U.S. ADVERSARIES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING THE HOMELAND_EXAMINING TSA'S RELATIONSHIPS WITH U.S.
ADVERSARIES

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 9, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-74

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
59-635            WASHINGTON : 2025

__________

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Garcia, California
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Ms. Melanie Harvey, Executive Assistant Administrator for
Security Operations, TSA:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    10
Ms. Stacey Fitzmaurice, Executive Assistant Administrator,
Operations Support, TSA:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Joint Prepared Statement.......................................    10

For the Record

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Statement of Honorable Mario Diaz-Balart.......................     1

PROTECTING THE HOMELAND--EXAMINING TSA'S RELATIONSHIPS WITH U.S.
ADVERSARIES

----------

Tuesday, July 9, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos A. Gimenez
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, LaLota, Lee,
Thanedar, and Garcia.
Also present: Representatives Crane and Salazar.
Mr. Gimenez. The Homeland Security Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the subcommittee in
recess at any point.
Today's hearing will examine TSA's relationships with U.S.
adversaries and particularly state sponsors of terrorism.
Without objection, the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane,
the gentlewoman from Florida, Ms. Salazar, are permitted to sit
with the subcommittee and ask questions of the witnesses. So
ordered.
Without objection also, there's a written statement from
Congressman Mario Diaz-Balart that he would like submitted for
the record. Without objection, that is also ordered.
[The information follows:]
Statement of Honorable Mario Diaz-Balart
July 9, 2024
I thank full committee Chairman Mark Green and Ranking Member
Bennie Thompson, Subcommittee Chairman Carlos Gimenez and Ranking
Member Shri Thanedar, as well as the distinguished Members of this
subcommittee, for giving me an opportunity to submit my statement for
the record. Chairman Gimenez in particular has demonstrated remarkable
leadership on this issue, and I thank him for his service and
dedication to South Florida, and our country.
Many of us were shocked to learn that TSA welcomed operatives of
the Cuban Communist Party to tour secure areas at Miami International
Airport--a visit that came to our attention only from press reports
detailing concerns raised by security personnel. Just last week, new
reports indicated that Communist China is building espionage facilities
in Cuba, just 70 miles from the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay. In
the week prior, Cuba allowed 4 Russian naval vessels, including a
nuclear submarine, into Cuban waters for joint Russia-Cuba military
exercises. This is the same regime that was caught in 2013 smuggling
240 tons of weapons materiel hidden under sugar to North Korea, which a
U.N. panel of experts found was the greatest violation of international
sanctions against North Korea to date. This is the regime that harbors
fugitives from U.S. justice, including FBI Top Ten Most Wanted
Terrorist and convicted murderer Joanne Chesimard, bombmaker William
Morales of the terrorist FALN, hijacker Charles Hill, and ELN and FARC
terrorists. It also signed a public military agreement with Belarus to
train Cuban nationals as soldiers, and according to reports,
facilitates Cuban nationals traveling to Russia to fight against
Ukraine.
We also know that the Cuban regime has an active and effective
espionage network operating against U.S. interests. Ana Belen Montes, a
convicted spy who worked for the Defense Intelligence Agency, provided
extremely damaging information to Cuba. The WASP Network's espionage
led to the brutal shootdown of two civilian planes in international
waters, killing 4 innocent people, and all 5 were convicted in U.S.
Federal court, only to be prematurely released by President Obama
despite their malign activities. In February of this year, a U.S. State
Department employee was convicted of working on behalf of the Cuban
regime, which he did for more than 3 decades. Convicted spies Walter
and Gwendolyn Myers of the U.S. State Department also were convicted
for spying for Cuba, as were Florida International University employees
Carlos and Elsa Alvarez. But apparently the regime need not work so
hard to gain this valuable intelligence anymore; the Biden
administration will welcome them with open arms and happily arrange
visits so that they can tour our sensitive, secure areas.
Some may not think that the repressive, anti-American Cuban regime
poses a serious threat to the United States. In a military-to-military
face-off, that is true. But what it does incredibly well, as numerous
intelligence and counterintelligence agents attest, is gathering
intelligence. In the mean time, it is deepening relationships with very
dangerous adversaries such as Iran, Communist China, and Russia, with
which it shares the information that it gathers. The damaging secrets
that it learns about us will not stay in Cuba. Welcoming Cuban regime
operatives to TSA is like inviting Iran, Communist China, Russia, and
our other most dangerous adversaries.
Undoubtedly, much of the blame for the colossal mistake of inviting
operatives of a terrorist state into our secure areas lies with the
U.S. State Department, which sets foreign policy and presumably
provided the visas for these misguided tours. The leadership at the
Department of Homeland Security also shoulders responsibility.
Nonetheless, the Transportation Security Agency also bears
responsibility for failing to raise red flags. As a senior member of
the House Committee on Appropriations, I worked closely with the
Homeland Security Appropriations Subcommittee Chairman Mark Amodei to
include a strong prohibition in the fiscal year 2025 Appropriations
legislation to ensure that no taxpayer money is used to allow
individuals working for a country designated as a state sponsor of
terrorism to have access to sensitive U.S. Government facilities. Maybe
after the alarms raised, including with the hearing today, the Biden
administration will receive the message that no state sponsor of
terrorism should receive special treatment at any airport or sensitive
Government facility in the United States.
I commend my good friend Rep. Carlos Gimenez for his leadership in
protecting the United States from profound and sometimes
underappreciated national security threats, and I hope that the
questions and concerns raised today will ensure that similarly absurd
and entirely unnecessary decisions regarding U.S. adversaries are not
made in the future. The Cuban regime, which works to harm U.S.
interests at every opportunity, stands to gain valuable intelligence
from these one-sided exchanges. We simply cannot allow this to
continue.
Again, I thank the committee for the invitation, and for
highlighting this important issue for U.S. national security interests.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on this important issue.

Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize myself for an opening
statement.
Today, our subcommittee is meeting to discuss
Transportation Security Administration's international
operations and their interactions with adversarial foreign
governments, especially the Republic of Cuba, a state sponsor
of terrorism.
May 20, 2024, marked the 122nd celebration of Cuban
Independence Day, and it's an extremely significant date for
Cuban expatriates such as myself, many of whom fled their home
after the Communist dictatorship takeover.
Each year on May 20, Cuban Americans remember the
sacrifices made to escape communism, celebrate the freedoms we
enjoy in the United States, and pray for those who are still
subjugated to the rule of the brutal Communist dictatorship.
However, on May 20, 2024, TSA and the State Department
welcomed the Castro regime agents to the home of the largest
population of Cuban Americans in the United States by hosting
them for a tour of the Miami International Airport. That's
pretty much a slap in the face to the Cuban Americans all
across the country but especially those living in Miami.
Serious precautions must be taken while dealing with the
Communist Cuban regime. Cuba is among the chief
counterintelligence and national security threats of the United
States.
Just 90 miles from the Florida Keys, part of the district
that I represent, the regime actively works to deepen ties with
our adversaries, such as the Chinese and the Russians, to
operate spy bases and conducting joint military exercises with
them.
Furthermore, our diplomats in Havana have been victims of
anomalous health incidents that are potentially the result of a
foreign intelligence service using microwave technology to
target our Foreign Service officers, causing brain damage and
long-term disabilities.
Additionally, Cuba's intelligence services actively recruit
spies from the U.S. Federal agencies, and some of their agents,
such as Victor Manuel Rocha, Kendall Myers, and Ana Belen
Montes, have spent decade passing Classified information to
Cuba.
Their information shared to Cuba has caused countless
deaths to Cuban citizens attempting to work against the Castro
regime and American service members operating around the world.
I am deeply concerned about the somewhat careless nature of
this visit. It's evident that TSA and the State Department
neglected to take the threat of Cuban officials on American
soil seriously, which leads me to believe that they don't think
Cuba poses really much of a threat to the United States.
TSA and the State Department failed to notify or coordinate
this visit with Airport Authority State and local officials,
and they did not notify Congress of their intention to host a
state sponsor of terrorism on American soil.
Furthermore, TSA continued the delegation's visit and
allowed the agents access to TSA headquarters after some of my
House and Senate colleagues and I sent a letter to the TSA
administrator and DHS Secretary expressing our outrage.
To make matters worse, senior leaders within TSA, including
Administrator Pekoske, were unaware of this visit, which
further demonstrates TSA's negligence and calls into question
TSA's ability to appropriately interact with adversarial
foreign governments, such as the People's Republic of China and
the Russian Federation and the Republic of Cuba.
Unfortunately, we have been through this fire drill before
with another Department of Homeland Security component. In
February 2023, the United States Coast Guard hosted a Cuban
delegation that consisted of the Cuban Border Guard and
Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Luckily, Congress was notified of this visit ahead of time,
and Chairman Green, Chairman McCaul, Chairwoman Salazar, and I
sent a letter to the Coast Guard leadership and were able to
prevent the Castro regime agents from accessing U.S. Coast
Guard headquarters and other sensitive U.S. Federal Government
facilities.
Immediately following this, Senator Rubio and I wrote
common-sense legislation that was included in the fiscal year
2024 NDAA that prevents the United States Coast Guard from
working with state sponsors of terrorism on all but the most
critical missions, such as search and rescue and counter-human
trafficking.
I am extremely concerned the Department of Homeland
Security lacks the proper policies and procedures across its
components to appropriately interact with adversarial nation-
states, especially state sponsors of terrorism, and learn from
past mistakes to take corrective actions in the future.
It's obvious that TSA and DHS must improve internal
processes, better coordinate international engagements with
State and local authorities, and ensure that Congress has the
proper visibility into engagements with adversarial nation-
states.
I am committed to addressing these failures and taking
corrective action that DHS has neglected to do on its own. The
United States cannot take a back seat and reward the Cuban
government with special access in the United States while it
carries out major human rights abuses on its own citizens.
Thank you to our witnesses, Ms. Harvey and Ms. Fitzmaurice,
for appearing before the subcommittee, and I look forward to
your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
Today, our subcommittee is meeting to discuss Transportation
Security Administration's International Operations and their
interactions with adversarial foreign governments, especially with the
Republic of Cuba, a state sponsor of terrorism.
May 20, 2024, marked the 122nd celebration of Cuban Independence
Day, an extremely significant date for Cuban expatriates, many of whom,
like me, fled their home after the Communist dictatorship takeover.
Each year on May 20, Cuban Americans remember the sacrifices made
to escape communism, celebrate the freedoms we enjoy in the democratic
United States, and pray for those who are still subjugated by the rule
of the brutal Communist dictatorship.
However, on May 20, 2024, TSA and the State Department welcomed
Castro regime agents to the home of the largest population of Cuban
Americans in the United States by hosting them for a tour of Miami
International Airport.
This is a slap in the face to Cuban Americans all across the
country and demonstrates the Biden administration's soft stance on
Cuba.
Serious precautions must be taken while dealing with the Communist
Cuban regime.
Cuba is among the chief counterintelligence and national security
threats to the United States.
Just 90 miles from the Florida Keys, part of the district I
represent, the regime actively works to deepen ties with our
adversaries by allowing the Chinese to operate spy bases and by
conducting joint military exercises with Russian warships.
Additionally, Cuba's intelligence service actively recruits spies
from U.S. Federal agencies, and some of their agents such as Victor
Manuel Rocha, Kendall Myers, and Ana Belen Montes have spent decades
passing Classified information to Cuba. Their information shared to
Cuba has caused countless deaths of Cuban citizens attempting to work
against the Castro regime and American service members operating around
the world.
Furthermore, our diplomats in Havana have been victims of anomalous
health incidents that are potentially the result of a foreign
intelligence service using microwave technology to target our foreign
service officers--causing brain damage and long-term disabilities.
I am deeply concerned about the careless nature of this visit. It
is evident that TSA and the State Department neglected to take the
threat of Cuban officials on American soil seriously which leads me to
believe they do not think Cuba poses any real threat to the United
States.
TSA and the State Department failed to notify or coordinate this
visit with the airport authority or State and local officials, and they
did not notify Congress of their intention to host a state sponsor of
terrorism on American soil.
Furthermore, TSA continued the delegation's visit and allowed the
agents access to TSA headquarters after some of my House and Senate
colleagues and I sent a letter to TSA Administrator David Pekoske and
DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas expressing our outrage.
To make matters worse, senior leaders within TSA, including
Administrator Pekoske, were unaware of this visit, which further
demonstrates TSA's negligence and calls into question TSA's ability to
appropriately interact with adversarial foreign governments, such as
the People's Republic of China (PRC), the Russian Federation, and the
Republic of Cuba.
Unfortunately, we have been through this fire drill before with
another Department of Homeland Security component.
In February 2023, the United States Coast Guard hosted a Cuban
delegation that consisted of the Cuban Border Guard and Ministry of
Foreign Affairs.
Luckily, Congress was notified about this visit ahead of time, and
Chairman Green, Chairman McCaul, Chairwoman Salazar, and I sent a
letter to Coast Guard leadership and were able to prevent the Castro
regime agents from accessing U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters and other
sensitive U.S. Federal Government facilities.
Immediately following this, Senator Rubio and I wrote common-sense
legislation that was included in the fiscal year 2024 NDAA that
prevents the U.S. Coast Guard from working with state sponsors of
terrorism on all but the most critical missions such as search and
rescue and counter human trafficking.
I am extremely concerned that the Department of Homeland Security
lacks the proper policies and procedures across its components to
appropriately interact with adversarial nation-states, especially state
sponsors of terrorism, and learn from past mistakes to take corrective
actions in the future.
It is obvious that TSA and DHS must improve internal processes,
better coordinate international engagements with State and local
authorities, and ensure that Congress has the proper visibility into
engagements with adversarial nation-states.
I am committed to addressing these failures and taking the
corrective action that DHS has neglected to do on its own.
The Biden administration has consistently relaxed U.S. policy on
Cuba, and this incident is one such example.
The United States cannot take a backseat and reward the Cuban
government with special access in the United States while it carries
out major human rights abuses on its own citizens.
Thank you to our witnesses, Ms. Harvey and Ms. Fitzmaurice, for
appearing before the subcommittee.
I look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Gimenez. I now recognize the Ranking Member for his
opening statement.
Mr. Thanedar. Good morning and thank you, Chairman Gimenez,
for calling today's hearing.
Thank you to our witnesses for sharing their expertise on
such an important topic.
Since the agency's inception, TSA has worked to ensure the
security of flights from foreign airports into the United
States. Under the Biden administration, TSA continues to carry
out a range of activities to secure international aviation,
from engagements with the International Civil Aviation
Organizations and other diplomatic bodies to managing bilateral
relationship with foreign government counterparts to ensuring
security requirements for air carriers flying into the United
States from foreign airports and inspecting them for
compliance.
To have confidence in the security of all flights entering
the United States from abroad, TSA must maintain access to
inspect security efforts at foreign airports to ensure they
meet U.S. standards.
Terrorist threats to U.S. aviation have originated
primarily overseas, so ensuring flights inbound to the United
States are screened to TSA standards is paramount to the
agency's security mission.
Maintaining access to foreign airports requires diplomacy
and reciprocity, including with our Nation's adversaries if
they have direct flights to the United States. In fact, our
adversaries' airports with direct flights to the United States
are perhaps the most important locations for TSA to inspect.
In the case of the recent visit of Cuban Government
officials to Miami International Airport, I understand TSA has
apologized for not notifying local officials in advance of the
visit and has pledged to do so for future visits. That said,
TSA and the administration have a responsibility under the law
to ensure the security of commercial flights from Cuba to the
United States, and doing so requires providing some level of
reciprocity.
For this visit, TSA and the State Department vetted the
Cuban officials, escorted them throughout their tour, and did
not share any Sensitive or Classified information.
Cuban officials have been regularly visiting U.S. airports
for over a decade without incident under administrations of
both parties. Notably, TSA hosted Cuban officials for a visit
in 2018 under the Trump administration, and there was no outcry
from Republican politicians then.
Commercial flights between Cuba and the United States have
brought benefits to both countries. During the past year,
approximately 2.4 million passengers have traveled between Cuba
and United States, providing opportunity for tourism and family
connections, which serve as critical lifelines to many people
during Cuba's on-going economic and humanitarian challenges.
Denying Cuban officials the opportunity to visit U.S.
airports would put at risk the security of air passengers,
ultimately harming the Cuban and American people far more than
the Cuban government.
International engagement fosters cooperation, even between
adversaries, when there is a shared interest in mutually
beneficial outcomes.
I'm confident TSA will not back down from fulfilling its
responsibilities to secure international aviation solely
because some of my colleagues are using the agency as a
scapegoat to score cheap political points.
International air travel is critical to the global economy,
and its security must never be compromised. I look forward to
hearing more from our witnesses about TSA's engagement with
Cuba as well as TSA's work with other countries around the
globe.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
July 9, 2024
Since the agency's inception, TSA has worked to ensure the security
of flights from foreign airports into the United States. Under the
Biden administration, TSA continues to carry out a range of activities
to secure international aviation, from engagements with the
International Civil Aviation Organization and other diplomatic bodies,
to managing bilateral relationships with foreign government
counterparts, to issuing security requirements for air carriers flying
into the United States from foreign airports and inspecting them for
compliance.
To have confidence in the security of all flights entering the
United States from abroad, TSA must maintain access to inspect security
efforts at foreign airports to ensure they meet U.S. standards.
Terrorist threats to U.S. aviation have originated primarily overseas,
so ensuring flights inbound to the United States are screened to TSA's
standards is paramount to the agency's security mission.
Maintaining access to foreign airports requires diplomacy and
reciprocity--including with our Nation's adversaries if they have
direct flights to the United States. In fact, our adversaries' airports
with direct flights to the United States are perhaps the most important
locations for TSA to inspect. In the case of the recent visit of Cuban
government officials to Miami International Airport, I understand TSA
has apologized for not notifying local officials in advance of the
visit and has pledged to do so for future visits. That said, TSA and
the administration have a responsibility under the law to ensure the
security of commercial flights from Cuba to the United States, and
doing so requires providing some level of reciprocity.
For this visit, TSA and the State Department vetted the Cuban
officials, escorted them throughout their tour, and did not share any
Sensitive or Classified information. Cuban officials have been
regularly visiting U.S. airports for over a decade without incident,
under administrations of both parties. Notably, TSA hosted Cuban
officials for a visit in 2018 under the Trump administration, and there
was no outcry from Republican politicians then. Commercial flights
between Cuba and the United States have brought benefits to both
countries.
During the past year, approximately 2.4 million passengers have
traveled between Cuba and the United States, providing opportunities
for tourism and family connections which serve as critical lifelines to
many people during Cuba's on-going economic and humanitarian
challenges. Denying Cuban officials the opportunity to visit U.S.
airports would put at risk the security of air passengers, ultimately
harming the Cuban and American people far more than the Cuban
government. International engagement fosters cooperation--even between
adversaries--when there is shared interest in mutually beneficial
outcomes.
I am confident TSA will not back down from fulfilling its
responsibility to secure international aviation solely because some of
my colleagues are using the agency as a scapegoat to score cheap
political points. International air travel is critical to the global
economy, and its security must never be compromised. I look forward to
hearing more from our witnesses about TSA's engagements with Cuba, as
well as TSA's work with other countries around the globe.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 9, 2024
International aviation represents a tremendous engine of the global
economy. According to the Department of Transportation, in calendar
year 2023, more than 237 million passengers traveled by air between the
United States and the rest of the world. Historically, flights inbound
to the United States from abroad have also represented the biggest
threat to our Nation's aviation system.
Since TSA's creation following the September 11 attacks, many of
the most troubling plots against aviation have emanated from overseas,
from the 2009 underwear bomber and the 2010 printer cartridge device to
more recent threats involving powders and personal electronic devices.
TSA's efforts to ensure sufficient security at foreign airports--
where TSA does not conduct screening itself--are critical to economic
development, tourism, trade, and employment around the world. TSA's
engagements with foreign partners improve security through the air
transportation environment--not just for American travelers, but for
travelers world-wide by raising the global baseline for security
standards.
TSA pursues multilateral and bilateral engagements to advance the
adoption of security measures related to explosives detection,
cybersecurity, passenger and employee vetting, and technological
advancement. By working directly with foreign government counterparts,
TSA pushes for security advancements that benefit all passengers
traveling through a foreign airport, not just those departing for the
United States.
When an airport's screening practices do not meet U.S. standards,
TSA imposes regulatory requirements on carriers servicing direct
flights to the United States, ensuring that carriers conduct gate
screening to augment standard checkpoint screening. With more than 300
airports in more than 100 countries offering direct flights to the
United States, TSA's efforts to safeguard all international inbound
flights are extensive and complex.
TSA does not have the luxury to choose whether to engage with the
foreign government of a country with direct flights to the United
States. If a foreign airport has direct flights to the United States,
the law requires TSA to provide for the security of those flights.
Efforts by some of my colleagues to paint TSA's engagements with
certain foreign governments as somehow suspect or dangerous are
disingenuous at best.
I struggle to understand why routine diplomatic engagements that
have occurred regularly for more than a decade under the
administrations of both parties should suddenly be viewed as scandalous
when conducted by the current administration. Some of my colleagues
have gone so far as to introduce legislation that would effectively ban
representatives of certain foreign governments from U.S. airports. Such
a bill, if enacted, would be incredibly dangerous, as it would endanger
TSA's ability to access foreign airports with direct flights to the
United States to assess their security. Millions of passengers could be
left to travel on flights the U.S. Government cannot attest are secure.
That would be far worse for our national security than allowing a few
vetted, escorted Cuban officials to observe some TSA officers screening
a few passengers and bags.
TSA is doing exactly what the law requires: Engaging with foreign
governments to secure international aviation. I hope today's hearing
will make clear the absurdity of raking TSA over the coals for doing
exactly what Congress directed the agency to do.

Mr. Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a distinguished
panel of witnesses before us today on this critical topic. I
ask for our witnesses to please rise and raise their right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative.
Thank you and please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Ms. Melanie Harvey serves as the executive assistant
administrator for security operations for TSA.
Ms. Stacey Fitzmaurice serves as the executive assistant
administrator for operations support for the TSA.
I thank both of our distinguished witnesses for being here
today.
I now recognize Ms. Harvey for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF MELANIE HARVEY, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR
FOR SECURITY OPERATIONS, TSA

Ms. Harvey. Thank you. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member
Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you today. It is my
honor to discuss TSA's work to ensure the security of
international aviation.
Up front, I would like to acknowledge that the TSA could
have done a better job coordinating with the Miami Airport and
local officials for the most recent engagement with the Cuban
aviation authorities.
While Cuba has visited U.S. airports 6 times since 2011, we
did not fully socialize this trip. I am committed to making
sure that does not happen again.
TSA is grateful for the authorities and resources provided
to us. On behalf of the 57,000 people who serve in TSA's
security operations, I thank the subcommittee for your
continued support.
TSA's mission is to support the freedom of movement for
people and commerce. Fundamental to that mission is ensuring
flights to and from the United States are secure.
Our commitment to secure air travel requires us to engage
transportation authorities around the world in areas that
sometimes place our employees in harm's way and with countries
that may not always share American values.
Today, TSA permanently stations 85 personnel to overseas
duty locations in 28 countries as attaches, security advisers,
trainers, inspectors and international industry
representatives. Over the last 8 months, TSA sent several of
these brave men and women into global hot spots, including
Ukraine, Haiti, and Israel.
Since the 1985 passage of the International Security and
Development Cooperation Act, Congress has granted TSA and our
predecessor organization the responsibility to assess the
effectiveness of security measures maintained at foreign
airports that serve as last point of departure to the United
States.
Congress also granted to the TSA administrator the
authority to work with aeronautic authorities of foreign
countries that benefit from U.S.-bound flights.
As a member nation of ICAO, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, we also honor the international standard
of information sharing regarding security programs, training,
and quality control.
This past Sunday, TSA screened 3 million people at domestic
airports, our busiest day ever. On that day, 471,000 passengers
arrived from overseas airports. There are currently 312 last-
point-of-departure airports in 115 countries. TSA professionals
are engaged daily around the world to ensure the security of
those flights.
This work makes it possible for TSA to deploy
countermeasures, such as Federal air marshals who fly on U.S.
carriers to and from airports around the world.
TSA also deploys experts to assess the security
effectiveness of both foreign airports and air carriers
directly serving the United States. Our teams have visited
Cuban airports 22 times since 2011. During the same period,
Cuban officials visited U.S. airports 6 times.
Our continued access to these airports and carriers is an
international norm, reinforced through frequent engagement and
reciprocity. As part of that reciprocity, we grant foreign
delegations access to our domestic facilities.
To ensure the operational security of these visits, we
follow strict protocols, which include coordination with DHS,
in most cases local airport authorities, and the Department of
State. Cuban delegations receive special handling. The
Department of State conducts a review of all visiting Cuban
officials prior to issuance of a diplomatic visa. Then DHS's
Office of the Chief Security Officer individually vets them.
Only then is the request approved and scheduled.
In closing, TSA's mission is transportation security. In
order to protect the United States, we must continue to use all
of the authorities granted by Congress and leverage our well-
established aviation security partnerships and reputation.
Thank you, Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member Thanedar,
for your continued support of TSA, and I look forward to your
questions.
[The joint prepared statement of Ms. Harvey and Ms.
Fitzmaurice follows:]
Joint Prepared Statement of Melanie Harvey and Stacey Fitzmaurice
July 9, 2024
Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the role of the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) in international
transportation security.
TSA's mission is to protect the Nation's transportation systems to
ensure freedom of movement for people and commerce. TSA works
collaboratively with foreign governments, air carriers, and
international organizations to address security risks to international
transportation. As TSA has previously shared with Congress, inbound
flights to the United States from foreign last-point-of-departure (LPD)
airports (foreign airports where an air carrier can provide direct
service to an airport in the United States) continue to present the
greatest risk to aviation security. When a new threat or potential
vulnerability emerges, TSA coordinates with these partners to develop
and implement responses that effectively mitigate the inbound risk to
the United States.
The mitigation process begins by analyzing risk in terms of threat,
vulnerability, and consequence. When risk increases significantly from
change(s) to threat, vulnerability, and/or consequence, TSA analyzes
the underlying factors and develops appropriate international
mitigation strategies. Of the nearly 3 million passengers screened by
TSA each day, approximately 375,000 arrive in the United States from
LPDs, making TSA's international mission critical for identifying and
mitigating risk.
tsa's international authorities
Global transportation has historically relied upon international
reciprocity and collaboration to protect the movement of people and
commerce--a common interest that transcends geopolitical differences.
In recognition of this, and our domestic transportation security
requirements, Congress granted TSA authority and oversight of
international engagement and activities through the Aviation and
Transportation Security Act, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Extension, Safety, and Security Act of 2016 (Pub. L. 114-190), and the
TSA Modernization Act. In recognition of a common interest in aviation
security, the U.S. Government honors the international standards of
cooperation established by the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). These international standards require information
sharing to ensure all nations understand the potential impact changes
to the aviation security posture of upstream nations and airports may
have on downstream nations around the globe, including the United
States.
The Secretary of Homeland Security is required to assess the
security effectiveness at all foreign airports served by U.S. aircraft
operators, as well as foreign airports serving as LPD locations for
foreign air carriers, in accordance with ICAO Standards under title 49
U.S. Code, Chapter 449. The Secretary has delegated this responsibility
to TSA. Under that requirement, as well as 49 C.F.R.  1544.3 and 
1546.3, TSA evaluates the effectiveness of security measures maintained
at foreign locations through assessments of foreign airports and
inspections of air carriers operating from those airports. These
mandated assessments require TSA to visit LPD airports with flights to
the United States. Foreign governments grant us that access, in large
part, because of relationships built through U.S. reciprocity.
Additionally, the Air Transport Agreements signed between the United
States and a foreign country acknowledge the need for cooperation
between the two countries based on reciprocity and comity. TSA honors
ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices by allowing other contracting
states to conduct validation visits to observe U.S. implementation of
security processes for passengers, baggage, and cargo--similar to the
way TSA assesses LPD airports. Beyond the legal authorities and
instruments discussed generally, TSA engages partners and builds long-
term relationships that facilitate TSA's global mission, protecting not
only the homeland, but also American citizens traveling abroad.
tsa's international engagements
TSA's international engagement efforts play a crucial role in
enhancing global transportation security. TSA maintains close
international relationships through bilateral and multilateral
engagements, engagements with industry, as well as regulatory
compliance assessments and inspections. Transportation Security
Administration Representatives (TSARs), International Industry
Representatives (IIRs), and TSA's International Inspectors engage daily
with partners, to include foreign governments, multilateral
organizations such as ICAO, International Air Transport Association
(IATA), Airports Council International (ACI), the European Commission,
as well as domestic and foreign air carriers in support of the broader
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) mission.
By hosting and participating in bilateral and multilateral
engagements, TSA creates an environment where the aviation security
community responsibly shares information that leads to a better
understanding of foreign security systems, associated risk, and best
practices. This collaborative information-sharing process provides TSA
with significant information on a foreign government's aviation
security posture and potential risks. TSA is able to use this knowledge
to produce risk-informed, data-driven policies for industry, and to
create meaningful exchanges with foreign governments to better align
our security posture. Through sharing with partners, we have
implemented higher standards, above and beyond ICAO requirements,
reducing risk, and driving aviation security accountability world-wide.
The United States responsibly shares information on topics such as
covert testing, cybersecurity, technology, security programs and
policies, and emerging threats to aviation through information-sharing
agreements based on an appropriately tailored, trust-based, and need-
to-know standard. These engagements ultimately bolster aviation
security for travelers world-wide. In addition to engagement with
governments and industry, TSA also conducts oversight and compliance
activities of all regulated entities.
ensuring continual compliance with security requirements
TSA conducts regular assessments of all foreign LPDs to ensure they
meet ICAO standards and conducts inspections of foreign and domestic
air carriers at LPDs to ensure continued compliance with TSA-approved
security programs. Assessments and inspections serve as our basis to
identify and mitigate risk.
The frequency of these assessments and inspections is determined by
threat, vulnerability, and consequence, as modeled by TSA. This
approach ensures the efficient allocation of limited assessment and
inspection resources, in a risk-based manner. Assessments are
coordinated by the assigned TSAR and carried out by a team of
international inspectors from 1 of TSA's 6 Regional Operation Centers
located world-wide. TSA inspectors have conducted 629 inspections of
foreign air carriers and domestic aircraft operators abroad and
completed 94 foreign airport assessments as of June in fiscal year
2024, while visiting 66 countries.
Cuba is the only country designated by the Department of State as a
state sponsor of terrorism which has direct flights to the United
States. Specific to Cuba, our 2 countries entered into a Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) on International Air Transportation on February 16,
2016. This MOU permits direct flights between the 2 countries by
carriers with appropriate Department of Transportation, FAA, and TSA
licenses and certifications.
In furtherance of the security mandate described above, TSA
currently assesses the 6 active Cuban LPD airports in Camaguey, Havana,
Holguin, Santiago, Santa Clara, and Varadero, with 5 U.S. carriers
operating regular, direct flights to up to 10 airports in the United
States depending on the season (for both passenger and cargo
operations). Since 2011, TSA and the Cuban Civil Aviation Institute
(IACC) retain an effective working relationship, and the IACC is
consistently responsive to TSA findings and recommendations. Through
the work of TSA personnel and our aviation security counterparts, TSA
has ensured that Americans aboard flights to the United States from
Cuba are secure.
foreign delegation engagement
DHS treats the vetting and approval of foreign visitors as a
national security imperative, ensuring all policy concerns are properly
addressed in accordance with DHS Policy Directive Memorandum 121-11,
which requires the vetting of all foreign visitors when accessing TSA
facilities and airports in the United States. The vetting process
begins when foreign nationals provide their passport details to TSA.
Once these details are received, TSA enters the information into the
Integrated Security Management System for vetting by the DHS Office of
the Chief Security Officer. Cleared individuals are only permitted to
access TSA facilities and U.S. airports under escort.
All foreign delegations must also meet the escort requirements
under the approved Airport Security Program or facility program. In the
case of the most recent Cuban delegation visit to Miami International
Airport (MIA) in May 2024, following DHS vetting, the delegation was
appropriately escorted at all times. Since 2011, TSA has conducted 22
visits to airports in Cuba. Cuban officials have made 6 visits to U.S.
airports, in August 2011, January 2013, May 2014, September 2015,
August 2018, and May 2024.
TSA's current process to host foreign delegations from countries
with LPD service begins with a request from a foreign partner. The TSAR
will then create and submit a Foreign Delegation Visit Request for
internal coordination and approval by the Regional Director, who is a
member of the Senior Executive Service. The request provides details of
the visit, including the purpose of the visit, number of participants,
location(s), and dates requested by the delegation, as well as the
level of information sharing determined appropriate. After the most
recent Cuban delegation visit, TSA formalized the Foreign Delegation
Visit Request process in an Administrative Directive. The directive
describes roles, responsibilities, time lines, and process for hosting
foreign delegations. This directive continues a long-standing DHS
process of vetting every individual from a foreign delegation in
addition to the Department of State processing their visa.
conclusion
TSA is a globally-recognized leader in aviation security. This
reputation is built on world-class subject-matter expertise,
transparency, trust, and reciprocity. TSA is well-positioned to lead
efforts with our foreign partners and industry to immediately respond
to emerging threats and enhance world-wide transportation security.
This is all made possible through, and as the result of, international
engagement, and the lessons learned from the recent Cuban delegation
visit have enabled TSA to review and improve existing procedures to
better coordinate and execute foreign delegation visits in the future.
TSA will continue to work with our Federal, industry, and
international partners to advance international transportation security
and protect Americans wherever they travel. We are grateful for the
authorities and resources that have been granted to TSA and look
forward to answering your questions.

Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Harvey.
I now recognize Ms. Fitzmaurice for 5 minutes to summarize
her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF STACEY FITZMAURICE, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT
ADMINISTRATOR, OPERATIONS SUPPORT, TSA

Ms. Fitzmaurice. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, and Members of the subcommittee. I appreciate
the opportunity to discuss TSA's international efforts within
Operations Support.
Within Operations Support, TSA manages the agency's
engagements with and sets the security and regulatory policy
requirements for all U.S. aircraft operators at any location as
well as foreign air carriers providing service to the United
States from international last-points-of-departure airports.
Operations Support works closely with security operations
so that our international policy and risk efforts both
complement the agency's bilateral government-to-government
engagements as well as international compliance activities.
These efforts enhance both the security and facilitation of
global air travel.
I appreciate the opportunity to testify today and look
forward to your questions. Thank you.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Fitzmaurice.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Ms. Harvey, state sponsor of terrorism, how many are there
on the list, our list of state sponsors of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, the Department of State maintains that
list, and there are 4 countries on that list.
Mr. Gimenez. Who is on that list?
Ms. Harvey. Cuba, North Korea, Syria, and Iran.
Mr. Gimenez. What does that mean, that you're a state
sponsor of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, I would defer to the State Department for
the definition of that.
Mr. Gimenez. I would think that if you're listed as a state
sponsor of terrorism, it doesn't mean that terrorism happens in
your country. It means that you, as the state, actually
sponsors the terrorism. I mean, terrorism happened in the
United States. I mean, 9/11 is a great example of that.
Everything started in the United States. But we're not a state
sponsor of terrorism. It happened in spite of us. In spite of
us, it happened.
A state sponsor of terrorism actually sponsors terrorism.
Cuba is on that list, is it not?
Ms. Harvey. It is on that list.
Mr. Gimenez. Now, when you want this reciprocity, you want
to make sure that Americans or whoever is traveling to the
United States on a plane from, say, Cuba to the United States,
it's done in a safe way, correct?
Ms. Harvey. Yes. Our job is to ensure the security of those
flights.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you have any doubt that somebody going from
the United States to Cuba, a plane going from the United States
to Cuba is not safe?
Ms. Harvey. I do not have any doubt that----
Mr. Gimenez. So all you're doing then is then I guess
pleasing the Cuban government that, hey, our planes are safe so
you got to come over and watch and see how we do stuff.
Is that pretty much what this reciprocity is all about?
Ms. Harvey. The international standards set by ICAO, that
is the definition of reciprocity, that states have the
responsibility and are encouraged to visit each other's
facilities and understand the security.
Mr. Gimenez. They're encouraged. Now, if we denied access
to Cuba, their folks, but we had access to theirs to verify
that their incoming flights--or at least verify--I mean,
really, come on, you're going to verify that they're safe.
This is a state sponsor of terrorism, for God's sake. They
can show you whatever they want, their procedures and all that,
and they might not follow them at all because they are a state
sponsor of terrorism.
So if you deny them access to us but we have access to
them, then who's--if we said, OK, we will still continue to fly
to Cuba, all right, unless you don't want us to anymore,
wouldn't it be up to Cuba to decide that they don't want those
flights anymore?
Ms. Harvey. I have no doubt that if we restricted access
for Cuban delegations to visit our airports, particularly those
last-point-of-departure airports to their airports, that they
could deny us access.
Mr. Gimenez. They could.
Ms. Harvey. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. Not that they would, but they could.
Ms. Harvey. I think that would be a likely result.
Mr. Gimenez. I think--I disagree with you, because that's a
lifeline to the Cuban regime. They need those flights. They
want those flights. It supplies them with much-needed revenue,
cash, and it kind-of keeps them afloat. So I disagree with you.
Seeing that I'm Cuban, I kind-of know what I'm talking about.
The vetting process that you all talk about. How do you vet
somebody who is an agent of a state sponsor of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, the process is that the officials from any
country who's traveling here submits their passport and
information to TSA.
TSA provides that information to both the Department of
State for processing of a visa as well as DHS chief security
officer to do the background check.
Mr. Gimenez. Who provides the information? Where do you get
that information from?
Ms. Harvey. We receive the passport information from the
foreign delegations.
Mr. Gimenez. From the state sponsor of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. We receive it from the foreign delegations.
Mr. Gimenez. From the state sponsor of terrorism.
So you vet a--you vet an agent from a state sponsor of
terrorism from the state sponsor of terrorism. That's how you
vet people?
Ms. Harvey. We use the passport information submitted by
the foreign government to do vetting, no matter what country
they are from.
Mr. Gimenez. You think that's adequate? So we have other
folks. So we now have direct flights to Iran. We would allow
the Iranian government, who we know sponsors terrorism with
Hezbollah and Hamas, et cetera, we would allow their folks to
come into our facilities to view our procedures, our equipment,
into sensitive areas, so that we can have reciprocity.
I think that's insane, to be honest with you, especially if
they are on our list of state sponsors of terrorism. So I guess
we're going to have to write another law. I'll be looking for
Senator Rubio to join me on that one, and then we'll see what
happens with this.
I understand the reciprocity thing, but I'll bet you, I'll
bet you a lot, I'll bet you all my salary, actually, that the
Cuban government will not stop flights to Cuba, all right, if
we say, no, you can't visit our facilities.
If we allow state sponsors of terrorism to send their
agents into our airports to look at our facilities, I just
don't think that's right.
So my time is up, and I recognize the Ranking Member from
Michigan.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here. Now, since 2011,
I believe there were 6 Cuban visits to our airports while TSA
visited Cuba 22 times. So we got--22 times we got access to
Cuban facilities, Cuban airports.
Now, how has this interaction helped the people of the
United States in terms of security? How does--that has helped
maintaining a secure environment for the people of the United
States?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, thank you for that question. First of all,
I would note that 2 million people fly back and forth to Cuba
in a year, and the security of those flights that is guaranteed
by these assessments and inspections is TSA's paramount
concern.
In a GAO study, they found that our engagements--through
their own analysis of our data, they found that these
engagements and assessments tend to improve the vulnerability
scores of the countries that we work with.
In the case of Cuba, we have seen that they have deployed
more technology, more advanced technology, specifically
explosive trace detection technology, in all of their airports,
which they did not have a few years ago.
We also--I can't share a lot of information in this
setting, but I can share that in our most recent assessment of
the Cuban last-point-of-departure airports that there were no
findings. They are fully compliant.
Mr. Thanedar. Now, under the Trump administration, were
there any Cuban visits to the United States under the Trump
administration?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, the last visit by a Cuban delegation to
United States airports was in 2018.
Mr. Thanedar. Which happened under the Trump
administration.
Now, what did the Cuban delegation see during the 2018
visit, and how did it compare to the visit this year?
Ms. Harvey. The visit in 2018, the delegation had a tour of
the checkpoint at DCA Airport right across the river. They saw
the canine operations at the checkpoint.
They also went next door to the TSA Security Integration
Facility, our lab of sorts where we test out new equipment and
approve it before it's deployed to the field.
They then went to Atlantic City, New Jersey, where they
visited the Federal Air Marshal Training Center and saw how we
train Federal air marshals.
They also received a briefing on how we do covert testing.
They capped off their visit at Philadelphia Airport, where they
saw a demonstration of how we do covert testing checkpoint
operations as well as the cargo operation.
Mr. Thanedar. So was that, the extent of access, was that
any different now compared to when the Cubans visited under
Trump administration?
Ms. Harvey. These visits are a norm. As you've noted, we've
had 6 visits from the Cuban delegation since 2011, and this
visit there was nothing out of the norm. It was a routine visit
where they--they wanted to visit Miami because that is the
major last point of departure for them.
Mr. Thanedar. So they basically saw the same thing what
they saw under the Trump administration.
Now, in 2018, did you hear of any Republican politicians
complaining about the access or the visit by Cuban authorities
to the United States?
Ms. Harvey. I'm not aware of any.
Mr. Thanedar. Now, if TSA were to stop hosting Cuban
delegations, do you believe--and we got more access to Cuba, 22
times compared to the 6 visits that they made to us, but if we
stop this, unilaterally we stop them from coming to the United
States, do you believe that we will get access to the Cuban
airports and their security?
Ultimately, if neither side wants to give this access, what
does that do to the security of American citizens?
Ms. Harvey. Thank you for that question. Access is an
international norm among countries. I think if we--you know,
the Cuban delegation, representatives of their Aviation
Authority, they want to see how we operate flights to their
country, just like we want to see how they secure the 6 last-
point-of-departure airports.
I believe if we cut off access for visits to the United
States' airports that they could do the same, and that would
have the result of eventually likely cessation of service
between the 2 countries.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much, and I yield back.
Mr. Higgins [presiding]. The gentleman yields.
I recognize myself for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Harvey, Cuba has been designated as a state sponsor of
terror. Are you aware of that?
Ms. Harvey. I am aware of that.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So let me just--for the record, with
respect to the Ranking Member here to my left, there's a great
difference between the United States of America visiting Cuba
22 times versus them visiting us 6.
In 100 percent of those visits, we were not--we're not a
designated state sponsor of terror and they are. I mean, this
is the key factor here.
The notification of Congress of such a thing was what the
Founders would expect. As a constitutionalist, it's what I
would look for. The Executive branch has broad authorities to
interact with nation-states across the world. Some of these
interactions are secretive and take place overseas. Some are
secretive and take place in the sovereign soil of our Nation.
But when you have an Executive branch initiate an
interaction where security procedures and policies of our ports
are exchanged with a nation-state, a foreign nation-state that
has been determined as a designated State sponsor of terror,
it's incumbent upon the Executive branch to advise Congress of
such a thing, and historically this has always been the case.
I was one of the lead voices for the impeachment of
Alejandro Mayorkas. This is reflective of the kind of disregard
for Executive branch responsibility that drove me and many of
my colleagues to look very hard at the service of Secretary
Mayorkas and ultimately conclude that because he would not, No.
1, stop his actions that were injurious to the United States of
America and correct course, and, No. 2, resign, that we had to
seek impeachment, which we did through this committee. A 15-
hour mark-up. It was quite grueling. We passed it through the
House.
So let me just ask you, who authorized this, Ms. Harvey?
Who authorized this visit, and who made the decision, don't
notify Congress?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, there was no decision to not notify
Congress. I apologize that we did not properly coordinate this
visit. We have not notified Congress in the past. This was----
Mr. Higgins. You have notified. Well, maybe not you, but
TSA has notified Congress in the past. That's been historically
the precedent that was set. It's very much different for
Congress to not be notified of such a visit.
Somebody--it's always one guy. Somebody has to make that
decision, don't notify Congress of this interaction. I suspect
it was Alejandro Mayorkas. He's in charge, is he not? I believe
he's still--contrary to my wishes, I'd have him out, but I
believe he's still the Secretary of Homeland Security. Is that
correct?
Ms. Harvey. That is correct.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So who ultimately made the decision to
bring state sponsors of terror into our Nation to review and
tour the security apparatus of our airports?
The guy running the Department of Homeland Security who
allegedly has invested his life into the security of our
homeland, one would hope, did he make that decision?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, he did not make the decision to invite the
Cuban delegation to the--to visit United States airports. This
visit was a routine visit. We've hosted these delegations
before.
Mr. Higgins. It's a routine visit?
Ms. Harvey. They have visited 6 times since----
Mr. Higgins. Well, please shed light on that for America.
Do we have North Korea over here?
Ms. Harvey. We do not.
Mr. Higgins. Well, wouldn't that be routine?
Ms. Harvey. No. There are no last----
Mr. Higgins. How is Cuba different?
Ms. Harvey. There's no last-point-of-departure airports
from North Korea or any of the other state sponsors of
terrorism. That's what makes Cuba unique.
Mr. Higgins. Agreed, which is why it's uniquely incumbent
upon the Executive to notify Congress of such a visit, because
we don't have these visits from North Korea and Iran.
We expect notification of such things, and we--and I would
say that the Founders would have anticipated that the
Legislative branch would have been notified of such things from
our Executive branch.
My time is exhausted, and I yield to the gentlelady Ms. Lee
for her questions.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for convening
this important hearing today.
My district is home to many Cuban Americans, some of whom
have personal stories about fleeing this Communist dictatorship
and the dangers of this on-going regime.
Given Cuba's proximity to the United States, the on-going
political environment and hostility, Cuba's alliance with many
of our foreign adversaries, any engagement by our Government
with Cuban officials is of key concern to State and local
elected officials and to Congress.
As we have been discussing here today, the Department of
State identifies state sponsors of terrorism as countries that
have, ``repeatedly provided support for acts of international
terrorism.''
Now, as you have discussed here today, Ms. Harvey, there
are currently 4 countries listed as state sponsors of
terrorism: Cuba, Iran, North Korea, and Syria.
Has TSA ever conducted inspections of airports in Iran,
North Korea, or Syria?
Ms. Harvey. Not to my knowledge.
Ms. Lee. Has TSA, to your knowledge, hosted personnel from
Iran, North Korea, or Syria at any of our U.S. airports?
Ms. Harvey. No, ma'am.
Ms. Lee. Does TSA, to your knowledge, have any contact at
all with official government leaders from Iran, North Korea, or
Syria?
Ms. Harvey. No.
Ms. Lee. So it is only in the case of Cuba that we have had
this sort of interaction or visit to our airport facilities. Is
that right?
Ms. Harvey. That is correct.
Ms. Lee. If I understand your testimony correctly, it's not
just that they have visited. While those officials were here,
they were provided a tour and an overview of our checkpoints,
our canine program, screening equipment, air marshal training,
covert testing, and checkpoint operations. Is that right?
Ms. Harvey. That is correct.
Ms. Lee. All right. Could you please share with us about
any future engagements that are planned with officials from the
Republic of Cuba that you're aware of?
Ms. Harvey. We are not aware of any trips by the Cuban
delegation to travel here to the United States airports. We do
plan to send our inspectors to visit their airports and assess
the carriers that have last-point-of-departure service to the
United States later this year.
Ms. Lee. Given Cuba's status as a state sponsor of terror,
does it not concern you that we have actually shared with
representatives of the Cuban government information about some
of the most critical safeguards in place that secure our
airport and air travel for Americans?
Ms. Harvey. Ma'am, in the visit earlier this summer in May,
they did not receive access--we did not provide them any
written sensitive material--we call it sensitive security
information--nor did they see SSI while they were here.
Ms. Lee. So do you believe--you mentioned earlier, and I'd
like to hear more, about going-forward efforts to make sure
that if there are individuals from any country identified as a
state sponsor of terror but in particular Cuba, that you all
intend to make effort to ensure we're notified, as Congress or
State or local leaders. Could you share with us a little bit
more about that?
Ms. Harvey. Yes, ma'am. We have put--following this event
where we did not properly coordinate with Miami Airport, who's
been an extraordinary partner with us, we put an administrative
directive in place that requires formal notification to the
U.S. airport authorities well in advance of a planned trip to
ensure cooperation, coordination, and agreement that the visit
will be beneficial.
Ms. Lee. Do you have any awareness of a new report from the
Center for Strategic and International Studies that reveals
that Cuba is building a new spy base near the city of Santiago
de Cuba?
Ms. Harvey. I'm not aware of that.
Ms. Lee. That in November 2022 the FCC had a similar
finding, that Cuba was cooperating with China on furthering
surveillance operations?
Ms. Harvey. I'm not aware of that.
Ms. Lee. Do you have any concern that we should be
revisiting any security agreements that are presently in place
with the Republic of Cuba?
Ms. Harvey. So TSA has a really narrow focus, and our job
really is to ensure that the airports with last-point-of-
departure service, with direct service to the United States are
secure and that the 2 million passengers that fly back and
forth every year, most of them Americans, are safe on those
flights.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentlelady from Florida yields.
The gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane, is recognized for 5
minutes for questions.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to everyone on the panel for being here today.
Ms. Harvey, do you understand the concern from this
committee about the visit? Do you understand why there would be
concern?
Ms. Harvey. I do understand the concern.
Mr. Crane. You know, it's hard for some of us to watch.
I've actually questioned Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas, who the
Chairman was asking did he authorize this visit from the Cubans
to come in and be able to witness and take a look at our
security systems within our airport, if he's playing for the
other side.
That's not something that's easy for me to even ask, but
when you look at what's going on at our Southern Border, when
you look at the increase in individuals on the terror watch
list from the last administration to this administration, I
believe the numbers were 14 individuals encountered on the
terrorist watch list under the last administration to over,
well over 350 now. When you look at how many--the increase in
how many Americans are dying from fentanyl, how many
individuals from MS-13 and other gangs have been allowed to
come into this country, and now on a daily basis you can almost
read a story about how one of them has raped and killed one of
our American daughters.
It's hard to even imagine sometimes why these things are
being allowed to happen. Now we come into this hearing and
we're talking about why Cubans, who are known state sponsors of
terrorism, who are known Communists, who sell intelligence to
the Russians, the Chinese, the North Koreans, and the Iranians,
why are they being allowed to come into our airports and survey
and look at some of our sensitive technologies?
Do you understand why that might be concerning to this
Congress?
Ms. Harvey. I do understand.
Mr. Crane. Do you understand why there's a concern that we
weren't notified?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, I do understand why there's a concern, but
I will note that that has not been a norm. We host foreign
delegations frequently, and we have not notified Congress in
the past of those.
Mr. Crane. Right. But are most of them state sponsors of
terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Just Cuba.
Mr. Crane. OK. So there you go. So when you say you don't
understand and then you talk about how many other host nations
and countries we allow to come in here and look at our security
apparatus, yet they're not state sponsors of terrorism, that
should be your answer right there. There shouldn't be any
question about why the concern. That's it. That's it.
Were these Communists who came from Cuba--and they are
Communists. Is that correct, Ms. Harvey?
Ms. Harvey. I don't know the affiliation of the people who
came, sir.
Mr. Crane. Oh, really? You don't know?
Ms. Harvey. I don't.
Mr. Crane. Really? You think that the Communists in Cuba
would allow people in their delegation to come over here and
not be Communists? You think that's how communism works, Ms.
Harvey? I'm asking you a question, ma'am.
Ms. Harvey. I understand.
Mr. Crane. OK. All right. Were these Cubans that were
allowed to come and tour our airports and look at our security
apparatus, our systems, were they prevented from seeing
anything and, if so, what?
Ms. Harvey. Sure. There's a lot of--a lot of things that
they didn't see. We did not provide them any sensitive security
information. They don't have information on the detection
standards of our technology. We did not provide them the
details of our standard operating procedures that are SSI.
We gave them information that's generally available to the
public or that a passenger could see after they are screened
and transit into the secure area.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Were they allowed--when you say that they
only saw things that a typical passenger would see, Ms. Lee was
saying that they got to look at our canine program. Is that
correct?
Ms. Harvey. They observed canine operations at the
passenger screening checkpoint, yes.
Mr. Crane. Is that something that typical American
passengers leaving the country get to see?
Ms. Harvey. Sure, if the canines are operating at that
time.
Mr. Crane. OK. So they didn't get to go back behind closed
doors, look at the kennels, anything like that?
Ms. Harvey. No, sir.
Mr. Crane. OK. Is there anything else that they weren't
allowed to see, ma'am?
Ms. Harvey. I'm sure there is a lot that they were not
allowed to see. We didn't take them on a tour of our secure
flight facility or talk about, you know, the back end for how
we vet things. They really received a very--they were at Miami
Airport for a few hours in May.
Mr. Crane. Let me ask you this one last thing, because my
time is running out. Given the concern that this committee has,
just wanting to protect American citizens, will you commit to
doing everything in your ability to make sure that Congress is
aware the next time a visit is scheduled?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, I will take that back to my leadership for
consideration, yes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Ms. Harvey.
I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
If Members are going to have additional questions--and
we're still going to recognize Mr. LaLota for his first
question, but if Members have additional questions we're going
to accommodate that.
I'm going to recognize the Ranking Member for an additional
question at this time.
Mr. Thanedar. So this visit in--that happened in May, is
that a routine visit?
Ms. Harvey. Yes, it was a--we consider it a routine visit.
Mr. Thanedar. Was it any different from the visit that
happened in 2018 under the Trump administration?
Ms. Harvey. I think they saw--the tour was much more
extensive in 2018 when they visited. They did visit the Federal
Air Marshal Training Center in 2018. They saw cargo operations,
and they received a briefing on how we do covert testing as
well.
Mr. Thanedar. So under the Trump administration, the Cubans
got more access and more information than what was provided
under the Biden administration in the most recent trip visit.
Is that right?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, they had a much fuller itinerary, yes.
Mr. Thanedar. Was Cuba a state sponsor of terrorism back
then in 2018 when they visited under Trump administration?
Ms. Harvey. They were not a state sponsor of terrorism
until 2021.
Mr. Thanedar. So, now, if--so the hope here it looks like
is that we stop them from coming to us, but we will still have
access to Cuba and this will not impact the security of
American passengers. Do you buy that?
Ms. Harvey. I think we need access and we need exchanges of
information.
I do understand the concern about state sponsors of
terrorism. The one thing I think people can agree on is if
Americans get on a flight here or anywhere in the world headed
for the United States that they expect that that flight is safe
and secure.
Mr. Thanedar. All right. Thank you so much.
I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from New York is recognized for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate it.
Ms. Harvey, is Cuba known to the United States as a state
sponsor of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Yes, sir, they are on the list.
Mr. LaLota. When did the United States designate Cuba as a
state sponsor of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Several times throughout history. Most
recently----
Mr. LaLota. Most recently, Ms. Harvey. When was the last
time that the United States designated Cuba a state sponsor of
terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. January 12, 2021.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. Ms. Harvey, you work for an agency
within the Department of Homeland Security?
Ms. Harvey. I do.
Mr. LaLota. Ms. Harvey, what is the mission of the United
States Department of Homeland Security?
Ms. Harvey. For--TSA's mission is freedom of movement----
Mr. LaLota. No. The question was, what is the mission of
the Department of Homeland Security?
Ms. Harvey. To keep Americans safe in the homeland.
Mr. LaLota. Specifically, ``with honor and integrity, we
will safeguard the American people, our homeland, and our
values'' is the mission for the Department for which you work.
Ms. Harvey, you work for the Transportation Security
Administration?
Ms. Harvey. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. That's an agency within DHS?
Ms. Harvey. Yes.
Mr. LaLota. At TSA, you have a responsibility to protect
our Nation's transportation systems?
Ms. Harvey. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. Including our airports?
Ms. Harvey. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. Approximately, what is the TSA's annual budget?
Ms. Harvey. I think it is about $11 billion.
Mr. LaLota. Approximately how many people does the TSA
employ?
Ms. Harvey. Sixty-two thousand.
Mr. LaLota. So, Ms. Harvey, keeping in mind the mission of
the Department for which you work--and, again, I'll remind you
since you didn't know it, safeguarding the American people, our
homeland, and our values--was it a good idea to invite agents,
officials from a state sponsor of terrorism to tour the Miami
International Airport?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, we took precautions to ensure we didn't
share any sensitive information. These visits are reciprocal
visits. They have access to see airports and operations.
Mr. LaLota. Can I take that as a yes, Ms. Harvey, that it
was a good idea?
Ms. Harvey. Yes.
Mr. LaLota. Was it also a good idea not to inform top
officials, including Members of Congress, with respect to
inviting agents from a state sponsor of terrorism?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, I've apologized that we did not fully
coordinate this visit.
Mr. LaLota. I appreciate that. The concern this committee
is expressing--and I recognize the Ranking Member's rebuttal to
it--is not taken in a vacuum. It's in a more global approach on
this administration, the Biden administration's approach to
some bad guys around the world.
Now, we've seen what has happened with Iran. We've seen
what's happened with China, with Russia, the withdrawal from
Afghanistan. Now we're seeing Cuba, a weak response to this
Government's interaction with bad folks from around the world.
That's the frame in which and that's the lens from which we're
looking at this.
Specifically, you've mentioned reciprocity, that
essentially--and if I'm wrong, please do correct me, ma'am--
that TSA, in your words, is inviting Cuban officials here
because it thinks we're getting something in return. Is that
generally what you're saying?
Ms. Harvey. We need access to their airports in order to
ensure the security of the flights.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. The issue and the greater issue that
this committee has, this Homeland Security Committee has, this
administration canceled something called Remain in Mexico, a
policy in which migrants who were trying to come into the
country had to wait in Mexico before they were paroled in, an
effective policy that this administration canceled and got
nothing in return.
So I'm going to ask you this: The criticism is on you right
now for allowing these officials from a state sponsor of
terrorism within our own borders to view our airports. I'm a
New Yorker and 9/11 killed too many Americans, and it happened
because folks penetrated our aviation system. That is why the
Homeland Security Department was formed. That's why you have a
mission. That's why we have a TSA.
So what did you get in return for allowing these officials
to come into our country to view our spaces that make us
vulnerable? What did you get in return?
Ms. Harvey. We have full access. While they spend a few
hours at our airports, we spend days at their airports
assessing everything from the fence line in and also access to
their security procedures, to ensure they are compliant with
standards and recommended practices.
Mr. LaLota. Would you agree--and if the Classified setting
is required--to explain more in depth what that exchange of
information entails?
This committee is very interested to know that we're not
getting--that we are getting the better end of the deal, that
when this administration does deals with Iran, Russia, the
Taliban, Mexico, that we get the better end of the deal.
Would you commit to revisiting us and tell us exactly what
it is that you got in exchange for allowing agents from a
Communist country, from a state sponsor of terrorism on
American soil?
Ms. Harvey. Absolutely. I'd be happy to brief you on that.
Mr. LaLota. I yield, Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman Mr. Garcia is recognized for 5 minutes for
questions.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think, obviously, this is an important discussion which I
certainly appreciate. I think obviously we can all have
different perspectives on our relationship in the U.S.-Cuba
really delicate relationship that exists here and globally.
Just to be clear, I think most folks believe the Cuban
government represses its people, that it has human rights
abuses. There's a 62-year policy of isolation and embargo, that
it's failed its people. Certainly, there are enormous political
and human rights concerns that I think we all share, regardless
of our political perspectives.
I also think there is some difference into how we may view
that relationship between Members of Congress and certainly the
way I view the relationship moving forward.
I also think it's important that we're careful about making
allegations that routine TSA inspections, of which there has
been prior agreements between governments, is somehow
undermining our national security. I think that is a very
serious accusation to make and it's one that needs to be
handled I think very carefully. Our U.S. security is enhanced
by the work the TSA does with all of our partners, and I just
want to thank you for that work.
Now, Ms. Fitzmaurice, am I correct that inspections of TSA
screening operations have occurred 6 times since 2011 under
both Democratic and Republican administrations?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Am I also correct that the last
inspection prior to the one that we're discussing today was in
August 2018?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Garcia. In August 2018, that was under President Trump.
Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I also know that in return for
letting Cuban inspectors check our U.S. airports, we're able to
have U.S. inspectors go to Cuban airports.
In fact, U.S. safety and security has benefited with far
more U.S. inspections over the years, and that's of benefit to
us in the United States. Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Garcia. Ms. Fitzmaurice, while there have been 6 Cuban
inspections since 2011, how many U.S. inspections of Cuban
airports have there been in that same time?
Ms. Harvey. Twenty-two.
Mr. Garcia. So there's been 6 inspections that they have
done. We have done 22. Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. That is correct.
Mr. Garcia. So these agreements are common with countries
where we have direct flights and certainly not particular to
Cuba alone. Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. That is correct.
Mr. Garcia. So these relationships and these inspections to
other countries are happening to many other countries, not just
Cuba, to reinforce that point. Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes, that is correct.
Mr. Garcia. So, Ms. Fitzmaurice, of U.S. airports with
flights to Cuba, which U.S. airport has both the most flights
and the most passengers?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. It's Miami.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I think that is obviously one of the
reasons why we're having this discussion today, but I want to
make that point, that it is the most traveled as it relates to
flights and direct flights. Americans are going to Cuba, to be
very, very clear about that.
Now, the Cuban inspectors who visited Miami were vetted by
both the State Department and Department of Homeland Security.
Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. That is correct.
Mr. Garcia. The tour was only about 2 to 3 hours, and the
inspectors were escorted the entire time. Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. Yes, they were escorted.
Mr. Garcia. Is it true that there was no sensitive security
information that was revealed during that tour?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. That is correct.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. That's good to hear.
Is there any reason at all to believe that this visit,
``allowed potential vulnerabilities to be exposed,'' or is
putting Americans at risk?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. No.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I'm glad. I want to clear that up as
well. In fact, much of the tour is also available to folks that
are going in and out of the airport. Is that correct?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. That is correct.
Mr. Garcia. So if we decide to start blocking Cuban
inspectors from coming here, wouldn't Cuba then just block U.S.
inspectors from visiting Cuba?
Ms. Fitzmaurice. That is certainly a concern.
Mr. Garcia. I think that is really the real crux of the
issue here. I trust our Homeland Security personnel, our State
Department personnel, the TSA, and I want ensure that they have
access to these Cuban airports and certainly these facilities
where we have countless Americans going to every single day
throughout the year. Americans are going to Cuba. We know this
to be true.
Now, 1.1 million travelers fly between the United States
and Cuba last year on American, JetBlue, United, Southwest, and
Delta flights. People-to-people exchanges are positives.
Families oftentimes get to be reunited, and I think this is a
good and healthy thing. For those that don't know and who want
to cut off travel from the United States to Cuba, attacking
routine TSA inspections is maybe a convenient way to achieve
those goals, but it's certainly not productive in our long-term
effort to ensure that Cuba becomes a strong democracy.
So thank you both for your testimony.
With that, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
I recognize myself for a couple of additional questions.
Just for the record, those across the country, maybe in the
back row that haven't heard, in 2018, under the Trump
administration when you had a somewhat similar visit, Cuba was
not a designated state sponsor of terror.
Just putting that out there, something you might want to
consider. Quite a difference. Now Cuba is a designated state
sponsor of terror.
If this is a designation that has any significance or
meaning to us, then we should be protective of the security
apparatus of our ports, our airports in this case, to protect
American travelers. If it doesn't have any significance, then
why have the designation?
If you're not going to protect the security apparatus of
our airports from careful review by state sponsors of terror,
then why have a designation of state sponsor of terror? Maybe
we're making too much of this. Maybe it's not a big deal to
this administration. It's certainly something that America
should consider.
So let me ask, during this extended tour of our TSA
facilities in the Miami Airport, were any precautions taken for
these Communists that came through our airport security
checkpoints? Like, did we take their phone or anything like
that, Ms. Harvey?
Ms. Harvey. Sir, we vet them before they come. They're
escorted the full time. They're screened before they have
access to our facilities. We did not share sensitive
information.
Mr. Higgins. Did we take their phones?
Ms. Harvey. To my knowledge, we did not take their phones.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So when myself and my colleagues, when we
enter a secured area, a SCIF, or when we go into a confidential
briefing in the auditorium, a large briefing for Members of
Congress, you know, we have to leave our phone outside, right?
I recently went to the D.C. jail to pray with inmates
there. To enter that facility, I had to leave my phone. So it's
not--I mean, don't look at me like I'm crazy. We have state
representatives selected by the Communist state of Cuba to come
into the United States and tour the secured areas of our
airports, and they're carrying their phones with them. They're
showing everything they've got to their colleagues, their
comrades in China or Russia.
So we think it's cool for them to have their phones?
American citizens, American Congressmen are not allowed to have
our phone in secure briefing areas, but this administration is
going to wave Communists into our major airports to tour the
security areas of our airports and they can keep their phones?
You know, this is why--I mean, ultimately, the Founders
gave us a solution. It's called elections.
Does the gentleman from California have any further
questions? We had had a second round of questioning, good sir.
If not, I believe we're prepared to close.
I thank the witnesses for their testimony. We do
respectfully appreciate you being here. There were some
difficult questions you fielded today and there was a certain
tone you had to tolerate. So we respectfully thank you for your
patience.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask that the
witnesses respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be held open for 10 days for you to receive those questions in
writing.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:05 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
