- EXAMINING THE ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT OF JULY 13

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EXAMINING THE ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT OF
JULY 13

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JULY 23, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-76

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
59-794 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Eric Swalwell, California
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           J. Luis Correa, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
August Pfluger, Texas                Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Nick LaLota, New York                Robert Garcia, California
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Colonel Christopher L. Paris, Commissioner, Pennsylvania State
Police:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Mr. Patrick Yoes, National President, Fraternal Order of Police:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    12

For the Record

Honorable Elijah Crane, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Arizona:
Article, The Washington Post, November 30, 2023................    57

Appendix

Questions From Honorable Clay Higgins for Christopher L. Paris...    83
Questions From Honorable Clay Higgins for Patrick Yoes...........    86

EXAMINING THE ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT OF JULY 13

----------

Tuesday, July 23, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark E. Green
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, McCaul, Guest, Bishop,
Gimenez, Pfluger, Garbarino, Greene, Gonzales, LaLota, Ezell,
D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell, Strong, Brecheen, Crane, Thompson,
Swalwell, Correa, Carter, Thanedar, Magaziner, Ivey, Goldman,
Garcia, Ramirez, Menendez, Suozzi, Kennedy, and Clarke.
Also present: Representative Kelly.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the committee in
recess at any point.
Before we begin today's hearing, I would like to take a
moment to recognize the loss of a friend to all of us on this
committee, Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee. Congresswoman
Jackson Lee was a longtime Member of this committee who always
felt passionately for her constituents and causes that she
believed would better the homeland.
I would like to yield to the Ranking Member for his remarks
that he would like to make.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Like all of us, we are deeply saddened by the loss was my
colleague, who was my seat mate for quite a while,
Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee. Needless to say, she will be
missed.
So I would like to at this point take a moment to honor the
legacy of Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee, who, as I said,
passed away last week. During her nearly 20 years on this
committee, she served on every subcommittee and left her mark
on all of them.
As every single one of us in this room know, there was no
more fierce an advocate than Congresswoman Jackson Lee, and she
directed her passion to making the homeland safer and more
secure. She was dedicated to oversight, asking pointed
questions of Government and private-sector witnesses alike and
pressing for hard answers. She was a prolific legislator who
took pride in writing her own legislation and improving the
bills of her colleagues through amendments.
Congresswoman Jackson Lee fought for resources for first
responders, help for those suffering the effects of natural
disasters, and immigration policies that reflect our values as
a Nation of immigrants.
Congresswoman Jackson Lee's reputation across Capitol Hill
was similarly impressive. Indeed, it often appeared she could
be in more than one place at a time. Within 1 hour, the
Congresswoman could be observed giving a floor speech,
participating in a committee hearing on a topic she cared
about, and then giving remarks at an event to support a cause.
She was a reluctant and relentless public servant, and every
cause she took on was better because of it. The Nation owes her
a debt of gratitude.
I am grateful that Congresswoman Jackson Lee decided to
lend her immeasurable energy and tenacity to our committee. Her
absence will be felt just as much as her presence, and we will
miss her dearly.
Today we continue our prayers for her family, friends, and
constituents.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I ask that all Members of the committee please rise and
join me in observing a moment of silence to honor our
Congresswoman Sheila Jackson Lee's memory.
[Moment of silence.]
Chairman Green. Thank you.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the assassination
attempt against former President Donald Trump that took place
July 13.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
On July 13, 2024, our Nation came within an inch of an
unmitigated tragedy and crisis. In Butler, Pennsylvania, a 20-
year-old gunman mounted a building in plain view of former
President Donald J. Trump's campaign rally, took aim, and fired
multiple rounds. At exactly the right moment, however,
President Trump turned his head to read a chart so that a
bullet which would have pierced his skull instead grazed his
ear.
Three others sitting behind President Trump on the stage
experienced a different fate. Fifty-year-old Corey Comperatore,
a father and former fire chief, was struck and killed. As one
outlet recently reported, this brave and loving man, ``spent
his final moments diving down in front of his family,
protecting them from the gunfire that rang out.'' He is
survived by his wife and two daughters. Two others, 57-year-old
David Dutch and 74-year-old James Copenhaver, were seriously
injured.
I would like to pause for a moment of silence in
remembrance of Corey and in prayer for the recovery of David
and James.
[Moment of silence.]
Chairman Green. Thank you, everyone.
This failed attempt on President Trump's life demands
urgent and comprehensive Congressional oversight. We must
understand how it happened to ensure that changes are made so
this never happens again.
That was the scene last Saturday where thousands of
Americans were exercising their Constitutional rights until
they were viciously attacked. Yet what we saw after those shots
rang out should also encourage everyone. We saw a leader under
fire rising up to show the attacker had failed. We saw brave
Secret Service agents who put their bodies in harm's way. We
see Americans across this Nation refuse to let this thwart
their participation in our democratic process.
At the same time, however, we also witnessed a massive
security failure by the Secret Service and the Department of
Homeland Security, the closest someone has been to taking the
life of a President or a Presidential candidate since Ronald
Reagan was shot in 1981, more than 40 years ago.
We must be committed in our determination to ensure that
this never happens again. That is why the House Committee on
Homeland Security is demanding full transparency and
accountability. That's why we made a trip to Butler,
Pennsylvania, yesterday to see the site for ourselves. I'm
grateful to the Ranking Member and the 11 other Members who
were able to come yesterday.
I want to share with the American people some of what we
saw yesterday. I, for one, was struck by how close the
unsecured building from which Thomas Crooks took his shot was
to the stage where President Trump was standing. What we saw
yesterday only raises more questions about how this roof was
unsecured. After several of our committee Members climbed on
the roof, let me tell you any excuse about the roof being too
steep to post a countersniper team up there is pure nonsense.
Protecting the President of the United States and
Presidential nominees is the Secret Service's mission. There
can be no room for mistakes. Unfortunately, that was not the
case here. In order to prevent a repeat of this, we must first
thoroughly gather and assess the facts, and that's why we're
here today, most importantly to obtain answers for the American
people from officials in the best position to provide those
answers.
Like tens of millions of Americans, our list of questions
is extensive. Why was the rooftop which the shooter fired
multiple rounds not secured? Who made the decision not to post
a countersniper personnel on the roof on a place better to
cover the roof? Were warnings from private citizens in
attendance about a shooter on top of the building heard by law
enforcement? If so, why was nothing done to respond? How did
the shooter access the rooftop despite reported Federal and
local law enforcement presence in and around the building? Were
there communication breakdowns that prevented law enforcement
officials from effectively communicating with each other in
response to alerts and threats? The shooter was spotted and
designated as a suspicious person prior to President Trump
taking the stage. Why wasn't President Trump moved to a secure
location until the Secret Service could investigate? The
shooter visited the rally site multiple times before the actual
rally. Reports indicate he even flew a drone on a
reconnaissance trip to the rally site on the day of the attack.
Why wasn't the site secure?
Following the rally, the Secret Service said that reports
President Trump security detail requested additional security
resources were false; however, then backtracked and told the
Washington Post that the Secret Service had learned new
information indicating the Secret Service headquarters may
have, in fact, denied some requests. Why? When were those
requests denied?
These are just some of the most pressing questions we have
and expected to hear answers from Secretary Mayorkas and
Director Wray and Director Cheatle.
We also expect to hear answers and questions about the
shooter's motivation and what the FBI has found in its
investigation, including information collected from the
shooter's various devices. Unfortunately and unacceptably, they
have refused to appear before the committee today.
Director Cheatle testified yesterday before another
committee, but many questions remain. Yesterday, she provided
wholly unacceptable responses to Members of the House Oversight
Committee and completely failed to the address lack of
confidence both sides of the aisle have in her leadership of
the Secret Service.
Her appearing before one committee yesterday also does not
absolve her of her responsibility before this committee.
In any case, make no mistake we will continue to push for
answers. While these Federal officials refuse to testify today,
we're grateful for the opportunity to speak with law
enforcement members about the events of that tragic day. Their
testimony will be critical to putting together this complicated
puzzle, understanding coordination efforts, and getting to the
truth about what happened.
Before I conclude, however, I have to urge the Ranking
Member to reconsider his legislation that was clearly intended
to strip Secret Service protection from President Trump. While
I understand the legislation would not have applied in this
instance, it was clear to everyone that it was directed toward
the former President. We all introduce messaging bills. This
one should be withdrawn.
Today's hearing is critical so we can ensure that our
children and grandchildren will grow up in a free Nation where
every American can participate in the democratic process. I
hope every Member will join me in getting to the bottom of what
happened so that it doesn't happen again.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentleman from
Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, MD
July 23, 2024
On July 13, 2024, our Nation came within an inch of unmitigated
tragedy and crisis. In Butler, Pennsylvania, a 20-year-old gunman
mounted a building in plain view of former President Donald J. Trump's
campaign rally, took aim, and fired multiple rounds.
At exactly the right moment, however, President Trump turned his
head to read a chart, so that a bullet which would have pierced his
skull instead grazed his right ear. Three others sitting behind
President Trump on the stage experienced a different fate.
Fifty-year-old Corey Comperatore, a father and former fire chief,
was struck and killed. As one outlet recently reported, this brave and
loving man ``spent his final moments diving down in front of his
family, protecting them from the gunfire that rang out.'' He is
survived by his wife and 2 daughters.
Two others, 57-year-old David Dutch and 74-year-old James
Copenhaver, were seriously injured.
I'd like to pause for a moment of silence in remembrance of Corey
and in prayer for the recovery of David and James.
Thank you everyone.
This failed attempt on President Trump's life demands urgent and
comprehensive Congressional oversight. We must understand how it
happened--and ensure changes are made--so this never happens again.
That was the scene last Saturday, where thousands of Americans were
exercising their Constitutional rights--until they were viciously
attacked.
Yet, what we saw after those shots rang out should also encourage
everyone. We saw a leader under fire rising up to show the attacker had
failed. We saw brave Secret Service agents who put their bodies in
harm's way. We see Americans across this Nation refuse to let this
thwart their participation in our democratic process.
At the same time, however, we also witnessed a massive security
failure by the Secret Service and the Department of Homeland Security--
the closest someone has been to taking the life of a President or
Presidential candidate since President Ronald Reagan was shot in 1981--
more than 40 years ago. We must be committed in our determination to
ensure this never happens again. That is why the House Committee on
Homeland Security is demanding full transparency and accountability.
That's why we made the trip to Butler, Pennsylvania, yesterday--to see
the site ourselves. I'm grateful to the Ranking Member and the 11 other
Members who were able to come yesterday.
I want to share with the American people some of what we saw
yesterday. I was struck by how close the unsecured building, from which
Thomas Crooks took his shot, was to the stage where President Trump was
standing. What we saw yesterday only raises more questions about how
this roof was unsecured. And after several of our committee Members
climbed on the roof, let me tell you--any excuse about the roof being
``too steep'' to post a counter-sniper team up there is pure nonsense.
Protecting the President of the United States and Presidential
nominees is the Secret Service's mission. There can be no room for
mistakes. Unfortunately, that was not the case here.
In order to prevent a repeat of this, we must first thoroughly
gather and assess the facts. That's why we are here today, most
importantly, to obtain answers for the American people from officials
in the best position to provide those answers. And like tens of
millions of Americans, our list of questions is extensive:

Why was the rooftop from which the shooter fired multiple
rounds not secured?

Who made the decision not to post counter-sniper personnel
on the roof?

Were warnings from private citizens in attendance about a
shooter on top of the building heard by Federal law
enforcement, and if so, why was nothing done to respond?

How did the shooter access the rooftop despite reported
Federal and local law enforcement presence in and around the
building?

Were there communications breakdowns that prevented law
enforcement officials from effectively communicating with each
other in response to alerts and threats?

The shooter was spotted and designated as suspicious prior
to President Trump taking the stage. Why wasn't President Trump
moved to a secure location until the Secret Service could
investigate?

The shooter visited the rally site multiple times before the
actual rally. Reports indicate he even flew a drone on a
reconnaissance trip to the rally site on the day of the attack.
Why wasn't the site secure?

Following the rally, the Secret Service said that reports
President Trump's security detail requested additional security
resources were false; however, then backtracked and told the
Washington Post that the Secret Service had learned ``new
information'' indicating the Secret Service headquarters may
have in fact denied some requests. Why, and when were those
requests were denied?
These are just some of the most pressing questions we have, and
expected to hear answers to from Secretary Mayorkas, Director Wray, and
Director Cheatle. We, also, expect to hear complete answers to
questions about the shooter's motivation and what the FBI has found in
its investigation, including information collected from the shooter's
various devices. Unfortunately and unacceptably, they have refused to
appear before this committee today. Director Cheatle testified
yesterday before another committee, but many questions remain.
Yesterday, she provided wholly unacceptable responses to Members of the
House Oversight Committee, and completely failed to address the lack of
confidence we have of her leadership of the Secret Service. Her
appearing before one committee yesterday also does not absolve her of
her responsibility to before this committee. In any case, make no
mistake, we will continue to push for answers.
While these Federal officials refused to testify today, we are
grateful for the opportunity to speak with State and local officials
and law enforcement members, some of whom were on-site and witnessed
the events of that tragic day. Their testimony will be critical to
putting together this complicated puzzle, understanding coordination
efforts, and getting to the truth about what happened.
Before I conclude, however, I have to urge the Ranking Member to
reconsider his legislation that was clearly intended to strip Secret
Service protection from former President Trump. While I understand the
legislation would not have applied in this instance, it was clear to
everyone that it was directed toward the former President. We all
introduce messaging bills; this one should be withdrawn.
Today's hearing is critical so we can ensure that our children and
grandchildren will grow up in a free nation where every American can
participate in the democratic process. I hope every Member will join me
in getting to the bottom of what happened--so it doesn't happen again.

Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to everyone.
It's been 10 days since a 20-year-old took his father's AR-
15 rifle to a campaign event in Butler, Pennsylvania, shot the
former President and two others, and took the life of an
innocent bystander who died protecting his family.
We're grateful for the brave law enforcement officers who
responded to the heinous attack, and our thoughts and prayers
continue to be with the victims and their families.
Let me be clear at the outset of today's hearing: The
Secret Service has a no-fail mission, and there must be answers
and accountability for what occurred. The security failures
must be identified and addressed to ensure that they never,
ever happen again. That work is already well under way.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Pennsylvania
State Police have active and on-going criminal investigations.
The Secret Service has begun an internal investigation. The
Secretary of Homeland Security, Alejandro Mayorkas, has
announced a bipartisan independent law enforcement review.
Later this week, Congress will vote on a resolution to
establish a task force on the attempted assassination.
This committee also has begun its oversight as well.
Yesterday, as the Chairman indicated, I joined a bipartisan
group of committee Members on a visit to the Butler Farm Show
Grounds. We walked the site where the attack occurred. We saw
the layout of buildings and infrastructure for ourselves. We
met with local officials and the county sheriff.
Today's hearing is the next step in our oversight, and I
hope it will be a productive one in keeping with the
seriousness of the issue at hand. We must understand what
happened in Butler and take corrective action to ensure the
security of every Secret Service protectee. I hope to hear from
our witnesses today about how State and local law enforcement
work with the Secret Service and other fellow agencies at these
events and where coordination and communication must be
improved.
While we can have policy differences as Americans, we must
be united in condemning political violence in all of its forms.
There simply is no place for it in our democracy. The attempted
assassination is another tragic example of the threat high-
powered weapons like the AR-15 pose to our communities and to
police officers trying to keep us safe. These weapons have
killed regular Americans from all walks of life, concert goers,
church goers, movie goers, grocery shoppers, workers, and, yes,
even school children. I'm an avid hunter and law-abiding gun
owner but believe strongly that we must do more to keep these
weapons off our streets and out of the wrong hands.
As we continue our oversight of the events of July 13, I
hope the committee will look at the terrible toll that these
weapons are taking and look at them and make some kind of
policy decisions to keep them out of the hands of a lot of
people who don't deserve them. They're military-style weapons.
We use them for our men and women to defend people on the
battlefield. Our neighborhoods and our communities are not
battlefields.
Mr. Chairman, I thank you for holding this hearing and the
witnesses for being here today.
With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 23, 2024
It has been 10 days since a 20-year-old took his father's AR-15
rifle to a campaign event in Butler, Pennsylvania, shot former
President Trump and 2 others, and took the life of an innocent
bystander who died protecting his family. We are grateful for the brave
law enforcement officers who responded to the heinous attack, and our
thoughts and prayers continue to be with the victims and their
families.
Let me be clear at the outset of today's hearing--the Secret
Service has a no-fail mission, and there must be answers and
accountability for what occurred. The security failures must be
identified and addressed to ensure they never, ever happen again. That
work is already well under way:

The Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Pennsylvania
State Police have active and on-going criminal investigations

The Secret Service has begun an internal investigation

Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas announced
a bipartisan, independent law enforcement review

And later this week, Congress will vote on a resolution to
establish a task force on the attempted assassination.
This committee has begun its oversight as well. Yesterday, I joined
a bipartisan group of committee Members on a visit to the Butler Farm
Show grounds. We walked the site where the attack occurred. We saw the
layout, buildings, and infrastructure for ourselves. We met with local
elected officials and law enforcement.
Today's hearing is the next step in our oversight, and I hope it
will be a productive one in keeping with the seriousness of the issue
at hand. We must understand what happened in Butler and take corrective
action to ensure the security of every Secret Service protectee. I hope
to hear from our witnesses today about how State and local law
enforcement work with the Secret Service and other Federal agencies at
these events and where coordination and communication must be improved.
While we may have policy disagreements and ideological differences,
as Americans we must be united in condemning political violence in all
its forms. There simply is no place for it in our democracy.
The attempted assassination of the former President is also another
tragic example of the threat high-powered weapons like the AR-15 pose
to our communities and to police officers trying to keep us safe.
These weapons have killed regular Americans from all walks of
life--concert-goers, church-goers, movie-goers, grocery shoppers,
office workers, and school children.
I am an avid hunter and law-abiding gun owner but believe strongly
that we must do more to keep these weapons off our streets and out of
the wrong hands. As we continue our oversight of the events of July 13,
I hope the committee will look at the terrible toll these weapons are
taking on our Nation.

Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
Without objection, the gentleman from Pennsylvania, Mr.
Kelly, is permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions to the
witnesses.
I will say that votes just got called, and so what we'll do
is let our witnesses do each of their 5 minutes, and then we'll
go into recess and come back with questions following the vote
series.
Does that sound good to you, Ranking Member?
Mr. Thompson. Yes.
Chairman Green. I'm pleased to have an important panel of
witnesses before us today, and I ask that our witnesses please
rise and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Green. Let the record reflect the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Colonel Christopher Paris serves as the commissioner for the
Pennsylvania State Police. In this role, he exercises command,
administrative, and fiscal authority over the Pennsylvania
State Police, the tenth-largest police agency in the United
States. Commissioner Paris has served in the Pennsylvania State
Police since his enlistment in 1999.
Thank you for the support getting to the site yesterday.
Colonel Paris. Yes.
Chairman Green. Mr. Patrick Yoes currently serves as the
president of the National Fraternal Order of Police. In this
role, Mr. Yoes leads the order and its more than 367,000 law
enforcement members in representing police officers and the
profession. Prior to taking his current role, Mr. Yoes served
an impressive 36 years as an active law enforcement officer.
I thank the witnesses for being here today, and I now
recognize Colonel Paris for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER L. PARIS, COMMISSIONER, PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE

Colonel Paris. Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson,
Homeland Security Committee Members, good morning. I am Colonel
Christopher Paris, commissioner of the Pennsylvania State
Police.
I would like to take this opportunity to offer our
condolences on the passing of Congresswoman Lee. I would also
like to take this opportunity to express our condolences to the
Comperatore family and offer our continued prayers to Mr.
Dutch, Mr. Copenhaver, as well as former President Trump as
they continue to recover.
I'm humbled to be here today and testify about a tragic
incident which has deeply impacted the Butler community, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and our Nation. I would like to
dedicate my testimony here today to the approximately 6,400
women and men, civilian and enlisted, of the PSP who work
tirelessly for Pennsylvania, and it is my honor to lead them.
I would like to offer a perspective that this is very much
an on-going, complex, and dynamic investigation, and each day,
as we arrive at day 10 today, I learn multiple new facts as we
uncover new information as the investigation progresses.
I'd like to offer a point of clarification affirmatively
about PSP's role. Prior to the shooting, our role was to
support the Secret Service with personnel and assets that they
requested. Our operation plan completed to fulfill this
responsibility consisted of 32 members, and we had two main
responsibilities, a motorcade operation for the transportation
with the Secret Service of former President Trump, as well as
manning and staffing security posts inside the secure area of
the Butler County Farm Show. Additionally, we provided two
marked cars with uniformed troopers outside of the secure
perimeter to provide roving duties, as the name implies,
responding to incidents that may occur as a large gathering of
people were moving to the venue.
After the shooting, very early after the shooting, I had a
conversation with the FBI wherein the FBI is the responsible
investigating agency for the attempted assassination of a
former President under Federal law. The same actions that led
to that also led to the homicide of 1 Pennsylvanian and the
attempted homicide of 2 additional, as well as the use of force
by the Secret Service countersniper to neutralize the threat of
Mr. Crooks, thus necessitating an officer-involved shooting
investigation.
So the PSP currently is conducting a criminal investigation
parallel to and in concert with the FBI to identify any and all
parties criminally culpable under Pennsylvania State law for
the homicide and for the attempted homicides. As I said, we are
additionally conducting an investigation into the U.S. Secret
Service countersniper who neutralized the threat posed by
Crooks after he opened fire.
I've been recently briefed about the Department of Homeland
Security's commissioned after-action report. I can tell you
that the Pennsylvania State Police will fully cooperate with
that investigation, and it's my hope that I can answer some
questions here today without sacrificing that on-going
investigation and prove to be of value to the committee.
Thank you very much.
[The prepared statement of Colonel Paris follows:]
Prepared Statement of Christopher L. Paris
July 23, 2024
introduction
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the House
Homeland Security Committee, I am Colonel Christoper L. Paris,
commissioner of the Pennsylvania State Police (PSP). I proudly enlisted
in the PSP in 1999 and was appointed commissioner in January 2023 and
confirmed unanimously by the Pennsylvania State Senate on March 8,
2023.
I would like to offer my condolences to the victims and acknowledge
the selfless actions of the PSP members at the July 13 rally of former
President Trump in Butler County, a tragic occasion that has deeply
affected the PSP, the Butler County community, the Commonwealth, and
the Nation. I appreciate the opportunity to join you today to discuss
the event as it pertains to the Pennsylvania State Police.
investigative responsibilities
The PSP is responsible for investigating 1 homicide and 2 attempted
homicides of rally attendees, both State crimes under Pennsylvania's
Crimes Code, as well as the use of force by a United States Secret
Service (USSS) sniper. Conversely, in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Federal Criminal Code, the FBI is responsible for
investigating the attempted homicide of former President Trump. Due to
these crimes stemming from the same sequence of events, the FBI and the
PSP have combined investigative efforts. To date, over 100 interviews
have been conducted and 1,000 pieces of evidence gathered. It is
important to note that PSP's investigative responsibility is completely
separate from and unrelated to any internal review of the USSS
protocols or procedures. As this is an on-going investigation, I may be
unable to comment on all aspects of it. Additionally, any information I
may offer today should be considered preliminary in nature and not
final.
department composition
The PSP is the tenth-largest police agency in the United States,
having jurisdiction in all political subdivisions within the
Commonwealth and providing full-time or part-time police service to
approximately 67 percent of the Commonwealth's municipalities, 61
percent of the Commonwealth's roadways, and 81 percent of the
Commonwealth's total land area. We are a full-service police department
composed of 4,562 sworn members and 1,616 civilian employees providing
various law enforcement services to communities and our local, county,
regional, State, and Federal partners.
The PSP operates independently from our local partners. The PSP
troopers are dispatched by our own police communications operators and
not by county 9-1-1 centers. The PSP houses and staffs its own forensic
service, research and development, special operations, training,
communications, and criminal intelligence assets.
PSP works cooperatively with full and part-time local law
enforcement agencies, but we do not have administrative or operational
oversight over local law enforcement agencies or county sheriff's
offices. PSP is dedicated to keeping our communities safe and inspiring
public trust and confidence through effective 21st Century policing
strategies, as the purpose of the PSP is to seek justice, preserve
peace, and improve the quality of life for all. This is attained
through our core values of honor, service, integrity, respect, trust,
courage, and duty. PSP's priority is always ensuring the safety of
every Pennsylvanian and everyone visiting our State. We have always and
will continue to work with our law enforcement partners at the local
and Federal level to protect public safety.
preplanned request for resources
The United States Secret Service (USSS) is the lead agency at
events involving its protectees. These types of events occur regularly
in Pennsylvania, and the PSP routinely provides resources and personnel
to assist the USSS. As a matter of protocol, the USSS advises the PSP
that an event is anticipated followed by a joint meeting and site visit
to ensure areas of responsibility are clearly identified for State and
local law enforcement.
On Friday, July 5, the USSS notified PSP that a rally for former
President Trump would take place at the Butler Farm Show Grounds. There
was an initial planning meeting with law enforcement agencies on
Monday, July 8 and PSP participated in a walk-through at the Butler
Farm Show Grounds on Thursday, July 11. The PSP provided all resources
requested by the USSS.
areas of responsibility
Thirty-two members of the PSP were assigned to various roles to
support the USSS. This included members providing escorts for the
motorcade route, staffing posts within the secured perimeter,
performing roving patrols and staffing the USSS command post. PSP was
not responsible for securing the building or property at AGR
International.
communications
The USSS established and managed the primary command post for
communications in the office of the Butler Farm Show. Command posts are
established to coordinate communications between different agencies
that may utilize different mechanisms for communication. A PSP
supervisor was stationed in the USSS command post to relay any
communications made by PSP personnel to our local and Federal partners.
conclusion
Today's hearing is one of many inquiries about the tragic events of
July 13. Our investigation into the shooting is in process and
interviews in this investigation remain on-going. Again, any
information I may offer today should be considered preliminary in
nature and not final. I thank you for the opportunity to provide
clarity about the activities and the mission of the Pennsylvania State
Police and I look forward to answering any questions you may have.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Colonel Paris.
I now recognize Mr. Yoes for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PATRICK YOES, NATIONAL PRESIDENT, FRATERNAL ORDER
OF POLICE

Mr. Yoes. Good morning, Chairman Green, Representative
Thompson, and distinguished Members of the House Committee on
Homeland Security. My name is Patrick Yoes, and I'm the
national president of the Fraternal Order of Police, the
Nation's oldest and largest law enforcement labor organization.
I would like to first take this opportunity to recognize a
long-term Member of Congress and a Member of this committee,
Sheila Jackson Lee, for her contribution to great work done
here in Washington.
I want to thank you for providing me with an opportunity to
appear before you today on behalf of the 377,000 members of the
Fraternal Order of Police as this committee examines the
attempted assassination of former President Donald Trump just
10 days ago.
Before I begin my testimony, I want to express my
admiration for the Secret Service agents who jumped into action
and protected the former President. Rarely does the public
witness just how selfless these agents are placing themselves
between flying bullets and their protectee. They, along with
State and local law enforcement officers on the scene that day,
demonstrated extraordinary courage.
I also want to extend my thoughts and prayers to the family
of Corey Comperatore and the others who were injured that day.
My testimony today will not be specific to the attempted
assassination of President Trump. Instead, I hope to provide a
perspective of State and local law enforcement when providing
support and assistance to these events. We must remember that
the law enforcement mission is a shared mission and agencies at
every level routinely cooperate and corroborate with one
another.
Law enforcement in our country is highly decentralized.
With more than 90 percent of services provided by State and
local agencies through more than 18,000 different
jurisdictions, State and local agencies would not be effective
without the support of their Federal colleagues, and our
Federal partners would be unable to perform their functions
without the assistance of State and local agencies. Anyone
suggesting that the United States Secret Service not rely on
State and local agencies at these events is simply uninformed.
At these events, local law enforcement works under the
direction of the United States Secret Service which must ensure
that all agencies involved at the event have a clear
understanding of their roles and responsibility. Law
enforcement agencies provide valuable community insight that
can be crucial in identifying potential risks and issues. They
contribute resources, personnel, and support that augments the
capabilities of the U.S. Secret Service to ensure that there's
adequate staffing and all contingencies are covered. Local law
enforcement should be part of a command post and communication
center to facilitate real-time information sharing and rapid
response to emerging situations. This collaborative planning
process ensures that all potential risks are identified and
mitigated and that local officers are fully integrated into
timely and coordinated responses.
Our presence is a vital part of the security matrix, but
the United States Secret Service ultimately is responsible and
is the final arbiter of any security matters affecting their
protectee and the public. Clear and constant communication
between participating agencies and the United States Secret
Service is crucial to ensure the security of the protectee and
everyone at the event.
All this said, there were critical failures of security at
the event in Butler. It is important that this--that we learn
from these failures to better provide safety and security for
our leaders moving forward and the public also attending these
events. In the coming election, we will have extraordinary
challenges placed on our Secret Service as they provide
security at sites all across this Nation over the next 4.5
months. I'm confident the State and local law enforcement
agencies are well-prepared and ready to assist the United
States Secret Service in this mission.
I want to pause for a moment, and I want to flag another
issue that often creates unnecessary obstacles for agencies
within--who are working together in real-time, and that being
interoperable communications. In the aftermath of 9/11,
Congress wisely established FirstNet to address the voice and
data communication failures faced by officers, partners, and
first responders.
To facilitate full use of FirstNet's advanced capabilities,
we strongly urge Congress to ensure that our Nation's public
safety organizations at all levels of government are aware of
and fully leverage the critical communication life line.
Further, Congress and the FCC must all take all necessary
steps to guarantee FirstNet's continued success and evolution.
In conclusion, close collaboration between Secret Service
and their advance teams and in local law enforcement agencies
provide indispensable support that ensures the safety and
security of our Nation's leaders and the public. These
collaborative efforts should exemplify the very best in our
interagency cooperation and underscore our collective
commitment to national security.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to appear here
today, and I'd be more than happy to answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Yoes follows:]
Prepared Statement of Patrick Yoes
23 July 2024
Good morning, Mr. Chairman, Representative Thompson, and
distinguished Members of the House Committee on Homeland Security. My
name is Patrick Yoes, and I am the national president of the Fraternal
Order of Police, the Nation's oldest and largest law enforcement labor
organization. Thank you for providing me with the opportunity to appear
before you today on behalf of the more than 373,000 members of the FOP
as the committee examines the attempted assassination of former
President Donald J. Trump just 10 days ago in Butler, Pennsylvania.
Before I begin my testimony, I want to express my thanks and
admiration for the Secret Service agents and officers who leapt into
action to protect the former President. Rarely does the public get the
opportunity to see just how selfless these agents and officers are--
placing themselves between flying bullets and their protectee. They,
along with the State and local officers on the scene, demonstrated
extraordinary heroism.
I also want to extend my condolences to the family of Corey
Comperatore, the retired fire chief who was killed while protecting his
family, and to the others who were seriously injured by this would-be
assassin.
My testimony today will not be specific to the attempted
assassination of former President Trump. Instead, I hope to provide the
perspective of the role played by State and local law enforcement when
we provide support and assistance to the U.S. Secret Service (USSS) at
an event or appearance of one of their protectees. As I have stated
publicly after the incident in Butler, we must remember that the law
enforcement mission is a shared mission and law enforcement at every
level routinely cooperates and collaborates with one another. Law
enforcement in our country is highly decentralized--more than 90
percent of U.S. law enforcement are State and local officers in more
than 18,000 different jurisdictions. They would not be as effective at
their jobs without the support of the Federal colleagues, and our
Federal partners would be unable to perform their functions without the
assistance of State and local agencies. Those in the media who suggest
that USSS should not rely so heavily on State and local agencies at
events like the one in Butler simply do not know what they are talking
about.
Working events like a rally featuring a former President or major
Presidential candidate, requires a robust and coordinated security
effort among Federal, State, and local agencies. The USSS is tasked
with leading these efforts, but the success of these operations relies
heavily on the seamless integration and cooperation of local law
enforcement agencies. The partnership between the USSS and local law
enforcement is founded on mutual respect, trust, and a shared
commitment to protecting our Nation and its leaders.
Prior to an event like the one in Butler, USSS advance teams meet
with local agencies and develop the logistical and security plans for
the event. Local law enforcement agencies can provide local knowledge
and support. This may include coordinating with local emergency
services, managing traffic, and ensuring the security of motorcade
routes. This collaborative planning process ensures that all potential
risks are identified and mitigated. Clear and constant communication
between participating local agencies and the USSS advance teams is
crucial to ensure the security of the protectee and everyone at the
event. Local law enforcement agencies have a long history of
cooperating with the USSS on events like this and the Secret Service
also works well and often with their local partners--the event in
Butler was no exception.
Before, during, and after these events, local law enforcement works
under and at the direction of the USSS, which must ensure that all
agencies involved in the event have a clear understanding of their
roles and responsibilities. The local agencies contribute resources,
such as personnel and support, to augment the capabilities of the USSS
to ensure that the event is adequately staffed and that all
contingencies are covered. Our presence is a vital part of the security
matrix, but the USSS is ultimately responsible and the final arbiter on
any and all security matters affecting their protectee and the public.
During these events, local law enforcement officers should--when
possible--be part of the command posts and communication centers to
facilitate real-time information sharing and rapid response to emerging
situations. It also ensures that local officers are fully integrated
into the overall security operation as the event unfolds to ensure a
coordinated response.
I want to digress for a moment here to flag another issue that
often creates unnecessary obstacles for agencies working together in
real time--interoperable communications. Congress addressed this issue
in part after 9/11 by securing additional spectrum resources for public
safety by providing a fully operable and dedicated, nation-wide
network, the nation-wide Public Safety Broadband Network--also known as
FirstNet. Congress and the Federal Communications Commission should do
everything in their power to ensure FirstNet continues to be a success.
In conclusion, the partnership between local law enforcement and
the U.S. Secret Service is critical to keeping everyone safe at these
events. Close collaboration between USSS advance teams and protective
details with local law enforcement agencies provide indispensable
support that ensures the safety and security of our Nation's leaders
and the public. These collaborative joint efforts should exemplify the
best of interagency cooperation and underscore our collective
commitment to national security.
All of this said, there was a critical failure of security at the
event in Butler. An armed man was able to access an ideal shooting
perch with a clear line of sight of the protectee--former President
Trump. The would-be assassin killed 1 man, seriously injured 2 others,
and very nearly assassinated the former President. It is important that
we learn how and why this security failure occurred to ensure that
future events better provide for the safety and security for our
leaders and the public attending these events. From a law enforcement
and security standpoint, the coming election will be an extraordinary
challenge for the Secret Service. They will be advancing and planning
security for the candidates at sites all across the Nation for the next
4\1/2\ months. In making and executing these plans to protect the
candidates and event attendees, they will need to rely on State and
local law enforcement to ensure the protective mission is successful. I
am confident that our State and local agencies are well-prepared to
assist the USSS in their mission by establishing and maintaining mutual
respect and trust among the agencies, their leaders, and the men and
women on the front line.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today. I am
happy to answer any questions you may have.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Yoes.
Colonel Paris, I just want to make sure I say this. You
feel comfortable at any time to say, ``I'm sorry. This could
compromise the investigation.'' These guys get this all the
time. ``This is Classified information.'' They're accustomed to
that. So just--you know, they're going to be cool with that, I
assure you.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority when we
come back from votes, but we will take a recess and return 10
minutes after the last vote.
[Recess.]
Chairman Green. The committee will come to order.
Members will be recognized in order of their seniority for
their 5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of
questioning may be called after all Members have been
recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Colonel Paris, typically these events--do they typically
have 2 control rooms or 2 sort-of tactical operations areas
where the Secret Service is in their sort-of spot and the local
law enforcement is in their sort-of command center? Is that how
it's typically done?
Colonel Paris. I would say, from my experience and State
Police operations, to include this event as planned in our
operations plan, we had integrated communications by having our
PSP personnel in the Secret Service command post.
Chairman Green. So your person was in there, in that
command post on this event?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Chairman Green. Do you know if the local sheriff had
anybody or the deputies that were also provided, the local
guys?
Colonel Paris. I would be remiss at this point to say I
knew the exact----
Chairman Green. OK.
Colonel Paris [continuing]. Listing of everyone in that
command post.
Chairman Green. OK. The sheriff yesterday told us he did
not. Would you expect him to have had somebody there?
Colonel Paris. So I would say generally there's a lot of
talk about interoperability in communications. The State
Police, for example, operate our own State-wide radio network.
So we have the ability to--if we have an incident, a long
protracted incident, for example, where we need to patch other
agencies in, we have the capability to do that. However, Secret
Service, for example, maintains some additional encrypted
communication. So the best way to integrate unified command----
Chairman Green. Is physically present in the command site?
Colonel Paris. Right. That would be our----
Chairman Green. Yes, that's how the Army does it, the
military does it.
Colonel Paris. I would expect our commanders to have
personnel in there so that we could have radio communication as
well as a redundancy in the operations plan with a telephonic
backup.
Chairman Green. Do you know if in this particular case--I
mean, normally they sweep these sites with dogs. Was a K-9 team
used here for this event?
Colonel Paris. I do not know. I have not seen the Secret
Service operations plan. I've asked for it. I've yet to receive
it. I did double-check. That was something that PSP could
typically offer to the Secret Service if they requested it. I
did verify that, in this event, we did not provide any dogs.
Chairman Green. OK. As I understand it, there wasn't one,
but you'd expect one in a situation like this?
Colonel Paris. So I want to be clear that, when the Secret
Service interfaces with the State Police for whatever protectee
and level of protection they're endeavoring to provide, the
Secret Service is the lead agency.
So, as per your earlier statement of 18,000 law enforcement
agencies across the United States, it would be very difficult,
I would assert, for the Secret Service to operate all across
the United States and have each individual agency telling the
Secret Service how the operation should be run. They're the
lead agency. If that was something that their protocols called
for during the initial meeting when preliminary steps and
agencies were brought together, that would be something that
would be discussed typically.
Chairman Green. The AGR building, did your guys on the
ground there ever voice concerns to the Secret Service for not
putting somebody on that building?
Colonel Paris. So I suppose the best sequence of events
that I can give you is that PSP was notified by email on July 5
about this event. There was an initial planning meeting where
we had commanders present on Monday, July 8. So, over Tuesday
the 9th and Wednesday the 10th, those commanders that we
designated, basically our orders are, from the front office, my
team on down, we work collaboratively with the Secret Service,
collaborate, give them what we can.
The final walk-through occurred on the 11th. Present at
that meeting were the 2 commanders that were tasked with both
staffing the security checkpoints on the interior of the secure
perimeter as well as the commander who was going to be in
charge of the motorcade. But, in addition to that, a PSP area
commander was on that walk-through holding the rank of major--
--
Chairman Green. Could you share a little bit of insight--I
appreciate the time line, but could you share a little bit,
because I only have about a minute----
Colonel Paris. I apologize.
Chairman Green. Yes, specific to the AGR building.
Colonel Paris. So, on that walk-through, our area commander
asked specifically who was responsible for the AGR building,
and we were told that Butler ESU was responsible for that area
by several Secret Service agents on that walk-through.
Chairman Green. OK. All right. One last quick question.
Real quick--I mean, I'll let you comment about it--the slope of
the roof, would that have prevented a sniper from being up
there?
Colonel Paris. I don't believe so, sir.
Chairman Green. OK. Thank you.
I yield.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much.
Commissioner Paris, you talked about your tenure with the
Pennsylvania State Police. Have you worked other events where a
Presidential candidate or the President has come to
Pennsylvania?
Colonel Paris. Yes, I have, sir.
Mr. Thompson. So this would not have been an unusual
occurrence to participate?
Colonel Paris. I ran the numbers. We typically do about 20
missions a year, the low 20's a year in a regular year. We're
already in the low 20's this year being an election year. So
our commanders in the field who interface with the Secret
Service to plan and provide support are on a routine basis. I
wouldn't say an everyday occurrence, but a fairly routine
basis.
Mr. Thompson. OK. So can you walk us through the
Pennsylvania State Police's interaction with the Secret
Service? You kind-of started off giving us the point of contact
that an occurrence was about to happen. Was there anything
particular about the Butler, Pennsylvania, event that stands
out as regular, irregular, or anything?
Colonel Paris. I would say not to my knowledge. Based on
our discussions with our commanders who planned it, it
progressed along a normal time line. They attempted to give the
Secret Service and I believe provided the Secret Service with
everything they were requested.
Mr. Thompson. So your role on that day in terms of the
State Police was what?
Colonel Paris. So we were, I would classify it as, in a
support role, and the two main areas of responsibility for the
State Troopers that were assigned that day were those
participating in the motorcade to get former President Trump
from his point of landing to the venue in Butler County and
back, with several other additional entities that were
requested by the Secret Service.
Then, on-site, we had to staff security posts that were
determined by the Secret Service. All of those posts were
inside of the secured perimeter of the Butler County Farm Show.
Mr. Thompson. I guess I was one of those individuals who
traveled to Butler. Just for my information, have you had any
interaction with the FBI or anything as they look into the
investigation as to what you or your men observed on that day?
Colonel Paris. Yes. We're conducting an investigation
largely in concert with and parallel to the Bureau because the
actions of Crooks have Federal legal implications and State law
implications.
Mr. Thompson. OK. Thank you.
President Yoes, in your comments, you talked about the need
for communication. You talked about FirstNet. So we have
Federal, State, and local law enforcement at an event like what
we're talking about in Butler, but in our conversation with
some of the locals, not State Police, but the sheriff's
department and the chief of police in Butler yesterday, those
individuals did not have communication with actually State
Police or Secret Service.
Would that, in your professional opinion, be a
vulnerability for managing an event like this?
Mr. Yoes. Well, I think we can go back to 9/11 when we
identified at that time that the inoperability of different
agencies to be able to communicate really was a hindrance.
There's an infrastructure in place now to address these, you
know, inoperabilities; but, at the same time, they're not
always utilized in every event. I do not have any direct
knowledge whether that was the issue here, but I can tell you
there's a common issue in law enforcement in an ability for our
agencies not to be able to communicate, not that the technology
is not necessarily there; it's because they're not always
incorporated.
Mr. Thompson. Yes. You know, we passed legislation
mandating obviously FirstNet interoperability, and we tied
funding to make sure that that happened. But here we are
looking at this situation, and we picked up some valuable
information that we're still not where we need to be on that.
I would think that, Colonel, the role of the State Police
is invaluable, but it appeared in talking with some of the
local officials--as you say, it's just--you're not primary.
You're kind-of secondary in that role--that we need to somehow
as a committee look at how do we enhance the overall mission so
that we have no gaps.
So I look forward to the work of this committee identifying
the gaps, look at the after-action review to close those gaps.
So, just to tell you, No. 1, Butler, Pennsylvania, has no
permitting process for events of that size. So you can announce
it and hold it, and local government doesn't really have
anything to do with it. We were assured by local government
that they would try to fix that, that they say we have to be
more involved in events of this size so that if this was not
the best venue, then that permitting could have gotten engaged
and suggested an alternate venue, those kind of things.
So thank you very much.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Chairman McCaul for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, I want to thank you for the site visit that we
had in Butler, Pennsylvania, yesterday. It was very eye-
opening, educational. I agree with the Ranking Member's
comments in terms of, you know, after 9/11, connecting the dots
in Federal, State, and local working together was the answer. I
led a Joint Terrorism Task Force when I worked at the
Department of Justice, and I was also involved in national
security events. So I kind-of know how these things operate.
My question is to Colonel Paris. It's standard practice
that the lead Federal agency will come in and meet with the
State and locals regarding the security plan before the event,
prior to the event. Sir, did you participate or did your
department participate in that?
Colonel Paris. So I did not participate. As I stated
earlier, there were 2 commanders dedicated to those 2 primary
roles, the motorcade and the staffing of the posts on-site
within the secure perimeter, as well as State Police area
commanders.
So, just as a way of background, our area commander that
covers multiple troops in that area of the State, out of nearly
5,000 troopers, there are only 4 area commanders. So that major
was present for the walk-through on the 11th.
Mr. McCaul. Were your troopers assigned inside the
perimeter or outside?
Colonel Paris. Inside.
Mr. McCaul. Inside. Was the outside within the jurisdiction
of the local police?
Colonel Paris. So, just as a point of clarification, there
were 2--on the operations plan, there were 2 marked cars that
were assigned roving duties, which would primarily, as the name
implies, be outside of the secure perimeter on roadways
responding to incidents that potentially could occur as a
result of a congregation of that many people, but----
Mr. McCaul. So we saw--we walked into--we actually walked
on to the roof where the sniper was, a clear eyes on, clear
shot of the President. A tree blocked the Secret Service's
view. This kid that's under investigation, he had a drone out
there days prior, got an aerial surveillance of the premises.
That position was probably the best position outside the
perimeter as far as I could tell.
There's also a water tower that would have been a perfect
spot for Secret Service. Were you aware of any presence of
Secret Service in this water tower?
Colonel Paris. I was not.
Mr. McCaul. You're aware of what I'm talking about?
Colonel Paris. I am familiar. I physically flew out there
on Saturday the 13th. It was still very much an active crime
scene, so I did not walk the roofs----
Mr. McCaul. OK.
Colonel Paris. But I do know----
Mr. McCaul. On the adjacent building, we got a tour of that
as well where I believe the local police were positioned. There
were 3 windows. The first one had a plain view of where the
sniper would be. However, they were stationed in the second and
third windows.
Are you familiar with this at all?
Colonel Paris. I am not from the standpoint that I have not
seen the Secret Service's operations plan, and our deference
would be to them to assign Butler ESU according to----
Mr. McCaul. Right. They were apparently local
countersnipers. Do you know if they should have been assigned
to the rooftop?
Colonel Paris. I would defer to the--there are many ways
that you can cover. Obviously positioning people on the rooftop
would be one of those.
Mr. McCaul. No. You know, going to the actual site, way too
close. He should never have been allowed to get on top of that
building. I don't know how--and I know he is on your radar
inside the perimeter. You seem to have lost him, and somehow he
finds his way up to the rooftop unimpeded until a local law
enforcement officer crawls on top of the roof and looks at him,
and he points his AR-15 at him.
My question to you is, what was the communication like that
day? Typically Secret Service has one channel for them, the
other channel for State and locals. Was there any communication
to identify, ``Hey, this is not a local police officer; this
is, in fact, an unidentified individual on the rooftop''? Was
that communicated to the Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. So my belief, as I sit here today, is that
we did have integrated communications from members that were
inside the Secret Service command post. Completely deferential
to the on-going nature of the investigation, I have an
understanding of a sequence of events, but I would like to draw
a distinction between a sequence of events meaning----
Mr. McCaul. So one theory is that they thought maybe he was
an officer, but then they find out he's not. The thing I find
interesting is that the countersniper Secret Service within
seconds of the shots on the President kills the suspect. That
tells me he had him in his sights. Maybe he's not aware of who
the individual was, was not identified. But I know within
seconds after the shots were fired at the President the threat
was eliminated.
You know, last--I just want to end with this. This was
actually astonishing, and I want to get your confirmation. He
had a detonation device with him, and two of his bombs were
located in his car, and it was parked on the other side of the
perimeter. It seems to me a good theory would be that he was
going to kill the President and then detonate his car, causing
a diversion, and then escape from the crime scene.
Are you aware of any of this?
Colonel Paris. I am aware of the presence of the device on
his person. We were aware of that very early on, and that was a
serious tactical consideration in the hours--in the immediate
aftermath as we worked that crime scene. But to your point
about his ultimate theory or what his ultimate motivation was,
that remains under investigation.
Mr. McCaul. He had a rangefinder on him as well. That's a
big red flag.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Swalwell
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Swalwell. Violence has never been the answer, and I
thank both of you for your service in law enforcement and
testifying today.
Violence has never been the answer, not on a certain day in
January and not on a day in July.
I remember I was 12 years old and my dad--I was on the way
to school, a cold day in January, and my dad was a cop, stopped
me as I was about to leave, and he wanted me to watch the
television. His guy had just lost a Presidential election, and
some young kid from Arkansas was about to be sworn in as the
new President of the United States. My dad was burned. He
really liked George Bush. He did not like Bill Clinton. But he
told me to stop and watch the television coverage of the
inauguration because he said, ``Look at that. Look at that,
son.'' He said, ``That's what makes us so special. My guy lost.
This guy is getting sworn in, and not a shot has been fired.
That's what makes us different.''
Violence has never been the answer. It's despicable that
somebody thought they could take a shot at the former President
and change the course of history.
We don't know much about the political beliefs of this
individual. We know he was a 20-year-old male, registered
Republican, gun enthusiast, also had researched the DNC, also
had researched President Biden, also had researched Speaker--
Leader--I'm sorry--Hakeem Jeffries. We don't know what led this
mad man to try and kill the former President, but it's
despicable. The people who went to that rally deserved to hear
without violence the candidate that they were supporting.
Commissioner Paris, I'm sorry this happened to your
community. I'm sorry this happened to the people who--the
person who died and the persons who have been wounded.
I just want to understand, though, because we are a country
that is armed to the teeth, how many firearms were within the
perimeter, back-of-the-envelope estimate?
Colonel Paris. The only firearms of which I'm aware that
were inside the perimeter were those in the possession of law
enforcement.
Mr. Swalwell. Would you estimate that was hundreds or
dozens?
Colonel Paris. I would only feel comfortable, not having
seen the Secret Service operations plan, about the PSP members
that were inside of the perimeter.
Mr. Swalwell. OK. How many rounds did the shooter fire
before he was killed, do you know?
Colonel Paris. I believe that the number is 8. Eight
casings have been recovered.
Mr. Swalwell. I also understand the emotions around this
assassination attempt, but I'm not going to allow some--and I
say ``some.'' The Chairman of this committee is a serious
legislator who wants answers. Some are not, and some are trying
to rewrite what has happened in our country over the last 8
years, erase what happened in this building on January 6.
One Member of this body in Congress said, ``The Republican
district attorney in Butler County should immediately file
charges against Biden for inciting assassination.''
Another said, ``Congressman Scalise, Justice Kavanaugh, and
now President Trump--for years, Democrats and their allies have
recklessly stoked fears calling President Trump and others
threats to democracy.''
Another said, ``Democrats and liberals in the media have
called Trump a fascist. They've compared him to Hitler. They've
tried to lock him up.''
A radical shift in what has really happened in our country.
In fact, the former President's current Vice Presidential
nominee is the one who said that Donald Trump might be
America's Hitler, might be a cynical A-hole, cultural heroin
he's responsible for, noxious and reprehensible.
I join the Chairman in seeking unity as the anecdote to
political violence, unity as the anecdote to political
violence. But we're not going to erase and rewrite and allow
some to reincarnate themselves as victims of what happened. We
can't let this ever happen again. We must arm law enforcement
and have better security perimeters. But, in this country,
violence has never been the answer.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I'll now recognize the Vice Chairman of the committee, Mr.
Guest, for his 5 minutes. Mr. Guest for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Gentlemen, thank you for both being here today.
You both classified as what happened on July 13 as critical
failures. I would expand that and say it was a colossal
failure, and I think that you both have stated that the
ultimate responsibility for what occurred that day falls upon
the Secret Service.
Colonel Paris. I know that your officers were there in a
support role. You were following the operational plans set out
by Secret Service. You testified that the primary
responsibilities for your officers were motorcade and then the
interior perimeter and that you had 2 roving officers there,
really just out there to provide support if necessary and
called upon.
You mentioned earlier that you went to the scene on the
13th, and thank you for going there and being a part of that.
You also testified earlier that you have not been provided the
operational plan by the Secret Service. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. That's correct that we haven't received it
yet.
Mr. Guest. When did you request that?
Colonel Paris. I'd have to go back and check. In the
earlier part of the investigation, that was just something that
we ask for as a matter of course. We were not told no. We just
to date have yet to receive it.
Mr. Guest. That would be important, would it not, if you're
going to investigate what happened on that day? The operational
plan, that is the starting point for all of the events that
later transpired. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. Well, I don't want to overstate. The role of
the State Police here is to investigate the 3 Pennsylvanians
that were shot and the use of force by the Secret Service
countersniper. To the extent that we need to know the sequence
of events leading up to that, we obviously would like to know
as much as we can, but it's not our role to do an after-action
report on the sequence----
Mr. Guest. Well, but all of the shootings occurred
simultaneously. The same shot that struck President Trump
shot--1 of those shots killed 1 of your fellow citizens, and 2
others were injured. So you can't separate the two. This is one
investigation into a shooting that occurred in which 1 of your
citizens were killed, 2 more were fatally injured, and which
the President himself was struck.
So the fact that the Secret Service is stonewalling your
investigation, that they're not providing you this
information--we saw the testimony yesterday from the Secret
Service director where she refused to answer questions and has
now resigned; I find that to be especially troubling. We have
the Secret Service not wanting to cooperate with Congress, not
wanting to cooperate with a fellow law enforcement agency. I
personally find that troubling.
As we look--and as you are aware from speaking to your
officers that were there physically on the scene that day, did
Secret Service, did they have any drones in the air so that
they could have an eye in the sky and see what was happening,
to your knowledge?
Colonel Paris. To my knowledge, I'm not aware that they
were using drones, but----
Mr. Guest. And----
Colonel Paris [continuing]. I haven't seen the operations
plan.
Mr. Guest. Does your agency have drones?
Colonel Paris. We do maintain some drone capabilities.
Mr. Guest. So, if the Secret Service would have requested
your agency to fly drones that day, you would have been able to
do so. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. We would have endeavored to try to honor
that request, yes, sir.
Mr. Guest. You testified that you've been to the scene of
the shooting. Did you see the water tower that's located
approximately 100 yards from the building where the shooter
fired those shots?
Colonel Paris. I did see it, sir.
Mr. Guest. Would it have been possible to have put an
officer--and, again, that's not your responsibility to do that.
That's the Secret Service's. But would it have been possible to
put an officer there looking down on the scene of the rally and
the building where the shooting occurred; would that have been
something that would have been possible to do?
Colonel Paris. Presuming that there's a way to access the
water tower. I didn't walk over. I was probably several hundred
yards away, so I can't say that I could----
Mr. Guest. If you had an officer up there, that would have
provided you a strategic viewpoint of the events that were
transpiring below, correct?
Colonel Paris. I would agree tactics--height gives a
tactical advantage, yes, sir.
Mr. Guest. Now I want to ask you also about the roof where
the shooter was located. You said you didn't go on the roof,
but you viewed the roof. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Guest. The Secret Service director, prior to her
resignation, said that she did not put anybody on the roof
because it had a sloped roof that would have created a safety
concern.
Now, I was in Butler, Pennsylvania, yesterday with many
Members of this committee. My fellow member, Carlos Gimenez,
who is 70 years old--and I guess he doesn't mind me saying that
since he has put that information out there--there is video of
him easily traversing the roof, walking across the roof, and
even though he is some 50 years older than the shooter.
So my question is, do you agree with the assessment of the
former Secret Service director that the roof was so sloped that
it created safety concerns?
Colonel Paris. I can't agree with that statement, sir.
Mr. Guest. All right. Thank you very much.
I'm out of time, and I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Correa for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the Ranking Member for putting together the trip to Butler
yesterday. Good eye-opening trip.
Colonel Paris, thank you for hosting us out there.
I certainly hope that the Secret Service does cooperate
with us in our investigation as to what went wrong. The Secret
Service has to be 100 percent correct all the time. They're a
small force, 2,300, plus maybe 1,300. So you, local, State,
local police officers are the force multiplier. To hear you say
that miscommunication was an element here is unacceptable.
We talked earlier to the fact that FirstNet was put
together post-9/11. That's a little over 20 years ago. To hear
that we still don't have the technology for people on the
ground to talk with each other is of concern.
It's even a greater concern to me when I was taking a tour
of that farm in Butler, Pennsylvania, yesterday, I had local
law enforcement officers, local electeds coming to me,
whispering to me, ``There's more here to the story; we need to
talk about what actually happened.'' To have people that were
on the ground there concerned, afraid of stepping forward is
unacceptable--to tell us of other failures that maybe this
committee does not know about yet that were a part of what
happened in Butler, Pennsylvania, is unacceptable.
I asked one of the officers, safety officers, ``Could you
talk?'' ``The Secret Service said no; we can't communicate. It
took us 15 minutes to communicate with them.'' Local elected
official who said, ``I have other stories I need to talk to you
about when you have a moment.''
Ladies and gentlemen, we're 4\1/2\ months away from this
election. Pennsylvania is a battleground State. You will have
these kinds of events again. To know that we don't have the
facts, let alone execute a plan to fix the holes, is
unacceptable to our democracy and to our country.
We can talk about the facts. The facts are a lot of things
went wrong. Let's talk about how to fix it, fix it now, and I
think we start with accepting the fact that things went wrong
and that we need more resources.
Colonel Paris, your volunteers, your officers that you put
on the line to help Secret Service, are they actually
compensated somewhere for their overtime, their extra time that
they're out there?
Colonel Paris. They're in a paid status, yes. They're not--
we assign them to those duties. If they incur overtime as a
result of the contract, the contractual bargaining agreement,
we pay them.
Mr. Correa. So let me ask you something in the minute-and-
a-half I have left. One of the local officers there after we
spoke a while, I said, ``Well, let me summarize what you just
told me. You're asking me who's in charge.'' He asked me,
``Yes, I want to know who's in charge.''
Mr. Correa. I said, ``Well, let's talk some more.'' He
said, ``Lou, we don't know if it's the campaign or the Secret
Service that's in charge here.'' Said, ``If I called for a row
of dump trucks to be put up behind the stand, it wouldn't
happen because the optics would not be good for a campaign
rally.'' I want to know who is in charge protecting our
national candidates.
Mr. Chairman, I'd like to see if we can ask those tough
questions. This is not a Democrat or Republican issue. This is
about trying to come up with some rules, protocol, to make sure
this does not happen again. After the events, we can sit here,
and we can point fingers at each other and talk about
partisanship. It's not going to fix our democracy or our
electoral system.
Mr. Chairman, I do hope we go back and talk to a lot of
those folks who are not here today, who wanted to talk, who
weren't invited, and a lot of people, even if we invite them,
are not going to talk, because, frankly speaking, they want to
keep their heads down as the shooting continues. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and I yield.
Chairman Green. Gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Bishop for 5 minutes.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Colonel Paris, are you aware whether any law enforcement
officer or officers was or were posted in the second-floor
window of the AGR building?
Colonel Paris. I am aware, yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. What is the answer?
Colonel Paris. To my knowledge, there were 2 posted there
from Butler ESU.
Mr. Bishop. You said Butler ESU. What does the acronym ESU
stand for?
Colonel Paris. Emergency Services Unit. It's a team that's
comprised of multiple agencies that pool resources on a county
or several county basis in order to enhance capabilities and
training and be able to respond. Basically, a mutual aid
agreement is my understanding.
Mr. Bishop. Is it sort-of like a SWAT team?
Colonel Paris. They are trained in SWAT tactics to my
knowledge.
Mr. Bishop. How many ESU officers were posted to that
second-floor window?
Colonel Paris. So I am aware that 2 were in the building,
but again, I have not seen the Secret Service operations plan.
Mr. Bishop. Do you know--well, you say in the building.
Were they in a window out on to the scene?
Colonel Paris. From briefings that I have been given, I was
told they were in a window, yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Did they remain on post?
Colonel Paris. I was told that, at a certain point, they
began searching along with other local officers in the
immediacy before--after Crooks had been identified as
suspicious by them.
Mr. Bishop. By them?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is that they identified
Crooks for not matriculating--to my knowledge, Crooks never
made it through the secure perimeter into the venue space
itself. He was identified by those members as suspicious in
part because of that, and then, at some point, he produced the
range finder, which heightened that suspicion.
Mr. Bishop. So Representative Crane took a video on-site
yesterday. I'd like staff to put that up. It's very short. It's
a few seconds, if they can do that.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Bishop. If I understand correctly, this is from the
second-story window of the AGR building. You can see that
window comes out from the sash and swings out to the right.
There's an aerial photo right after Crooks was killed where
Crooks' body is on the roof and that window was open. Was it
from this vantage point that those ESU officers spotted Crooks?
Colonel Paris. I don't know about that particular window,
but my understanding is from a second-story window is where he
was initially spotted.
Mr. Bishop. OK. So are you then saying that, to your
knowledge, those ESU officers left that--the location where
they could look out the window to go in search of this person?
Colonel Paris. That is my understanding.
Mr. Bishop. So sometime before the time he was--between the
time he was spotted on the ground and identified as someone
suspicious, until the shooting, they had left the--that post to
go look for him. Is that what you're saying?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is yes, along with other
municipal officers that responded to that area. That's based on
interviews that we've conducted, and I want to be very clear
that I don't want to establish a time line minute by minute,
because we don't have that yet.
Mr. Bishop. I think that's revelatory. I hadn't heard that
information. I did hear before that--and there's a local--a
news station--well, there's a local news station report from
July 17 that says that local law enforcement were told they
couldn't be responsible for securing the AGR building during
the Trump rally. Of course, you've testified a moment ago or
earlier in this hearing that it was your understanding from--
that the meeting with Secret Service on the site was that ESU
was going to handle the AGR building. Which is it? Do you know?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is what my initial answer
was.
Mr. Bishop. OK. You also, in response to Mr. McCaul, you
started to say something. You were saying that you did have
integrated comms, and you were saying you were deferring to the
on-going investigation, but you have an understanding of the
sequence, and then he cut you off and went on to another
question. Do you know what you were about to say? Do you
remember that?
Colonel Paris. Just that we had members of PSP inside of
the Secret Service command post, and we were maintaining
communication with our people.
Mr. Bishop. Had ESU maintained position in that window
overlooking the roof, isn't it true that they would have had a
clean shot at the--at Mr. Crooks as he was ascending the roof
to his shooting position?
Colonel Paris. I'm not prepared to say that because I don't
know the exact time line of events.
Mr. Bishop. But it's your understanding, though, that they
were no longer in that room where they had been previously
overlooking the building at the time he was ascending the roof.
Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. Could you repeat that question?
Mr. Bishop. The ESU officers were no longer in that room
where they could look out the window and oversee the roof as
that video shows.
Colonel Paris. I believe they were actively searching along
with additional municipal officers for Mr. Crooks.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My time's expired.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Carter for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you to our
witnesses for joining us today. As we convene to discuss the
attempted assassination of former President Donald Trump and
its profound implications on our Nation's political landscape,
it is imperative that we recognize the growing threats to our
homeland. The failure of the Secret Service to protect former
President Donald Trump must be thoroughly investigated and
addressed to ensure such an incident never happens again.
Violence has no place in political discourse, regardless of
our philosophical differences, our parties, or our beliefs. We
must stand united against such actions and uphold the
principles of democracy and respect. What happened on that day
was an incredible breach, a threat to our Nation, because one
of our leaders were placed in harm's way.
Secret Service has a principle role, and that is to provide
protection for our party leaders, whether they're Republican,
Democrat, or other, whether they are someone that we agree with
or someone we disagree with. It's not a luxury. It's a
necessity. It's an imperative. While we all have lots of
questions, it appears abundantly clear that the two of you, and
while we appreciate you being here, own the responsibility to
the breach, and I respect the fact that the questions that are
coming to you are very difficult for you to answer, because you
have limited facts. But I do appreciate your presence. I
appreciate your leadership. I appreciate what you do. For all
the men and women in uniform, we thank you for putting your
lives on the line to protect us.
I will ask this general question. If you were in charge,
can you say what you might have done differently?
Colonel Paris. I would defer to the Secret Service from the
standpoint that our expertise in the Pennsylvania State Police
is not primarily focused on full-time dignitary protection,
sir. I would endeavor generally to try and put whatever
resources and partnerships in place to maintain and ensure the
safest event we possibly could.
Mr. Carter. Do you believe that the coordination failed
between agencies?
Colonel Paris. Again, I can only comment on the State
Police portion at this point. We continue to learn more 10 days
in, and I have not seen the Secret Service operations plan.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Yoes, can you join us and share any light
in your expertise on where we are and how can we make sure this
absolutely never happens again regardless of who might be at
the podium? A President is a President is a President.
Mr. Yoes. I cannot agree with you more. In this situation,
if I'm speaking on behalf of local law enforcement or State law
enforcement, I would say that, again, the primary
responsibility of making these calls, making these decisions,
and making the operations plan is going to be the Secret
Service. As I mentioned earlier, there are some 19,000 agencies
across this country. It would be impossible to have any
continuity or any consistency with what we do in protecting our
leaders. So Secret Service would have to play a huge role in
this part.
If you're asking me personally what I would have done
different, obviously, I look at a--an assessment of the
situation and look at all of the elevated positions that were
in place. They should have been part of a contained area. But
that's just my own personal view of not--of seeing news reports
and not physically being on-site.
Mr. Carter. I have never served in any form of law
enforcement, but I think I would have figured that that
perimeter should have been tighter. I think I could have
figured out that there's no way that that building where the
shooter sat--laid and aimed should not have had snipers on top
of it as well negating any opportunity for a shooter to be
there.
Notwithstanding, that there should have been a sweep of the
area, we should have had our people on that building as a point
of view for our former President. As I said, a President, a
President, a President, a former President, a former President,
former President, a Cabinet Secretary, a leader. We deserve to
have answers to these questions, because when we don't have
answers, those who would rather divide and create theater by
saying things that aren't true, they know aren't true,
distorting facts and trying to suggest that somehow people
played an active role, listen-- American people deserve the
truth. So I am imploring that we have somebody at these tables
that can answer the questions, the good, the tough, the
uncomfortable, the comfortable, because the American people
deserve to know.
This is something that should have never happened. We as a
committee in a most bipartisan fashion should stand together to
make sure that we send a message always that we will always
protect our leaders, whether we agree with them or not.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Gimenez,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr.--Colonel Paris, you said the United States Secret
Service, Penn State Police was there, Butler ESU was there. Any
other law enforcement agency there?
Colonel Paris. According to the operations plan that PSP
put together, there were elements from Butler County sheriff,
deputy sheriffs were on some of those interior posts and thus
they were on----
Mr. Gimenez. I just need the answer.
Colonel Paris. I apologize. Additional ones I could name
would be Butler County sheriffs were in our operations plan,
Pittsburgh City Police provided assets to the motorcade, and I
believe Allegheny County Police also.
Mr. Gimenez. You said that you were in the incident command
center, that your agency was in the incident command center
with the Secret Service.
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. Were all the other agencies in that command
center?
Colonel Paris. I believe that some of those agencies were
represented, but I can't definitively tell you.
Mr. Gimenez. We need to find the answer to that. Was Butler
ESU in that command center?
Mr. Gimenez. I was told at one point that there was a
representative in there. How long and over what period, I'm not
sure. I'm aware of 3.
Mr. Gimenez. So the agency that is in charge of the outside
perimeter, actually, the agency in charge of the greatest
threat, because when you stand at the podium, and I stood
there, and when you look--all you have to do is look around,
there is the greatest threat right there. It's 100 yards away.
It's elevated. Direct line of fire to the President. I stood on
that roof. No problem standing on that roof. Yes, I am 70 years
old. OK?
So the time line is very important here. If, in fact, they
thought this--that Mr. Brooks was so suspicious that they
actually pulled the ESU countersnipers away, because there were
countersnipers the way I understand it in that window, away to
look for him, and from my understanding of the time line, it's
about 20 minutes before the President came out. Was that
information relayed to the Secret Service that they were
looking for a suspicious individual and that people had been
pulled away to look for that suspicious individual? Was that
relayed to the Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. I believe that it was.
Mr. Gimenez. Was that relayed to the Secret Service, the
team that surrounds the President himself?
Colonel Paris. I can't answer that.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, if it wasn't, that's another big mess-
up. I can tell you, this is just one of a bunch of mess-ups
that I've seen. One of them, the question that I have is, why
in the world was that team from ESU in the building to begin
with? Why weren't they on a rooftop? I--it was a hot day,
right? So that's another question that I'm going to--why were
you assigned inside a building when you have a little window
that's like this big and your line of sight out of that window,
unless you stick your head out of the window, is pretty
limited. Your view. So why were you inside and not outside? Who
said for them to be inside and not outside? What did the Secret
Service tell the--you were inside the perimeter, right?
Colonel Paris. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. For the most part, you were inside the
perimeter.
Colonel Paris. Me personally?
Mr. Gimenez. I'm saying your agency was inside the
perimeter.
Colonel Paris. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. The biggest threat was outside the perimeter.
So who developed the plan to protect the outside of the
perimeter? There's only one agency. That's the United States
Secret Service. Because you really can't ask the local agency
to do that because they're not in the business of dignitary
protection. They don't do it all the time. You don't do it all
the time. They do it all the time.
So, Mr. Chairman, we're going to need those other agencies
to come in. We need a time line, who said what to who, and what
the action that was taken. One thing that I noticed in another
video, and I've got to find out if it's true, and it appears to
be true, is that the snipers on the south side reposition to
look to the north side. I want to know what the time line for
that was. How far in advance were the snipers, the
countersnipers on the south side told, ``Hey, you need to look
at a threat on the north side,'' and how much time was there
between that and then the shots being fired? Do you have any
information on that?
Colonel Paris. I do not have a specific time line.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Those are the--that's the information that
we need. It's not unusual to have people on different
frequencies. Actually, you have to, because you have so many
people. But you have to have everybody in the same place so
they can communicate with each other. So we need to know if
everybody that was in charge or had responsibility for
protecting not only the interior perimeter, but outside the
perimeter, if they were all in that incident command center. If
they weren't, that's a huge problem too. Thank you, and I yield
back.
Chairman Green. Gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Magaziner for 5 minutes from Rhode
Island.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
First, I just want to join my colleagues from both sides of
the aisle earlier who recognized the tremendous legacy of our
colleague Sheila Jackson Lee who--and I feel very fortunate to
have had even just a year-and-a-half to work with on this
committee. She always came prepared. She was diligent. She
brought empathy and was a great example to us newer Members. So
I'm very grateful for her legacy and I know it will live on for
a long time to come.
I also join my colleagues on both sides in condemning the
assassination attempt on former President Trump and condemn all
acts of violence. Violence is not the answer. Our condolences
go out to the family of Corey Comperatore and all who were
injured and traumatized by what occurred that day, and I think
about the children who were at that event and had to witness
that. That is something they will carry with them for the rest
of their lives.
We don't know the motivation of the shooter at this time,
but I remain concerned by the rising tide of political violence
and domestic violence extremism in this country which impacts
all of us. This is something that some of us have been talking
about a lot in this committee. In 2023, the U.S. Capitol Police
investigated more than 8,000 cases of direct threats against
Members of Congress, a ten-fold increase from 2015. So I ask
everyone: Take down the rhetoric. Remove violent rhetoric from
our political discourse. Remember, as President Lincoln said,
that we are not enemies but friends, and we have to appeal to
the better angels of our nature.
Yes, we have to make sure that this never happens again. It
is welcome news that the director of the Secret Service has
resigned, but if we say that that is enough, then we're not
doing our jobs. We need to understand what protocols, policies,
resources need to be changed, if any, to make sure this does
not happen again.
Colonel, I wanted to ask, I imagine the Pennsylvania State
Police deals with lots of events like this, right? You have
lots of political events, big events, Secret Service protectees
who come in and out of Pennsylvania, so can you just help us
understand, is it unusual to have such a small perimeter around
an outdoor event like this one?
Colonel Paris. I would say that we routinely, as a matter
of course, exercise deference to the Secret Service to set the
perimeter for an event like this based on the protectee.
Mr. Magaziner. I think it's important to note that
Pennsylvania is a State where anyone 18 and above can carry a
firearm like an AR-15 without a license. It's an open-carry
State. So my second question is, outside of that perimeter,
were there any controls in place or any, you know, legal tools
that you had at your disposal if an individual with a firearm
had been spotted, again, within 300, 400 yards of the former
President?
Colonel Paris. I would defer to the Secret Service. I
haven't seen their operations plan, sir.
Mr. Magaziner. Right. But you, as State police, and then
also the Butler local police, who were responsible for areas
outside of the perimeter, you know, if this individual had been
spotted earlier with a firearm, because it is an open-carry
State, what legal tools would you have had at your disposal?
Colonel Paris. We would have responded and attempted to
make contact and ascertained what the person was doing there
and what their activity was.
Mr. Magaziner. So a number of us have asked questions about
lines of communication. I think that's important, right?
Because, to the layperson at home, what we're trying to
understand is, if this individual was spotted on the roof, as
he appears to have been well over a minute before the shooting,
did the local officers who spotted him know how to radio in to
the command center? Was that information relayed? Then was it
in turn relayed to the Secret Service? This question has been
asked a few different times, but can you tell the public what
you know about whether local officers outside the perimeter
knew how to radio in a suspected threat, whether there was an
individual in the command center who was receiving those calls
and communicating them to the Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. So I do know that Butler County set up a
command post on the site itself along with the Secret Service's
command post, but they were not located in the same building.
The exact communication between municipal officers and that
command post or the county dispatch that they would rely--the
State police have our own State-wide dispatching. We can
communicate with the dispatching centers telephonically and
through electronic means, but we maintain separate dispatching
systems, so I would defer to----
Mr. Magaziner. So the locals were not included in the
Secret Service command center. The State police was or was not?
Colonel Paris. The PSP--I can assure you the PSP was in
there.
Mr. Magaziner. Yes.
Colonel Paris. Additional people, I was briefed on one
occasion that there was a representative from Butler ESU that
was in there. When they were in there and the length is not
really a focus at this point of our investigation into the
homicide and attempted--2 homicides as well as the officer-
involved shooting, so those sequence--that sequence of events
has come up pursuant to us investigating that, but I am very
remiss to give you a minute-by-minute time line and what the
communications were.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Pfluger for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My deepest sympathies to the family of Sheila Jackson Lee.
We worked very closely together on many things, and she was an
excellent Member of this committee.
I agree with my colleague Mr. Carter when he talked about
Americans deserve the truth. I absolutely agree with that. Also
Mr. Magaziner talking about Republicans and Democrats working
together on the oversight. Imagine, if we worked together, the
transparency that we could have on some of the other issues
that are going on right now. I believe that that is possible
for us to do.
Thank you both for being here. Colonel Paris, was it clear
to you--when we talk about rules of engagement, deconfliction
plans, the assignments of which law enforcement agency will
cover which section, did you have concerns prior to the
President coming on stage? If so, did you voice those concerns
to the Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. So, just to be clear, I was not present at
the venue on July 13.
Mr. Pfluger. But, in the planning, in the lead-up to----
Colonel Paris. In planning, my default position would be
that our commanders are aware of what their responsibilities
are within a unified command structure reporting to the Secret
Service.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you believe that it was absolutely clear
that there were zero questions of who was supposed to cover
what areas of the venue?
Colonel Paris. I can only comment to our responsibilities,
and I believe our responsibilities were delineated to us, and I
believe we met or exceeded those responsibilities based on
everything that I know as I sit here 10 days in.
Mr. Pfluger. I think there's still a lot of questions
regarding the plan, you know.
Colonel Paris. I'll agree.
Mr. Pfluger. This is always in any sort of protection
assignment, it's--that's always the hardest thing. Who are
friendly assets, who can be a vulnerable hostile actor, who
displays hostile intent, hostile act. I think it's clear there
was a failure, and we definitely want to get to the bottom of
it.
President Yoes, do you get the impression that Secret
Service at any point in the run-up to this or other events has
been stretched thin when it comes to their--just the work hours
that they are putting in, the resources that they have? Was
that communicated in any way?
Mr. Yoes. I can't speak directly to that. I can tell you
that law enforcement across this country is stretched thin just
simply due to the inability to be able to attract the best and
brightest at any levels in order to maintain the staffing
levels we need. So, if that is the case and we're not meeting
those levels in Secret Service because of our inability to be
able to recruit, then we need to address that. Or if it's the
alignment of assets and the assignment of individuals, then
that in itself is something as well. It's something I'm not in
a position to be able to speak about other than to recognize
that there is two huge factors here that need to be addressed.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, it's clear that that's the case, and God
bless both of you for what you do, for the hours that you put
in to protect our communities. We can't do it without you, and
we need you, and we will continue to advocate for you.
I want to talk about now that leads me into this next
question. There is a piece of legislation, H.R. 8081, called
the Disgraced Act. It says Denying Infinite Security and
Government Resources Allocated Toward Convicted and Extremely
Dishonorable Former Protectees Act, which is a whole mouthful
of basically taking details away from people that could include
those who are convicted. Talk to me about the impact if former
President Trump didn't have a protective detail of U.S. Secret
Service there, talk to me about the impact on State and local
partners to protect them in any of the communities that you
represent.
By the way, he also was responsible for taking out al-
Baghdadi, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and Qasem Soleimani, and the
Iranian government wants to do harm to him and other people
like him. So what's the impact if you don't have Secret Service
help?
Mr. Yoes. More than happy to yield. I think, you know,
trying not to become very political in this. I think we have a
President of the United States who has by simple virtue of his
position having served as President that deserves a certain
protection because of his service to the country. So the rest
of these things are all things that are not for me to decide
other than to tell you that I think we have a responsibility to
our leaders.
Mr. Pfluger. This is not political. That's not political.
He deserves protection. You're absolutely right. Colonel Paris.
Colonel Paris. I would just echo that my understanding is
it's a Federal statute that creates the Secret Service and
tasks them with those responsibilities. So, to contemplate a
different paradigm, I would reflect back to the legislature to
contemplate something.
Mr. Pfluger. If he was denied a protective detail in
Pennsylvania this past week, the weekend prior, what would that
have done to your local resource to protect him adequately?
Colonel Paris. I think the removal of any resource
inherently makes the burden on the surrounding resources that
would have been committed somewhat additional.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I--point of order?
Mr. Thompson. Point of order.
Chairman Green. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. So I appreciate the gentleman's question, but
let me put it another way to the witnesses. The referenced
legislation----
Chairman Green. Ranking Member, I mean, a question to the
witness would be someone yielding. Point of order, I'm allowing
you to make a point of order.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. The point of order is, if you read
the bill, it says that, if you are a convicted felon and found
and sentenced by a judge----
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Chairman----
Mr. Thompson [continuing]. Then you would not be--that's my
point of order. That you would not have service. You have to be
a convicted felon and sentenced. Now, at the time the bill was
filed, nobody who is a protectee was a convicted felon. But, if
those who are lawyers here know that once you are convicted a
felon and sentenced, you are remanded in the custody of that
particular law enforcement agency for custody.
I think it's an anomaly to try to say that the Secret
Service would have to protect the felon in jail, a convicted
felon. So this whole notion about my legislation, I just say to
the gentleman, if you read it, it says you have to be a
convicted felon and sentenced.
Now, we're not there. The conjecture, you could do whatever
you want, but let me be clear about the bill. Republicans have
made a lot of hate about the bill saying it's about former
President Trump and would take away his security. That just is
not true. The bill doesn't mention former Trump--President
Trump, and it would not have affected security at this tragic
event.
The bill talks about any Secret Service protectee who is
convicted of a felony and sentenced to serve jail time. It does
not take away security. The bill makes clear that when a
protectee is sentenced and remanded to the custody of prison
officials, the Secret Service is able to hand off the prisoner
in an orderly fashion and that Secret Service agents aren't
forced to become correctional officers too. That's the
legislation. That's all it says. For the record, we can go back
to----
Chairman Green. The gentleman will need to get to his point
of order.
Mr. Thompson. Point of order is the line of questioning is
inconsistent with the legislation. It does not say on that day
former President Trump would have been without Secret Service
protection. He is not sentenced. If he's not sentenced, he will
still have the protection, plain and simple.
Chairman Green. You yield on your point of order, Mr.
Ranking Member? OK. I want to make a point of order then as
well. You know, a lot of times we hear from both sides of the
aisle about rhetoric and how rhetoric and the things we do in
messaging, bills that we do shapes discussion, impacts people.
First, my point of order is prison isn't necessarily a safer
place. You can ask Mr. Epstein's family about that. So to
suggest that somehow he'd have the security necessary in a
prison I think is just not an accurate statement.
In terms of--you know, I agree with the Ranking Member that
his bill did say that it would not apply in this particular
case, but it's more about what we're doing and what we're
saying at certain times that generates the attitude in our
society, and so I just make that point of order about this
particular legislation. I made in my opening remarks a request
that he withdraw the bill----
Mr. Carter. I just wanted to make--I think the Chairman was
clear that this bill was filed well in advance, so to connect--
you mentioned timing. It's important to mention timing, that it
was----
Chairman Green. We don't want to debate the bill. We're
here to hear from witnesses that are here, so I'm going to go
ahead and end this now, and we're going to move on. I think
actually Mr. Ivey is up for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to associate myself with the remarks of our Members
here with respect to the loss of Ms. Jackson Lee. It's with
deep sadness that I feel her loss. I share not only this
committee with her but on the Judiciary Committee as well, and
she was insightful and inspirational in the way she handled
herself and her role here in Congress.
I also want to join with the comments about sympathies to
the Comperatore family and the individuals who were injured on
the day of the shooting. I want to thank the Chair for taking
us up to Butler yesterday. My only regret about it was that it
was too quick. I think that--I didn't know it was going to be
like that, frankly, until after we got there and had a chance
to talk to people in the community.
But, when we got there, they were very anxious to talk to
us. In particular, I had conversations with Angela Fleeger,
supervisor for, and I hope I don't butcher this too bad,
Connoquenessing Township, was extremely helpful, and Sam
Zurzolo, who was a commissioner from Butler Township. They were
able to provide information on several fronts that I think we
need to pay attention to, not just for this particular event
but going forward.
Could you hit a video for me there? I think Ms. Fleeger
tried to produce this and sent it to me. The red building is
the one that was directly behind the stage. The building in the
center there is where the shooter was. The reason I'm asking
for this to be shown is that as you get past the middle of it,
look to the opposite side of the field from where the shots
came.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Ivey. You can stop it now.
I counted about 12 rooftops there just sort-of standing at
the front. I'm a former Federal prosecutor. I don't have a
background in protection, but my thought was, why would we pick
a spot where you had that many rooftops that were available? My
colleague, Mr. Crane, you know, definitely defer to your
experience as a sniper in the military and your point about
picking the water tower as a higher point would have been a
good one, I think, to consider. I'm curious about finding out
what the Secret Service would say about that, but I just
thought that this was a bad site to pick no matter where you
put them. There was just too many openings. The field was
totally open.
One of the things that Ms. Fleeger pointed out was that the
road that went to the side of this spot here, the stage was
right in front of those 2 buildings. The snipers were on top of
those, I believe. They didn't shut down that road. She also
showed me a photo of her husband going in on that day through a
fence that wasn't guarded in the perimeter area. Another point
that she made was that, the night before the speech was done,
she and 50 or 60 other people from the community came to
decorate the stage and put up the red, white, and blue binding
and the Trump signs and everything.
But the point she had there was that none of those people
were vetted before they went into the area and were up at the
stage and, you know, could have done anything, I think, was the
point that she made. Also noted that, apparently, the shooter
had hidden the gun somewhere on the site by I think where the--
I hate to call the name of the business, but the business where
the shooter ended up taking the shots from.
So I think there's a variety of concerns here that I look
forward to getting a chance to hear from these individuals. I
don't know if it's going to be in the context of this committee
or the Oversight Committee or the task force that's been
proposed. Whoever does it needs to go talk to these folks,
because the ones that I talked with had not been interviewed by
the FBI, Secret Service, or local police. They have key
information that I think we should have, especially making
decisions about going forward.
Then just a couple quick points before my time runs out. I
think it came up with respect to the communications piece, I
appreciate Mr. Yoes' comments there, but we need to figure out
not just what happened on that day, but when we do these on
other sites across the country going forward, what's going to
happen with the communications? If they're not using the
national band that was set up, how can we make sure that
happens in the future?
Then, with respect to the local police not reinventing the
wheel every time, one of them suggested, you know, maybe some
kind of clearinghouse for information where local police
departments, local elected officials who, for example, in this
instance didn't find out the President was coming until a few
days before and therefore had to scramble to catch up. I
believe she called your office, Congressman Kelly, to figure
out what was going on, and you hadn't even been told about it
yet, so we need to get to a point where we've got better
communication, that we're giving elected officials and law
enforcement at the local and State level more lead time and
more information so they can prepare for these events. I know
that the director has resigned, but I think it's critical to
make sure that we go forward with the investigation of the
Secret Service whether she's there or not.
Then, the last point, I apologize for running over, is that
to the Secret Service and to Homeland Security, I know there's
going to be a process now to replace her, but that cannot get
in the way of us sorting out what happened on that day and,
more importantly, what we need to take forward, because we've
got other events coming up in the very near future. We've got
to make sure we take those lessons quickly so we can move them
forward.
Thank the Chair for his deference for giving me a little
time to run over there, and I thank you again for taking us up
to Butler.
Chairman Green. You were making an excellent point, and I
didn't want to stop you, Mr. Ivey.
I now recognize Mr. Garbarino, the gentleman from New York,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairman.
Colonel Paris, there have been conflicting reports about
the location of State and local law enforcement. The Secret
Service director, I believe, said--the former Secret Service
director said that local police were in the same building that
the gunman fired from while other accounts indicate that local
law enforcement was in an adjacent building. Were any
Pennsylvania State Troopers--State Police assigned to the
building where the shooting happened?
Colonel Paris. There were no State troopers to my knowledge
assigned there, sir.
Mr. Garbarino. Do you know if any other local law
enforcement were assigned inside that building?
Colonel Paris. I only know that Butler ESU were assigned.
When you say ``that building,'' I'm referring to--there's a
series of buildings there that have covered walkways or second-
story walkways that allow you to--almost like a pole barn-type
configuration, a modular-type building. But, to my knowledge,
there were no troopers assigned to that location, sir.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Mr. Yoes, as technology has evolved, drones have become
widely available to both law enforcement and the general
public. For a large event with this level security, would you
normally expect law enforcement to use drones for surveillance
and to deploy counterdrone technology?
Mr. Yoes. I'm sorry, I couldn't hear the last part.
Mr. Garbarino. Would you normally expect law enforcement to
use drones for surveillance and deploy counterdrone technology?
Mr. Yoes. Obviously, as I mentioned earlier, my experience
at this location is there are a number of elevated locations
that should have been secured. There are a lot of ways to
secure that. They could be with individuals assigned to it, but
certainly an overwatch to be able to get a good visual of those
locations is paramount.
Mr. Garbarino. So it's been reported that the Secret
Service apparently did not use drones for surveillance, but the
shooter was able to fly his own drone over the area earlier in
the day of the rally and get aerial footage of the site. Do you
know if that's true?
Mr. Yoes. I have no direct knowledge.
Mr. Garbarino. Were you--OK. Do you know if whether or not
local, State, Secret Service enforcement was aware of any drone
use?
Mr. Yoes. I've heard the news reports, but I have no direct
knowledge.
Mr. Garbarino. Would you consider this a major security
breach?
Mr. Yoes. Absolutely.
Mr. Garbarino. Now, it's also been reported that, Colonel
Paris, that the local enforcement spotted the shooter outside
the AGR building and on its roof minutes prior to the shooting.
Did local police alert the Secret Service that the gunman was
on or around the AGR building roof, do you know?
Colonel Paris. So this goes to my earlier qualifier about
the time line, but my understanding of the sequence of events
is that he was determined to be suspicious as a result of
behavior that he was exhibiting milling around that area in
front of the AGR building. There was a text thread that was
going--I've been briefed--between the ESU members. They
identified. They took a photo of him.
At some point, when he utilized the range finder, the
suspicion was heightened, so I know, at a certain point in the
command post, a member of PSP received a phone call and a text
message from members of ESU, and I know from an interview that
that was immediately relayed in the command post to the Secret
Service.
Mr. Garbarino. What happened--that was my next question. So
what happened--what actions were taken after it was relayed to
Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. So, when the PSP member received that
information and verbally turned right around, gave it to the
Secret Service, our member was provided with a number to which
the picture that had been taken by the Butler ESU members that
was on that group thread to which that should be sent. Our
member did that, and our understanding was that was some
element of the Secret Service.
Mr. Garbarino. So you--this was all reported--this was all
reported to Secret Service and they gave him--the Secret
Service then sent him--one of your officers a number back to
send the information back to? Is what that you just said?
Colonel Paris. That's my understanding.
Mr. Garbarino. When did that happen?
Colonel Paris. Again, the actual time line I'm very remiss,
because I know these time lines need to be hammered out exactly
to the minute, but I would say, you know, that the overall time
line is about an hour before is when he became suspicious to
ESU. What I want to say is if we know that former President
Trump was shot at 1811 hours it was probably in the vicinity of
25 to 30 minutes, but I want to make sure that's a very----
Mr. Garbarino. So before he went on to speak.
Colonel Paris. But, at that point, just to be clear, he was
determined to be suspicious. We had--there was no information
that he possessed a weapon. He was outside of that building
where the ESU was posted. They were being vigilant. It's I
think relevant that there were other people at the venue who
were suspicious and reported likewise in a close temporal nexus
to that as well.
Mr. Garbarino. Just to confirm, the Secret Service had this
information that there was this suspicious individual. He had
used a range finder, which made him even more suspicious. This
was all reported to them prior to President Trump being allowed
on the stage to speak?
Colonel Paris. I believe--again, I'll defer to when the
President came out. I know that that was probably 20 to 25
minutes before 1811 hours, and steps were taken by the
municipal officers over in that area to actively--they were
actively looking for Crooks. You saw the building yesterday.
It's a pretty wide footprint. They began looking for him. There
were scores of people making their way across that facility.
Again, just for some context, there were over 100 people that
day that necessitated requiring medical attention due to the
heat. There was a missing 6-year-old.
This individual was deemed to be suspicious because he was
walking around and not moving into the venue. The range finder
obviously heightened that, and they were attempting to locate
him as people were moving across that space who were attending
the event to the secure perimeter.
Mr. Garbarino. Was he the only one determined to be
suspicious that day?
Chairman Green. The gentleman needs to wrap it up. Perhaps
somebody else will yield to you or me on this topic.
Mr. Garbarino. I yield back.
Chairman Green. I recognize Mr. Goldman now for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Well, we'll just pick up the questioning here.
Chairman Green. That sounds great, prosecutor.
Mr. Goldman. First, I do want to mention how sad it is to
see Sheila Jackson Lee's empty seat there. What an incredible
inspiration to so many of us and a great Member and advocate,
community presence, and we really are sorry to miss her. She
would be very eager to be asking questions here today, because
there are a lot of unanswered questions.
I sat through a 4\1/2\-hour hearing yesterday with the
director of the Secret Service, and we got no information, so
I'm going to jump on--piggyback off of Mr. Garbarino. Where you
left off is that you relayed or PSP relayed the photograph to
the number that the Secret Service directed your officer to. Is
that right?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Goldman. Now, did anything come back, any instructions
or directions come back from the Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. So, again, that is left to the after-action.
We're trying to come up with a sequence of events that led to
Crooks on top of the building where he ultimately took the
shots.
Mr. Goldman. Right. But you said--I'm trying to find--I
don't need the specific time line. I'm trying to just figure
out the sequence, because you said that many of your officers
or Butler ESU officers were looking for Crooks. That was after
that photograph was relayed to the Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is it was after the photo
was relayed to the--our trooper in the command post, and, yes,
Crooks was in that area around the building. My understanding
is 2 additional municipal officers who were on a different post
responded to that area, and they began actively looking for
Crooks. They circumvented--they circumscribed the building to
try to locate him. It became apparent at some point that he was
up on the roof.
Those 2 municipal officers who responded then, to their
credit, actively, once they realized that he was on the roof,
one boosted the other one up, hanging from the ledge of the
roof. By the time that officer was boosted up on top of the
roof, Crooks was on it almost in that final position that you
saw. He had the AR out, and he pointed it at the municipal
officer, who was suspended from the roof, was not in a
position, feet dangling at that point, to draw a weapon or
continue hoisting himself back up on the roof.
He drops back down from the roof. At this point, I believe
that's when the video that's been widely circulated with people
filming Crooks up on the roof saying there's somebody up on the
roof. There were other law enforcement around the building
running, but their vantage point on the ground did not lend a
clear line of sight to where Crooks was at the top of that
building.
One of our--one of our troopers on roving patrol also was
notified. That word went out, and he responded about the time
that the municipal officer was boosting the other officer up
onto the roof.
Mr. Goldman. What was he notified of?
Colonel Paris. I don't know specifically. That's going to
be part of the after-action. We obviously knew that he was--
Crooks was suspicious. He had not gone into the venue. They
were actively doing everything they could to try and locate
him.
Mr. Goldman. So the local officers who were outside of the
perimeter and in charge of securing the outside perimeter area
one way or another understood or got direction that they needed
to try to find Crooks presumably to ask him questions,
interview him? Is that what the protocol is?
Colonel Paris. I don't want to speak for--I haven't seen
the Secret Service operations plan. What their responsibilities
were and what their understanding of those were from the Secret
Service, I don't want to comment on it.
Mr. Goldman. But somehow they got the message that they
knew----
Colonel Paris. There was information that he was
suspicious. By the time that municipal officer was hoisted up
onto the roof and saw him, he had the weapon out.
Mr. Goldman. Do you know how long it was before--between
the time that the photograph was relayed to the Secret Service
and the time when the officer was trying to hoist himself onto
the roof?
Colonel Paris. So that's a critical detail, salient
question. I would answer it from the reverse time period, from
the first shots rang out at 1811 hours. Hoisting up of the
officer occurred probably no more, again, I'm going to give you
a time, but I want to just----
Mr. Goldman. We understand it's not specific.
Colonel Paris. A sequence of events, I would say at most
2\1/2\ to 3 minutes before that first shot rang out.
Mr. Goldman. When he----
Colonel Paris. When they were notified in the interim still
remains under investigation.
Mr. Goldman. Right. When he fell off of the--he let go?
Colonel Paris. The municipal officer--when--the briefing
that I had was the municipal officer saw Crooks; Crooks saw
him; and Crooks turned and leveled the gun at him--in a
position tactically of extreme disadvantage suspended in the
air with your legs dangling after somebody had boosted you up.
Mr. Goldman. He let go, right?
Colonel Paris. He let go and he fell back down.
Mr. Goldman. Was there at that point any communications
that there is a shooter on the roof from the municipal officers
who were there?
Colonel Paris. That's all part of the after-action. We're
just trying to get a sequence of events up to the point when
Crooks then fired the weapon, so that's been the focus of our
investigation.
Mr. Goldman. But there was at least you said--you thought
2\1/2\ to 3 minutes between the time when the officer--the
municipal officers tried to hoist on top of the roof, Crooks
pointed the gun at them, they dropped, and then between that
time and when he fired the shots.
Colonel Paris. I don't want to give you an exact period of
time, but it was minutes. It was a very short period of time.
Even for his ability----
Mr. Goldman. But not seconds.
Colonel Paris. I would say minutes. But I can't--I would be
remiss if I gave you--and I want to be very clear on the
record, when you do an investigation like this, the time line
is critical. You're asking me. I was briefed. I'm answering to
the best of my ability right now.
Mr. Goldman. I know my time up is up. Colonel Paris, I want
to thank you for providing us with this information. It was
incredibly disappointing that the director of the Secret
Service did not provide any of this information yesterday. I
think it's good that we're going to have somebody new at the
top, but just having somebody new does not answer the
questions.
Chairman Green. I couldn't agree more.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Chairman, I know you are working
diligently to try to get witnesses here. This is not an
academic exercise. This is not something that the American
people can wait 60 days for. With these gaps in information,
there are conspiracy theories. There is disinformation. All of
our safety is at risk, political violence is escalated, and we
need to know these answers. I thank you for bringing these
witnesses here, and I yield back.
Chairman Green. Absolutely. I appreciate the tag team
between 2 sides to get to the details on this, because this is
poignant, very poignant.
I now recognize Ms. Greene for 5 minutes.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Colonel Paris. I'd like to carry the dialog on about the
specific time line. I have a time line that was given to us on
the oversight committee yesterday when we questioned Secret
Service--former Secret Service Director Kimberly Cheatle as she
has resigned today, but the time line that I'd like to talk to
you about is exactly what you were just discussing here: 18
minutes before President Trump took the stage, it was at 5:45
that the Butler County Emergency Services noticed Thomas Crooks
on the roof, took a picture, and reported it.
You stated just a few minutes before in your testimony that
you--that police or PSP were given a phone number to the Secret
Service and that Butler County Emergency Services texted or
sent the picture. Was that a text? Was that a digital platform?
Was it an email? How did they send the picture?
Colonel Paris. Just to be clear, at that period of time, at
1845, I don't believe the testimony was----
Ms. Greene. Five-forty-five p.m.
Colonel Paris. Seventeen-forty-five p.m. Five-forty-five
p.m., yes, ma'am. He was not up on the roof at that point is my
belief.
Ms. Greene. No. Emergency services noticed Thomas Crooks on
the roof. This is the time line that we have. Took a picture
and reported it. Who did they send that picture to?
Colonel Paris. Just to be clear, they were posted in the
AGR building and took a picture of him. That's what you're----
Ms. Greene. Yes. Who did they send the picture to?
Colonel Paris. I only know from interviews what I can
confirm to my knowledge and belief here today that our--a
member of Pennsylvania State Police inside of the command post
received that information telephonically and by text; relayed
it to the Secret Service; and then was given a number to follow
up on. That was based, again, heightened suspicion----
Ms. Greene. How did they relay it to Secret Service?
Colonel Paris. I believe they verbally turned and said in
the command post, ``This is information that I just received,''
and then, in follow-up to that, as directed from the interview
that I was briefed on, that was forwarded by text as requested
by the Secret Service.
Ms. Greene. Can you give us copies of that communication
and that phone number that was given to them for Secret
Service?
Colonel Paris. That's part of the on-going investigation,
and I would defer to the legality of----
Ms. Greene. Can you find that information and provide it to
our committee?
Colonel Paris. I will look to see if--legally I will
consult chief counsel within the State Police, but it is an on-
going criminal investigation at this point.
Ms. Greene. So, after it was reported, President Trump took
the stage at 6:03 p.m. All of this took place, this was 18
minutes before President Trump actually took the stage at 6:03
p.m. President Trump was shot in the face at 6:11 p.m. This has
all been reported, these time lines. Why do you not have a time
line?
Colonel Paris. Because it's not our--the time line is going
to be critical for the after-action report. Obviously, we're
conducting an investigation with the FBI. We have been
deferential to the FBI in terms of what has been released to
the media. I was present for one press briefing on the night of
Saturday night, July 13, and we've been deferential to the FBI
on that. So I would refer you to the FBI.
The time lines that you're quoting, I just want to be clear
on the record, to my knowledge and belief, I don't have a
minute-by-minute time line. I've had multiple briefings about
what these interviews have gleaned, but they're from the
perspective of PSP investigating the homicide and the 2
attempted homicides.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Colonel. During the event, at what
point in the day was someone from your team first made aware
that there was a potential suspicious person or possible
threat?
Colonel Paris. So, based on my knowledge and belief, that
information relayed to the command post from Butler ESU in
terms of Crooks was the first time that I'm aware of. Again,
keeping in mind, I've heard estimates that there were 13,000
people there. There were multiple people identified as
suspicious, several that were identified in that area.
Ms. Greene. Yes. Thank you. You stated before in your
questions that you didn't--you haven't seen an operation plan,
but didn't your team participate and why haven't you seen the
plan?
Colonel Paris. So, as my answer prior on the record, I've
asked for it. The State Police has asked for it. We have yet to
receive it. My understanding is that our walk-through with our
commanders and our area commander was to delineate what our
responsibilities were, and we endeavored to fulfill those
responsibilities.
Ms. Greene. Who was the Secret Service agent in charge of
the advance team?
Colonel Paris. I don't know the name of the agent.
Ms. Greene. How was PSP supposed to communicate with Secret
Service on the advance team?
Colonel Paris. You mean in the planning leading up to it?
Ms. Greene. Uh-huh.
Colonel Paris. My understanding is, as is typical, we were
notified by on email on July 5. The meeting on July 8, Monday,
was to get all of those partners together to exchange
information, how they could communicate with one another, and
then the planning took place from there.
Ms. Greene. Could you provide our committee a copy of all
those communications, Colonel Paris?
Colonel Paris. I will check with our legal counsel.
Pennsylvania has multiple State statutes that cover
investigative plans, our law-enforcement-sensitive information.
Ms. Greene. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, one more thing, if I may. Trump's Secret
Service protection could be removed under Bennie Thompson's
proposed legislation. This legislation was introduced while the
political weaponized Government was prosecuting former
President Donald Trump. This would leave him at risk.
I'd also like to state for the record for this committee
that over 140 inmates are murdered in prison every single year.
This is a dangerous place, prison is, and, of course, 8 percent
of violence in prison leads to murder of inmates. This
legislation is reckless----
Chairman Green. Lady's time.
Ms. Greene. The Minority Ranking Member needs to withdraw
this legislation that would lead to the murder of President
Trump.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady's time has expired. I now
recognize----
Mr. Correa. Chairman, just----
Chairman Green. Well, we're not going to debate.
Mr. Correa. You think that statement should be made when
the Ranking Member is here so he can at least address it?
Chairman Green. He made his point earlier about his bill.
There is a difference of opinion, I suppose. We're just y'all
are out--OK.
I now recognize Mr. LaLota for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman.
Ten days ago----
Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. LaLota. Ten days ago, a 20-year-old with no military or
law enforcement training, with no more than about a thousand
dollars' worth of equipment, and apparently working alone,
thwarted the United States Secret Service, an agency with a $3
billion budget and about 8,000 personnel.
In the early phases of this investigation, the Secret
Service--it is clear, the Secret Service exhibited poor
tactics, including substandard two-way communications with
State and local PD. They displayed a lack of strategy,
including not employing drones to surveil the risks to
President Trump and the crowd.
Since July 13, the Department of Homeland Security and the
Secret Service, evidenced by them not being here today, has
avoided accountability by, among other things, avoiding
hearings like this.
The attempted assassination of former President Trump, the
leading candidate for President in 2024, shocked the conscience
of nearly every American, regardless of party affiliation.
We, the Members of the Homeland Security Committee from
both sides of the aisle, are here today to ask questions and--
about those who were in charge that day, to hold the Secret
Service accountable, but more importantly, to ensure this never
happens again.
Chairman, thank you for hosting this hearing.
Colonel Paris, you're the commissioner of the Pennsylvania
State Police Department?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir, I am.
Mr. LaLota. Your testimony, sir, is that approximately 25
minutes--and I won't hold you to the exacts--but approximately
25 minutes before the first shots were fired, that local law
enforcement officers identified Crooks as suspicious?
Colonel Paris. As suspicious, yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. What was it that led those officers to conclude
that Crooks was suspicious?
Colonel Paris. My understanding was that he was milling
about, and he stood out to them because he never made his way
to a point of ingress to the venue.
In defense of possible hypotheses, he could've been waiting
for somebody, he could've been delayed. But he stood out to
them, and they, from their vantage point at the AGR building,
identified him as suspicious.
Chairman Green. Back at 62 minutes prior, as I understand
the time line. That first one, it was 25 minutes prior for the
rangefinder.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman.
Commissioner, with respect to him being suspicious, were
there other folks who were also in the crowd identified as
suspicious by law enforcement?
Colonel Paris. I have been briefed that, yes, there were
multiple individuals, which would be consistent with normal
operations for a detail like this, that are identified as
suspicious.
Mr. LaLota. Can we take that as a single digit number of
other folks?
Colonel Paris. The number that I was briefed on was single
digit, but I can't say definitively that I was----
Mr. LaLota. What number were you briefed on, Colonel?
Colonel Paris. Excuse me?
Mr. LaLota. What number were you briefed on?
Colonel Paris. I believe I was briefed on an additional 3
individuals.
Mr. LaLota. OK. So Crooks, plus 3. My understanding is you
had about 30 Pennsylvania State Police officers at the time of
the rally?
Colonel Paris. That were assigned to the detail--both
responsibilities of the detail, yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. Were all of them assigned to your area of the
perimeter, not the interior where the Secret Service held the
most jurisdiction?
Colonel Paris. I'm confused by your question, sir.
Mr. LaLota. My understanding, and what the committee has
been told, is there were 2 layers of defense of President
Trump: No. 1, the interior, which the Secret Service held the
most domain over, and No. 2, the exterior perimeter, which had
ceded a lot of authorities to State and local. Is that your
understanding as well, Colonel?
Colonel Paris. So I don't want to get convoluted with the
different perimeters. I'm familiar that there was a VIP seating
area up front.
When I refer to the secure perimeter, I'm talking about the
fencing that goes around the Butler County Farm Show. All of
our people were detailed at various locations, decided by the
Secret Service, inside of that----
Mr. LaLota. So that leads me to my next question. If staff
can cue up the Eli Crane video to about second number 1 or 2.
This is the AGR building. I and several of my colleagues
were there yesterday in Butler. Kudos to Mr. Crane for getting
this good video.
My understanding from your prior testimony is there were 2
officers stationed or assigned, I think was your testimony, to
this building?
Colonel Paris. I'm aware of 2, but I don't want to say--
again, not having seen the Secret Service----
Mr. LaLota. They were assigned, sir?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is that the Secret Service
and Butler ESU had some sort of collaboration, and that was to
be covered.
Mr. LaLota. What was their assignment in the building, sir?
Colonel Paris. I cannot comment. I'd be remiss----
Mr. LaLota. Were they assigned to be in the building?
Colonel Paris. I can't comment----
Mr. LaLota. What were the qualifications of the people
assigned to or around the building? ESU guys? SWAT guys? Long
guns? Good tactics?
Colonel Paris. They would be, as the name implies, but I
defer to their exact training. I'm not aware of it
specifically.
Mr. LaLota. But your understanding is, sir, the duration of
the incident to at least the first shots fired, they were
entirely within the building, not on the building, sir?
Colonel Paris. I don't 100% want to say where they are--
where they were the entire period.
Mr. LaLota. But you don't have an understanding as to
whether they were assigned to be in the building or on top of
it?
Colonel Paris. I don't. I would need to see the Secret
Service operations plan.
Mr. LaLota. Would that have been left to the discretion of
State and local or would that have been left to the discretion
of the Secret Service?
It sounds like you're saying that would've been left to the
discretion of the Secret Service.
Colonel Paris. I would say the Secret Service is the lead
agency--just like they told us, here's the post we want you to
staff, this is the motorcade we want. I would defer to the
Secret Service.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks, Colonel.
When in Butler yesterday, we asked the question, why
weren't the 2 well-qualified ESU officers on top of the
building rather than in it? What would you say if we were told
the explanation is, well, it was a hot day in Butler, and there
was air-conditioning inside the building and not on the
building? What would be your reaction to that assertion,
Colonel?
Colonel Paris. I can't respond to it. I have no first-hand
knowledge about it.
Mr. LaLota. Was it a hot day in Butler that day?
Colonel Paris. I believe it was a warm day, yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. But you have no knowledge of whether or not the
Secret Service or anybody else assigned these 2 officers to be
in the building and not on it?
Colonel Paris. No, sir.
Mr. LaLota. I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
We're going to go out of order because Mr. Luttrell has to
get to his committee, so you're recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Can you pull the video back up, please?
Just for clarification, that is the exact point where the
shooter was positioned, correct? Looking through that window,
in proximity to--if you give a rangefinder to viewers, to
expose yourself outside that window, is that the shooter's
position? No?
In relation to that video, where is the shooter's position
at?
Mr. Crane. It's on the left.
Mr. Luttrell. Just further on the left side.
Mr. Paris, can you clarify something? There were ESU agents
internal to the building or in proximity to the building and in
that location, correct?
Colonel Paris. I don't know to that specific location, but
they were assigned to the AGR building.
Mr. Luttrell. Once the call went out that you had a bad
actor in, the agents in the building left their position to try
to find that individual?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is he was on the ground
moving around the perimeter, and they moved to actively aid in
the search, along with additional municipal officers who were--
--
Mr. Luttrell. Does it make sense that ESU agents would be
positioned inside the windows so they'd have a better vantage
point out into where the ``X'' is, or where the asset is
located?
Colonel Paris. Could you ask that question again?
Mr. Luttrell. Because it makes sense to me that the ESU
agents would be positioned in these windows, the windows that
they're talking about in this building, so they could have
better eyes on the asset--the President--instead of internal to
the building milling about. Is that a fair assessment?
Colonel Paris. I'm remiss because I don't know what the
conversation was and what their responsibilities to when----
Mr. Luttrell. I think my concern is, if we did have
agents--let's just speak hypothetically here--if agents were
positioned in these windows in order to provide cover--I'm
sorry--protection for the asset and then they were released--
and I'm assuming they work in pairs, correct? There's only 2 of
them, or is there 4 of them in the building? Do we know----
Colonel Paris. From my briefings, there were 2.
Mr. Luttrell. There were 2. But to me, it would make sense
that 1 would stay behind in order to cover the X, or cover the
asset, and then 1 would engage in activity to find the actor
that they were trying to identify, correct?
Colonel Paris. I can't----
Mr. Luttrell. I think my concern is, the individuals may--
and I hate to say this out loud, but if we didn't do due
justice and we left that asset exposed because both ESU agents
went to look for a bad actor, we just gave the shooter a
bowling alley.
Colonel Paris. I don't know what their responsibilities and
their rules of engagement were, not having seen the Secret
Service operations plan. I'm reluctant to speculate at this
point 10 days out, sir. I would rely on the reviews yet to
come.
Mr. Luttrell. When it comes to Secret Service--talk comms
matrix here real quick. When it comes to Secret Service and the
local law enforcement and State law enforcement, I understand
that they are housed in the same--is there a common
communication channel, and if so, does each agent and each
officer that's working the event have--and I'm going to use an
old term now--do they have an avalanche call? Do they have a no
joy? When they see something that raises the red flag, can any
officer radio in go/no-go, we are not--hold the asset in place,
we have somebody that we're looking for? Or--and if they do or
if they don't, how many people does that have to go through to
get to the right actor, in order to say ``stop''?
Colonel Paris. I don't know.
Mr. Luttrell. OK. We need to figure that out. Because if
I'm an ESU agent in this window and I have to radio a person
who has to radio somebody, who has to radio somebody else to
get to the main person, then to call it, the dishes are done.
Colonel Paris. I'm aware of 3 radio systems in operation:
PSP's, the Secret Service, and Butler County's.
Mr. Luttrell. All communicating on different channels?
Colonel Paris. Technically, yes, but the integration
occurs--I can only speak from PSP. Our integration occurs by us
having somebody inside of the Secret Service command post.
Again, for an incident of this magnitude, in theory, the
more people you have on the same channel, if there was a
medical emergency or a lost 6-year-old, and everybody keys up
at once, it paralyzes your communication.
Mr. Luttrell. I understand that, but if there's one
specific channel that you can go to to call an avalanche and
say--which is freeze the asset--I think that would be
necessary.
Now, you just mentioned something earlier. You guys have
done about 20 events this year in Pennsylvania, so--and you
spoke--it's common.
Now, the military folks in this room are going to
understand this. The first month of deployment and the last
month of deployment are the most dangerous times to be in
combat. One, because you get to the first month, you have no
idea what's going on. Then you're there and you get common, you
get complacent. Before you leave, that last month, situational
awareness kind of dies down a little bit, and that's when bad
things happen.
There's absolutely nothing common in protecting a
President--ever. As we move forward, I don't want that to be a
term that we use, because ``common'' just got our President--
our former President shot. If these assets would've been on
high alert--and I'm not saying that they weren't--but when
things become common, we get complacent.
Colonel Paris. I've instructed our commanders, moving
forward, if there is any--my expectation would be that, through
the collaboration and the planning of these events, you want
more people there, you want people voicing issues, and
everybody operating on the same page in a unified command.
But I have instructed our commanders, the ops plans get
reviewed prior to this up through our deputy commissioner of
operations, Lieutenant Colonel Bivens, seated here behind me
today. But through a result--or as a result of this, if there
are any issues that our people see, we are ordering them to
flag them, and we'll work collaboratively moving forward for
the remainder of the season and moving forward.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
Our witnesses, at any point where--you know, we're going to
probably go at least another hour here--if you need to take a
break, just let me know. Just give me the high sign or a
thumbs-up. Y'all are OK right now or you----
Mr. Yoes. Can we have 5?
Chairman Green. Take a break? All right. We'll do 5 minutes
and 5 minutes only. The restroom's right down the hallway to
your right.
Adjourned.
[Recess.]
Chairman Green. The committee will come to order.
I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Menendez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you to our
witnesses for appearing here today.
I just want to join my colleagues in remembering our
colleague Sheila Jackson Lee. She was incredible at this job.
She was brilliant. She was tenacious. She was tough. But she
cared about her district, cared about this country, and perhaps
my favorite thing was her taking the 5-minute clock as a
recommendation as opposed to a hard set time.
But to the matter today, I just want to ask, Colonel Paris,
how many times have you worked with the Secret Service on
events like this in Pennsylvania?
Colonel Paris. So year-to-date, we're in the low 20's.
Mr. Menendez. So low 20's just this year.
Colonel Paris. Yes. In an average year, it's about the same
number, but given the election year, there's more.
Mr. Menendez. I'm sorry for not knowing this, but in your
entire career, that would make it roughly how many times?
Colonel Paris. Dozens, I would say.
Mr. Menendez. OK. Do you find that there's, for each event,
despite whether it's in Philadelphia or Butler, a standard
process and set of procedures that are followed every single
time?
Colonel Paris. In terms of the planning of it or the
execution?
Mr. Menendez. The consistency of the planning of the event
where----
Colonel Paris. Yes, I would say there is a consistency of
the planning, based on my experience, yes.
Mr. Menendez. Not much variation, there is a set plan that
the Secret Service administers with its State, county, and
local partners?
Colonel Paris. That's been my experience, yes, sir.
Mr. Menendez. Was there any change or deviation in this
plan?
Colonel Paris. Not to my knowledge.
Mr. Menendez. OK. I benefit from so many of my colleagues
on this committee who served in law enforcement, served in our
military. I did not. I want to ask you a question.
From the time that a law enforcement officer was hoisted
up, was identified by the shooter, shooter turns his rifle on
him, how long between that encounter and the first shot?
Colonel Paris. So I'm glad you asked me that question,
Congressman. I'd like to clarify. So it was a matter of
seconds.
Mr. Menendez. OK. Because I think earlier it might've
been----
Colonel Paris. Correct. I appreciate you asking that
question and allowing me to clarify it on the record. When I
assigned that number, which, again, I don't want to get locked
into a time line, of 3 minutes before, that's probably a total
number of time, amount of time, that he was on the roof. When
there was local--when the one local officer hoisted the other
one up and subsequently falls, releases himself after being
faced with----
Mr. Menendez. Shooter shuffles across the roof.
Colonel Paris. He's already, I believe, close to being in
his final position there.
Mr. Menendez. OK.
Colonel Paris. I'm told, it's, again, sequence of events,
not a time line, based on the prior criteria I laid out, but
seconds after that is when the first shots rang out.
Mr. Menendez. That's helpful. The Chairman and I were
conferring on that, because it would've been--there's many
failures on that day, but it would've been a critical failure
if a gunman had turned his rifle on law enforcement, and no one
to pull the President off the stage if it was a matter of
minutes but seconds.
Colonel Paris. Thanks for allowing me to clarify.
Mr. Menendez. Yes, of course, of course, and thank you for
answering the question.
Just going back to the general process that you've seen
over your distinguished career, were there any specific
challenges that you and your team faced during this event?
Colonel Paris. None of which I'm aware, to my knowledge.
The planning on the PSP side, as per our interface with the
Secret Service, was routine.
Mr. Menendez. OK. You mentioned earlier that there's--that
in your experience in the standard protocol, the Secret Service
comes, engages with its State, county, and local partners. They
have a plan, they work with their partners to implement the
plan in the lead-up to the event and the day of the event.
Is there an opportunity for the State, county, and local
partners to provide input, you know, given that they have more
familiarity with the area? Butler Police, you, yourself have
more familiarity with the area. Is there an opportunity for you
to provide any feedback to the plan that the Secret Service
comes to you with?
Colonel Paris. In my past experience, yes. In my past
experience, I found the Secret Service very open and
collaborative. We enjoy a very strong working relationship with
them.
Again, there's that fine line where the deference is that
they're the--they're the top com under a unified command. It's
their incident. But certainly we would endeavor to give them
any local nuance that would make the planning more successful
and more safe.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. One of the things we
touched on multiple times today is the multiple lines of
communication, 3 different signals that were being used, a
command center. In your experience working with the Secret
Service, have you seen a better implementation of a more
streamlined communication set-up that allows the different
actors--the local PD, the county PD, the State police--to
directly communicate to the command center, and then once
there, there's a clear chain of command?
Colonel Paris. I have not. The Secret Service comms is a
very complex operation because of the world-wide environment in
which they work. I'm in no way an expert in it. I think from
the State and local perspective, our job is to try and
integrate communications, and it doesn't have to be a super
high-tech solution. We have people who can get a message, turn
over their shoulder and----
Mr. Menendez. Right.
Colonel Paris [continuing]. Report verbally. We have radios
that we can exchange or we have a trooper with a radio assigned
to another partner, be that a Federal partner or a municipal
partner, and those two radio communication systems can
interface because of the human interaction.
Mr. Menendez. I'll wrap up real quickly, Mr. Chair.
It sort-of makes sense in a way because you're going to
have people doing traffic. They're going to--folks who you
mentioned, a child went missing, you could have a firecracker.
You could have a multiple number of things that don't need to
rise up, which is why some level of siloing makes sense. But we
need to look at how we make it a clearer chain of communication
to ensure that really important pieces of information, like
identifying a shooter on the roof, doesn't get delayed in
moving through those channels.
So thank you both for appearing here, thank you both for
your service. Thank you, Chair. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Sheriff--I mean Congressman Ezell for his 5
minutes of testimony.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, we also want to thank all of you for being here
today, and for Speaker Johnson for putting together a
bipartisan task force to try to--so we can get as much
information, we can find out what happened here.
Today's conversations regarding the attempted assassination
of former President Trump is a critical one that I pray never
happens again.
Throughout my law enforcement career, I held many
leadership positions, and through those roles, I've coordinated
with the White House advance teams, State and local law
enforcement, and doing some of these very same similar-type
events. We have one goal in mind, and that's to keep people
safe.
Because of a massive failure in communication, President
Trump was shot from a little more than a football field away.
Because of the failure of former--of Secret Service leadership,
especially the former director, spectators were forced to do
what the Secret Service failed to do, and that was protect
themselves from bullets. Ultimately, this led to the death of
Corey Comperatore, who gave his life while bravely shielding
his wife and children during this terrible thing.
Colonel, thank you for being here today. I've said from the
beginning, if you want answers, you got to talk to the men and
women who were on the ground, the law enforcement officers who
were out there and who were taking directions and commands from
the leadership of Secret Service and various other leaders.
You testified that 32 members of PSP were assigned to
various roles to assist the Secret Service. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir, I did.
Mr. Ezell. Your officers were assigned to various roles,
but they were not responsible for securing the building or
property at AGR. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Ezell. The former director testified yesterday that the
building was outside the Secret Service-secured perimeter.
Did the U.S. Secret Service leadership direct local or
State police that that was their job to secure the building,
and if so, did they provide any guidance on this?
Colonel Paris. So as I stated earlier, aside from the
briefing that I received about the walk-through when the
question was raised and the response from the advance team of
the Secret Service, the agents on the pre-plan, that that was
going to be the responsibility of Butler ESU. I have no first-
hand knowledge about any interaction between the Secret Service
and any other entity really.
Mr. Ezell. The Secret Service established and managed the
primary command post for communications in the office of the
Butler Farm Show. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. That's my understanding, sir, yes.
Mr. Ezell. Preliminary findings have concluded that
communications were siloed, and local law enforcement were not
in frequent radio contact directly with the Secret Service.
Local SWAT and sniper teams were on a separate radio channel
from patrol.
Colonel, do your radios have the capability to be
programmed to be in contact with other agencies, and do you
know if the officers on the ground that day had communication
capabilities with the Secret Service that was on duty that day?
Colonel Paris. You're asking me a very specific question
that I would defer to our Bureau of Communication and
Information Services. I can get you an answer as to what
those----
Mr. Ezell. OK. Thank you very much.
Colonel Paris [continuing]. Specific capabilities were.
Mr. Ezell. Do you know if the Secret Service provided any
guidance on combined communications?
Colonel Paris. I do not. Again, referring I have not seen
their operations plan.
Mr. Ezell. At 5:45 p.m., a local law enforcement sniper
observed the suspect with a rangefinder and reported the
suspect to command and the U.S. Secret Service.
Colonel, how would you have responded to that information?
Colonel Paris. So, again, I certainly wouldn't articulate
that at that point a rangefinder, which could have legal and
legitimate use, that that is a threat, but it's certainly a
highly suspicious activity that should be addressed.
Mr. Ezell. Exactly.
Mr. Yoes, you testified clear and constant communication is
crucial to ensure the security of the protectee and that local
law enforcement should be part of the command post to
facilitate real-time information sharing and rapid response to
emerging situations.
As we all know, separate communications are necessary and
effective during a large-scale event like this. There's no way
everybody can be on the same channel. You talk over each other,
you won't ever get anything done.
But there must be some clear understandings through
communications at the beginning so that split-second decisions
can be made so there won't be a lapse in time and these
terrible things happen.
Would you like to just say a few words about that?
Mr. Yoes. I'm sorry. There's no doubt when you look at how
many people were involved in an operation like this, having
everyone on one channel is difficult. But there are people
within contained areas, and their ability to be able to
communicate as things change across platforms is crucial.
In this case, we know that in seconds things unfolded, and
in seconds, getting, you know, meaningful communication out to
people who might be able to act on that communication is vital.
So I think there's avenues here. I agree that not everyone
should be on the same channel, but there are certain people
within certain areas and perimeters that should be having
communication or the ability to communicate a little more
freer.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. D'Esposito, representing the New York
law enforcement community as well, for 5 minutes of testimony.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good
afternoon. Thank you both for your service.
On July 13, we witnessed the Secret Service fail to secure
a Pennsylvania field and keep the former President of the
United States of America and the Americans that were gathered
there safe.
While President Trump thankfully survived this horrific
attack, Corey Comperatore, a volunteer fire chief, a father,
and a husband died while shielding his family from the
assassin's bullets. Two others, David Dutch and James
Copenhaver, were both struck by bullets and are still
recovering.
The Secret Service failed. Quite frankly, they failed
miserably. Colonel Paris, Mr. Yoes, Mr. Ezell, myself, we could
probably combine our law enforcement experience and have no
question that there was failures that day. We could probably
ask someone who just graduated from a police academy or a
veteran with 40 years on the job, and they would agree.
So my first question is to Colonel Paris. I know that you
mentioned over the last year you've had close to 20
interactions with the Secret Service in visits.
During his Presidency, Pennsylvania has been the second-
most visited State by President Biden. If you could go over
again, what is your coordination with the Secret Service, what
does it normally look like ahead of a visit from the President
of the United States?
Colonel Paris. So I would say the basic time line is the
same. We are notified at some point that there's going to be a
visit of a protectee or the President and everybody in between.
The venue is ultimately secured, the logistics, and then
there's planning at the request of the Secret Service, and our
default position is to attempt to partner and give them all the
support that we can.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Now, I know that Mr. Menendez had
similar questions, but I just want to reiterate because I think
it's critically important. Of the dozens of times that you've
dealt with visits from the President of the United States--and
I'm sure you've thought about this dozens and dozens of times
at this point and read through emails and thought about
different incidents--compared to the incident on July 13, was
there anything different from the way that this was handled?
Colonel Paris. Not to my knowledge, sir.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. So at approximately 5:51 p.m.,
Pennsylvania State Police notified the Secret Service of a
subject with a rangefinder. That was 20 minutes before the
gunman shot President Trump and two others.
This is for either one of you. What should've happened
next?
Colonel Paris. So ideally, I would say that Mr. Crooks
could've been encountered and intercepted. That would've been
the ideal.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Yoes.
Mr. Yoes. Well, again, I have no direct knowledge, I want
to make that clear, but I think also we need to assess the
threat and determine whether there's a need to withhold the
asset from the stage.
Mr. D'Esposito. So I think we all know what should've
happened, right. Twenty minutes passed. There was someone who
eventually took a shot at a former President of the United
States and killed 2 innocent Americans. So we know what did
happen. We know what should've happened.
What do you say to those that are saying that local law
enforcement failed to provide adequate security at this rally?
Colonel Paris. As I stated earlier, based on everything I
know up until day 10, I only am going to comment on the
Pennsylvania State Police, and it's my belief as I sit here,
based on all the information that I have, that we met or
exceeded our expectations for that event.
Am I saying that the event was a success? Obviously it was
not. Our hearts go out to those affected.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Yoes.
Mr. Yoes. I will echo the fact that local law enforcement
plays a huge role--and must--I don't think the Federal agencies
have the ability or the bandwidth to be able to have this event
without coordinated effort with local law enforcement.
To my knowledge, local law enforcement did what their
responsibilities and directions were.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Yoes, we've corresponded about this
prior, but I just want to, in the last 20 seconds I have, the
United States Secret Service established and managed the
primary command post.
Would you agree, Colonel, that in the United States of
America we have a serious issue when it comes to law
enforcement and communicating through multiple jurisdictions
and agencies at a singular event?
Colonel Paris. I would say the short answer is it depends,
but communications are always a critical piece to any
successful operation.
Mr. D'Esposito. So I agree it does depend, but I do have a
concern. When some people's lives are on the line, when we are
supposed to be protecting an asset, regardless of who it is but
especially someone who was and--was the President of the United
States. The fact that law enforcement agencies are
communicating at such a critical time via text message is a
problem, and it's one that I think this committee and other
committees need to take a real hard look at.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Strong for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for being
here today. I think we all agree that none of us ever wanted to
be holding a hearing like this.
As we have covered, the Secret Service relies on Federal,
State, and local partners to coordinate and secure events to
ensure the safety of its protectee. As both of you rightly
emphasized in your testimony, Secret Service is the ultimate
responsible and the final arbiter of any and all security
matters affecting their protectee. Full stop.
Mr. Yoes, you also went on to highlight the importance of
mutual respect, trust, and shared commitment in the
relationship between Secret Service, the State, and locals.
I was pleased to learn that Director Cheatle has tendered
her resignation. This is the first time we have seen real
accountability from the director following July 13. It is my
hope the truth will now come.
Her lack of leadership following the assassination attempt
has not only impeded the on-going investigation and eroded the
public's trust, but it has also the potential to erode the
mutual respect and trust that are fundamental to this
relationship between the Secret Service and partners they rely
on.
Colonel Paris. I understand that State and local--locals
were the ones that first alerted the command center of a
suspicious individual some 20 minutes before he started
shooting. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. As I said before, I would agree with the
sequence of events, but I don't want to spec---or I don't want
to go on the record with the exact time. So that's my
understanding of the sequence of events, yes, sir.
Mr. Strong. Does the Pennsylvania State Police use a
digital radio system, whether it be the P25 or something of
that nature?
Colonel Paris. Yes, we do.
Mr. Strong. It has unbelievable technology. I know we've
utilized it throughout the State of Alabama. Forty years as a
first responder, to go from UHF, VHF, to a digital system
changes the ball game.
Does the Secret Service also use a digital radio system?
Colonel Paris. I would have to get you information on that.
I don't know, sir, specifically.
Mr. Strong. OK. So the communication between the agencies,
you know, you start looking at it, the communication with a
digital radio system, you can change frequencies----
Colonel Paris. Right.
Mr. Strong [continuing]. You can make a mutual frequency.
Every radio has--you can have hundreds of different
frequencies. But as far as, you're not sure if they have a
digital radio system or if they're using another conventional
UHF or VHF frequency or something of that nature?
Colonel Paris. In answer to the first part, I'm not an
expert on radios. I can't render an opinion on what their
system is. The only answer I would provide is, my understanding
is there are certain encrypted capabilities that the Secret
Service has to maintain that may provide difficulty in what
would otherwise be, if we had a regular incident, and we were
able to set up a patch to communicate across agencies.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Colonel Paris, as you just shared, after State and locals
identified the shooter as suspicious, they relayed that
information to Secret Service and were given a number to send
their concerns to.
Is this standard operating procedures to be left a phone
number to give your information to, rather than direct
communications through radio?
Colonel Paris. I don't want to say that it's standard
operating procedure, but if it's--if it was a system that--or a
measure that worked to push that information to the people who
needed it, in the most expeditious means, I wouldn't be averse
to going away from standard protocols.
Mr. Strong. You said that you had done this type of event
with other Presidents or in your State. In past history, is
this how it usually was done?
Colonel Paris. I can't say that I have had personal
experience about--I've obviously been present when there were
suspicious people that came out over the radio and law
enforcement was seeking them, but I can't say that I have a
frame of reference exactly on point here, sir.
Mr. Strong. Did the Secret Service provide rules of
engagement for State and locals? Did y'all have to authorize a
green light for fire, or do you go by your day-to-day
activity----
Colonel Paris. We would go by our--we would go by the
policy and regulations and State law that cover the
Pennsylvania State Police.
Mr. Strong. Another thing that stood out to me with a
background in emergency medical services is, when the President
was brought off, you saw his SUV move about 20 feet, and then
it sat there. We watched as a lady in a skirt walked in front
of the SUV. We watched as other law enforcement, people,
spectators, whatever--did you notice that that seemed to be a
long time for the President to be sitting, for someone that had
taken a bullet, did you think that was a long time?
Colonel Paris. I would completely defer to the Secret
Service.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Crane for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like the staff to go ahead and play the video that I
took at the site yesterday.
[Video shown.]
Mr. Crane. Can you guys cut it right there, please? Cut it.
Thank you.
All right. Colonel Paris, did you notice when you showed up
on-site what the tallest structure on the site was?
Colonel Paris. I can't say at the moment that I arrived
that I did, no, sir.
Mr. Crane. OK. Now that you've had a chance to go back and
look over it, what is the tallest structure on that site?
Colonel Paris. The water tower, sir.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely.
Colonel, do you know how far the water tower was from the
roof where the shooter took his shots?
Colonel Paris. I do not.
Mr. Crane. One hundred sixty yards, sir.
Who made the decision, Colonel, not to put a counter-sniper
team on the tallest structure, by far, on the site, with 360-
degree surveillance? Do you have any idea?
Colonel Paris. I do not know, sir.
Mr. Crane. OK. We'd like to get that answer.
Did you see the video that showed me sticking my phone out
the second-story window? Did you see that?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Crane. OK. Exposing the coverage of the window of the
entire roof.
Are you aware that local law enforcement and Secret Service
had full access to that building and that room?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is that they did.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Why weren't security teams, sir, on-site
able to spot a 20-year-old kid with zero camouflage crawling up
a white roof with an AR-15, that several rally-goers were
screaming and yelling and pointing out and they noticed him--
and they weren't even there to conduct security, they were
there to watch the President. Do you have any idea why the
security teams couldn't find that guy?
Colonel Paris. I do not, sir.
Chairman Green. Would the gentleman yield for just a second
on that?
Mr. Crane. Yes, sir.
Chairman Green. So just for clarification, it was the ESU
guys that were manning those buildings----
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Chairman Green [continuing]. And they left because of the
call of the suspicious person. So they left their post there to
go look for him. They're the same individuals who attempted to
climb up the building and were scared away by the shooter
pointing the gun, right?
Mr. Crane. I reclaim my time. Thank you.
Chairman Green. OK.
Mr. Crane. I'm just wondering why they weren't able to find
him, because even while they were looking, they could've still
looked out that window that they had access to.
All right. Colonel Paris--I'm just going to say it--are you
aware, sir, that many Americans believe this was very likely
not a lone shooter but a coordinated assassination attempt?
Have you been getting those messages from people, like I have?
Colonel Paris. I have not, sir.
Mr. Crane. You haven't? Well, there's a lot of people in
this room that have been getting the same messages. Why do you
think that is? Why do you think that a lot of Americans are
like, this doesn't add up, this doesn't make sense, guys? How
could this many things have gone wrong? Right? Like the things
I pointed out: a 20-year-old kid got 150 yards of the President
of the United States with an AR-15, flew a drone to conduct
site surveillance, was spotted with a rangefinder, ranging
targets, then lost, had advanced explosive devices on him, with
no military training, nobody was placed in the most obvious
spot to conduct counter-sniper operations.
I was a sniper in the SEAL teams, Colonel. As soon as I got
out of the SUV and I saw that water tower, I was like, that's
exactly where I'd be. Put me right there. So obvious.
After partisan attempts to bankrupt him, imprison him for
750 years, and countless depictions as a modern-day Hitler, are
you surprised, sir, that a lot of Americans are, like, maybe
there's more to the story?
Colonel Paris. I wouldn't begin to speculate about what the
American people think, sir.
Mr. Crane. Colonel, did your team make entry and conduct
investigation at the suspect's home prior to the shooting?
Colonel Paris. Excuse me, sir. Ask that question----
Mr. Crane. Did your team make entry and conduct any
investigation at the suspect's home?
Colonel Paris. I believe we had people that participated in
that securing of it. There were bomb assets that we provided.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Chairman, can I have 30 more seconds?
Chairman Green. Yes, yes. I'm letting everybody kind-of----
Mr. Crane. OK.
Colonel Paris. On the night of. Since then, none----
Mr. Crane. Did you get any reports from any of your agents
of anything fishy at the home?
Colonel Paris. I was briefed on----
Mr. Crane. Was there any silverware found in the home or
trash?
Colonel Paris. I have no--nothing in the briefing that I
was given, sir.
Mr. Crane. Was it extremely clean, almost like a medical
lab? Were you given any of those reports?
Colonel Paris. I was not given any of those details, sir.
Mr. Crane. OK. That's what I'm hearing. Interesting.
The last thing I want to enter into the record, Mr.
Chairman, this is a article, opinion, from, I believe The
Washington Post, by Robert Kagan, ``A Trump dictatorship is
increasingly inevitable. We should stop pretending.''
This article compares Trump to Caesar, and attempts to
justify the assassination of President Trump. I think, even
though we want to dodge around it and not make this partisan, I
think we all know that a lot of this has to do with the
rhetoric, the very violent rhetoric that has led up to this.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields, and so ordered on the
entry of that into the record.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted by Hon. Elijah Crane
a trump dictatorship is increasingly inevitable. we should stop
pretending.
By Robert Kagan, The Washington Post
November 30, 2023 at 8 o'clock a.m. EST
Robert Kagan, a Post Opinions contributing editor, is the
author of ``Rebellion: How Antiliberalism Is
Tearing America Apart--Again,'' which will be
published by Knopf in May.
Let's stop the wishful thinking and face the stark reality: There
is a clear path to dictatorship in the United States, and it is getting
shorter every day. In 13 weeks, Donald Trump will have locked up the
Republican nomination. In the RealClearPolitics poll average (for the
period from Nov. 9 to 20), Trump leads his nearest competitor by 47
points and leads the rest of the field combined by 27 points. The idea
that he is unelectable in the general election is nonsense--he is tied
or ahead of President Biden in all the latest polls--stripping other
Republican challengers of their own stated reasons for existence. The
fact that many Americans might prefer other candidates, much ballyhooed
by such political sages as Karl Rove, will soon become irrelevant when
millions of Republican voters turn out to choose the person whom no one
allegedly wants.
For many months now, we have been living in a world of self-
delusion, rich with imagined possibilities. Maybe it will be Ron
DeSantis, or maybe Nikki Haley. Maybe the myriad indictments of Trump
will doom him with Republican suburbanites. Such hopeful speculation
has allowed us to drift along passively, conducting business as usual,
taking no dramatic action to change course, in the hope and expectation
that something will happen. Like people on a riverboat, we have long
known there is a waterfall ahead but assume we will somehow find our
way to shore before we go over the edge. But now the actions required
to get us to shore are looking harder and harder, if not downright
impossible.
The magical-thinking phase is ending. Barring some miracle, Trump
will soon be the presumptive Republican nominee for president. When
that happens, there will be a swift and dramatic shift in the political
power dynamic, in his favor. Until now, Republicans and conservatives
have enjoyed relative freedom to express anti-Trump sentiments, to
speak openly and positively about alternative candidates, to vent
criticisms of Trump's behavior past and present. Donors who find Trump
distasteful have been free to spread their money around to help his
competitors. Establishment Republicans have made no secret of their
hope that Trump will be convicted and thus removed from the equation
without their having to take a stand against him.
All this will end once Trump wins Super Tuesday. Votes are the
currency of power in our system, and money follows, and by those
measures, Trump is about to become far more powerful than he already
is. The hour of casting about for alternatives is closing. The next
phase is about people falling into line.
In fact, it has already begun. As his nomination becomes
inevitable, donors are starting to jump from other candidates to Trump.
The recent decision by the Koch political network to endorse GOP
hopeful Nikki Haley is scarcely sufficient to change this trajectory.
And why not? If Trump is going to be the nominee, it makes sense to
sign up early while he is still grateful for defectors. Even anti-Trump
donors must ask whether their cause is best served by shunning the man
who stands a reasonable chance of being the next president. Will
corporate executives endanger the interests of their shareholders just
because they or their spouses hate Trump? It's not surprising that
people with hard cash on the line are the first to flip.
The rest of the Republican Party will quickly follow. Rove's recent
exhortation that primary voters choose anyone but Trump is the last
such plea you are likely to hear from anyone with a future in the
party. Even in a normal campaign, intraparty dissent begins to
disappear once the primaries produce a clear winner. Most of the
leading candidates have already pledged to support Trump if he is the
nominee, even before he has won a single primary vote. Imagine their
posture after he runs the table on Super Tuesday. Most of the
candidates running against him will sprint toward him, competing for
his favor. After Super Tuesday, there will be no surer and shorter path
to the presidency for a Republican than to become the loyal running
mate of a man who will be 82 in 2028.
Republicans who have tried to navigate the Trump era by mixing
appeals to non-Trump voters with repeated professions of loyalty to
Trump will end that show. As perilous as it is for Republicans to say a
negative word about Trump today, it will be impossible once he has sewn
up the nomination. The party will be in full general-election mode,
subordinating all to the presidential campaign. What Republican or
conservative will be standing up to Trump then? Will the Wall Street
Journal editorial page, which has been rather boldly opposing Trump,
continue to do so once he is the nominee and it is a binary choice
between Trump and Biden? There will be no more infighting, only
outfighting; in short, a tsunami of Trump support from all directions.
A winner is a winner. And a winner who stands a reasonable chance of
wielding all the power there is to wield in the world is going to
attract support no matter who they are. That is the nature of power, at
any time in any society.
But Trump will not only dominate his party. He will again become
the central focus of everyone's attention. Even today, the news media
can scarcely resist following Trump's every word and action. Once he
secures the nomination, he will loom over the country like a colossus,
his every word and gesture chronicled endlessly. Even today, the
mainstream news media, including The Post and NBC News, is joining
forces with Trump's lawyers to seek televised coverage of his Federal
criminal trial in D.C. Trump intends to use the trial to boost his
candidacy and discredit the American justice system as corrupt--and the
media outlets, serving their own interests, will help him do it.
Trump will thus enter the general-election campaign early next year
with momentum, backed by growing political and financial resources, and
an increasingly unified party. Can the same be said of Biden? Is
Biden's power likely to grow over the coming months? Will his party
unify around him? Or will alarm and doubt among Democrats, already
high, continue to increase? Even at this point, the president is
struggling with double-digit defections among Black Americans and
younger voters. Jill Stein and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. have already
launched, respectively, third-party and independent campaigns, coming
at Biden in the main from the populist left. The decision by Sen. Joe
Manchin III (D-W.Va.) not to run for reelection in West Virginia but
instead to contemplate a third-party run for the presidency is
potentially devastating. The Democratic coalition is likely to remain
fractious as the Republicans unify and Trump consolidates his hold.
Biden, as some have pointed out, does not enjoy the usual
advantages of incumbency. Trump is effectively also an incumbent, after
all. That means Biden is unable to make the usual incumbent's claim
that electing his opponent is a leap into the unknown. Few Republicans
regard the Trump presidency as having been either abnormal or
unsuccessful. In his first term, the respected ``adults'' around him
not only blocked some of his most dangerous impulses but also kept them
hidden from the public. To this day, some of these same officials
rarely speak publicly against him. Why should Republican voters have a
problem with Trump if those who served him don't? Regardless of what
Trump's enemies think, this is going to be a battle of two tested and
legitimate presidents.
Trump, meanwhile, enjoys the usual advantage of non-incumbency,
namely: the lack of any responsibility. Biden must carry the world's
problems like an albatross around his neck, like any incumbent, but
most incumbents can at least claim that their opponent is too
inexperienced to be entrusted with these crises. Biden cannot. On
Trump's watch, there was no full-scale invasion of Ukraine, no major
attack on Israel, no runaway inflation, no disastrous retreat from
Afghanistan. It is hard to make the case for Trump's unfitness to
anyone who does not already believe it.
Trump enjoys some unusual advantages for a challenger, moreover.
Even Ronald Reagan did not have Fox News and the speaker of the House
in his pocket. To the degree there are structural advantages in the
coming general election, in short, they are on Trump's side. And that
is before we even get to the problem that Biden can do nothing to
solve: his age.
Trump also enjoys another advantage. The national mood less than a
year before the election is one of bipartisan disgust with the
political system in general. Rarely in American history has democracy's
inherent messiness been more striking. In Weimar Germany, Hitler and
other agitators benefited from the squabbling of the democratic
parties, right and left, the endless fights over the budget, the
logjams in the legislature, the fragile and fractious coalitions.
German voters increasingly yearned for someone to cut through it all
and get something--anything--done. It didn't matter who was behind the
political paralysis, either, whether the intransigence came from the
right or the left.
Today, Republicans might be responsible for Washington's
dysfunction, and they might pay a price for it in downballot races. But
Trump benefits from dysfunction because he is the one who offers a
simple answer: him. In this election, only one candidate is running on
the platform of using unprecedented power to get things done, to hell
with the rules. And a growing number of Americans claim to want that,
in both parties. Trump is running against the system. Biden is the
living embodiment of the system. Advantage: Trump.
Which brings us to Trump's expanding legal battlefronts. No doubt
Trump would have preferred to run for office without spending most of
his time fending off efforts to throw him in jail. Yet it is in the
courtroom over the coming months that Trump is going to display his
unusual power within the American political system.
It is hard to fault those who have taken Trump to court. He
certainly committed at least one of the crimes he is charged with; we
don't need a trial to tell us he tried to overturn the 2020 election.
Nor can you blame those who have hoped thereby to obstruct his path
back to the Oval Office. When a marauder is crashing through your
house, you throw everything you can at him--pots, pans, candlesticks--
in the hope of slowing him down and tripping him up. But that doesn't
mean it works.
Trump will not be contained by the courts or the rule of law. On
the contrary, he is going to use the trials to display his power.
That's why he wants them televised. Trump's power comes from his
following, not from the institutions of American government, and his
devoted voters love him precisely because he crosses lines and ignores
the old boundaries. They feel empowered by it, and that in turn
empowers him. Even before the trials begin, he is toying with the
judges, forcing them to try to muzzle him, defying their orders. He is
a bit like King Kong testing the chains on his arms, sensing that he
can break free whenever he chooses.
And just wait until the votes start pouring in. Will the judges
throw a presumptive Republican nominee in jail for contempt of court?
Once it becomes clear that they will not, then the power balance within
the courtroom, and in the country at large, will shift again to Trump.
The likeliest outcome of the trials will be to demonstrate our judicial
system's inability to contain someone like Trump and, incidentally, to
reveal its impotence as a check should he become president. Indicting
Trump for trying to overthrow the government will prove akin to
indicting Caesar for crossing the Rubicon, and just as effective. Like
Caesar, Trump wields a clout that transcends the laws and institutions
of government, based on the unswerving personal loyalty of his army of
followers.
I mention all this only to answer one simple question: Can Trump
win the election? The answer, unless something radical and unforeseen
happens, is: Of course he can. If that weren't so, the Democratic Party
would not be in a mounting panic about its prospects.
If Trump does win the election, he will immediately become the most
powerful person ever to hold that office. Not only will he wield the
awesome powers of the American executive--powers that, as conservatives
used to complain, have grown over the decades--but he will do so with
the fewest constraints of any president, fewer even than in his own
first term.
What limits those powers? The most obvious answer is the
institutions of justice--all of which Trump, by his very election, will
have defied and revealed as impotent. A court system that could not
control Trump as a private individual is not going to control him
better when he is president of the United States and appointing his own
attorney general and all the other top officials at the Justice
Department. Think of the power of a man who gets himself elected
president despite indictments, courtroom appearances and perhaps even
conviction? Would he even obey a directive of the Supreme Court? Or
would he instead ask how many armored divisions the chief justice has?
Will a future Congress stop him? Presidents can accomplish a lot
these days without congressional approval, as even Barack Obama showed.
The one check Congress has on a rogue president, namely, impeachment
and conviction, has already proved all but impossible--even when Trump
was out of office and wielded modest institutional power over his
party.
Another traditional check on a president is the Federal
bureaucracy, that vast apparatus of career government officials who
execute the laws and carry on the operations of government under every
president. They are generally in the business of limiting any
president's options. As Harry S. Truman once put it, ``Poor Ike. He'll
say `do this' and `do that' and nothing at all will happen.'' That was
a problem for Trump is his first term, partly because he had no
government team of his own to fill the administration. This time, he
will. Those who choose to serve in his second administration will not
be taking office with the unstated intention of refusing to carry out
his wishes. If the Heritage Foundation has its way, and there is no
reason to believe it won't, many of those career bureaucrats will be
gone, replaced by people carefully ``vetted'' to ensure their loyalty
to Trump.
What about the desire for reelection, a factor that constrains most
presidents? Trump might not want or need a third term, but were he to
decide he wanted one, as he has sometimes indicated, would the 22nd
Amendment block him any more effectively from being president for life
than the Supreme Court, if he refused to be blocked? Why should anyone
think that amendment would be more sacrosanct than any other part of
the Constitution for a man like Trump, or perhaps more importantly, for
his devoted supporters?
A final constraint on presidents has been their own desire for a
glittering legacy, with success traditionally measured in terms that
roughly equate to the well-being of the country. But is that the way
Trump thinks? Yes, Trump might seek a great legacy, but it is strictly
his own glory that he craves. As with Napoleon, who spoke of the glory
of France but whose narrow ambitions for himself and his family brought
France to ruin, Trump's ambitions, though he speaks of making America
great again, clearly begin and end with himself. As for his followers,
he doesn't have to achieve anything to retain their support--his
failure to build the wall in his first term in no way damaged his
standing with millions of his loyalists. They have never asked anything
of him other than that he triumph over the forces they hate in American
society. And that, we can be sure, will be Trump's primary mission as
president.
Having answered the question of whether Trump can win, we can now
turn to the most urgent question: Will his presidency turn into a
dictatorship? The odds are, again, pretty good.
It is worth getting inside Trump's head a bit and imagining his
mood following an election victory. He will have spent the previous
year, and more, fighting to stay out of jail, plagued by myriad
persecutors and helpless to do what he likes to do best: exact revenge.
Think of the fury that will have built up inside him, a fury that, from
his point of view, he has worked hard to contain. As he once put it,
``I think I've been toned down, if you want to know the truth. I could
really tone it up.'' Indeed he could--and will. We caught a glimpse of
his deep thirst for vengeance in his Veterans Day promise to ``root out
the Communists, Marxists, Fascists, and Radical Left Thugs that live
like vermin within the confines of our Country, lie, steal, and cheat
on Elections, and will do anything possible, whether legally or
illegally, to destroy America, and the American Dream.'' Note the
equation of himself with ``America and the American Dream.'' It is he
they are trying to destroy, he believes, and as president, he will
return the favor.
What will that look like? Trump has already named some of those he
intends to go after once he is elected: senior officials from his first
term such as retired Gen. John F. Kelly, Gen. Mark A. Milley, former
attorney general William P. Barr and others who spoke against him after
the 2020 election; officials in the FBI and the CIA who investigated
him in the Russia probe; Justice Department officials who refused his
demands to overturn the 2020 election; members of the Jan. 6 committee;
Democratic opponents including Rep. Adam B. Schiff (Calif.); and
Republicans who voted for or publicly supported his impeachment and
conviction.
But that's just the start. After all, Trump will not be the only
person seeking revenge. His administration will be filled with people
with enemies' lists of their own, a determined cadre of ``vetted''
officials who will see it as their sole, presidentially authorized
mission to ``root out'' those in the government who cannot be trusted.
Many will simply be fired, but others will be subject to career-
destroying investigations. The Trump administration will be filled with
people who will not need explicit instruction from Trump, any more than
Hitler's local gauleiters needed instruction. In such circumstances,
people ``work toward the Fuhrer,'' which is to say, they anticipate his
desires and seek favor through acts they think will make him happy,
thereby enhancing their own influence and power in the process.
Nor will it be difficult to find things to charge opponents with.
Our history is unfortunately filled with instances of unfairly targeted
officials singled out for being on the wrong side of a particular issue
at the wrong time--the State Department's ``China Hands'' of the late
1940's, for instance, whose careers were destroyed because they
happened to be in positions of influence when the Chinese Communist
Revolution occurred. Today, there is the whiff of a new McCarthyism in
the air. MAGA Republicans insist that Biden himself is a ``communist,''
that his election was a ``communist takeover'' and that his
administration is a ``communist regime.''
It's therefore no surprise that Biden has a ``pro-Chinese Communist
Party (CCP) agenda,'' as the powerful chairman of the House Energy and
Commerce Committee, Cathy McMorris Rodgers (R-Wash.), put it this year,
and is deliberately ``ceding American leadership and security to
China.'' Republicans these days routinely charge that their opponents
are not just naive or inadequately attentive to China's rising power
but are actual ``sympathizers'' with Beijing. ``Communist China has
their President . . . China Joe,'' Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-Ga.)
tweeted on Biden's Inauguration Day. Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) has
called the president ``Beijing Biden.'' The Republican Senate nominee
in New Hampshire last year even called Republican Gov. Chris Sununu a
``Chinese Communist Party sympathizer.'' We can expect more of this
when the war against the ``deep state'' begins in earnest. According to
Sen. Josh Hawley (R-Mo.), there is a whole cabal determined to
undermine American security, a ``Uniparty'' of elites made up of
``neoconservatives on the right'' and ``liberal globalists on the
left'' who are not true Americans and therefore do not have the true
interests of America at heart. Can such ``anti-American'' behavior be
criminalized? It has in the past and can be again.
So, the Trump administration will have many avenues to persecute
its enemies, real and perceived. Think of all the laws now on the books
that give the Federal Government enormous power to surveil people for
possible links to terrorism, a dangerously flexible term, not to
mention all the usual opportunities to investigate people for alleged
tax evasion or violation of foreign agent registration laws. The IRS
under both parties has occasionally looked at depriving think tanks of
their tax-exempt status because they espouse policies that align with
the views of the political parties. What will happen to the think-
tanker in a second Trump term who argues that the United States should
ease pressure on China? Or the government official rash enough to
commit such thoughts to official paper? It didn't take more than that
to ruin careers in the 1950's.
And who will stop the improper investigations and prosecutions of
Trump's many enemies? Will Congress? A Republican Congress will be busy
conducting its own inquiries, using its powers to subpoena people,
accusing them of all kinds of crimes, just as it does now. Will it
matter if the charges are groundless? And of course in some cases they
will be true, which will lend even greater validity to a wider probe of
political enemies.
Will Fox News defend them, or will it instead just amplify the
accusations? The American press corps will remain divided as it is
today, between those organizations catering to Trump and his audience
and those that do not. But in a regime where the ruler has declared the
news media to be ``enemies of the state,'' the press will find itself
under significant and constant pressure. Media owners will discover
that a hostile and unbridled president can make their lives unpleasant
in all sorts of ways.
Indeed, who will stand up for anyone accused in the public arena,
besides their lawyers? In a Trump presidency, the courage it will take
to stand up for them will be no less than the courage it will take to
stand up to Trump himself. How many will risk their own careers to
defend others? In a nation congenitally suspicious of government, who
will stick up for the rights of former officials who become targets of
Trump's Justice Department? There will be ample precedents for those
seeking to justify the persecution. Abraham Lincoln suspended habeas
corpus, the Wilson administration shut down newspapers and magazines
critical of the war; Franklin D. Roosevelt rounded up Japanese
Americans and placed them in camps. We will pay the price for every
transgression ever committed against the laws designed to protect
individual rights and freedoms.
How will Americans respond to the first signs of a regime of
political persecution? Will they rise up in outrage? Don't count on it.
Those who found no reason to oppose Trump in the primaries and no
reason to oppose him in the general are unlikely to experience a sudden
awakening when some former Trump-adjacent official such as Milley finds
himself under investigation for goodness knows what. They will know
only that Justice Department prosecutors, the IRS, the FBI and several
congressional committees are looking into it. And who is to say that
those being hounded are not in fact tax cheaters, or Chinese spies, or
perverts, or whatever they might be accused of? Will the great body of
Americans even recognize these accusations as persecution and the first
stage of shutting down opposition to Trump across the country?
The Trump dictatorship will not be a communist tyranny, where
almost everyone feels the oppression and has their lives shaped by it.
In conservative, anti-liberal tyrannies, ordinary people face all kinds
of limitations on their freedoms, but it is a problem for them only to
the degree that they value those freedoms, and many people do not. The
fact that this tyranny will depend entirely on the whims of one man
will mean that Americans' rights will be conditional rather than
guaranteed. But if most Americans can go about their daily business,
they might not care, just as many Russians and Hungarians do not care.
Yes, there will be a large opposition movement centered in the
Democratic Party, but exactly how this opposition will stop the
persecution is hard to see. Congress and the courts will offer little
relief. Democratic politicians, particularly members of the youngest
generation, will yell and scream, but if they are not joined by
Republicans, it will look like the same old partisanship. If Democrats
still control one house of Congress, they will be able to blunt some
investigations, but the odds that they will control both houses after
2024 are longer than the odds of a Biden victory. Nor is there
sufficient reason to hope that the disordered and dysfunctional
opposition to Trump today will suddenly become more unified and
effective once Trump takes power. That is not how things work. In
evolving dictatorships, the opposition is always weak and divided.
That's what makes dictatorship possible in the first place. Opposition
movements rarely get stronger and more unified under the pressures of
persecution. Today there is no leader for Democrats to rally behind. It
is difficult to imagine that such a leader will emerge once Trump
regains power.
But even if the opposition were to become strong and unified, it is
not obvious what it would do to protect those facing persecution. The
opposition's ability to wield legitimate, peaceful and legal forms of
power will already have been found wanting in this election cycle, when
Democrats and anti-Trump Republicans threw every legitimate weapon
against Trump and still failed. Will they turn instead to illegitimate,
extralegal action? What would that look like?
Americans might take to the streets. In fact, it is likely that
many people will engage in protests against the new regime, perhaps
even before it has had a chance to prove itself deserving of them. But
then what? Even in his first term, Trump and his advisers on more than
one occasion discussed invoking the Insurrection Act. No less a
defender of American democracy than George H.W. Bush invoked the act to
deal with the Los Angeles riots in 1992. It is hard to imagine Trump
not invoking it should ``the Communists, Marxists, Fascists, and
Radical Left Thugs'' take to the streets. One suspects he will relish
the opportunity.
And who will stop him? His own handpicked military advisers? That
seems unlikely. He could make retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff if he wanted, and it is unlikely a
Republican Senate would decline to confirm. Does anyone think military
leaders will disobey commands from their duly elected, constitutionally
authorized, commander in chief? Do we even want the military to have to
make that call? There is every reason to believe that active-duty
troops and reservists are likely to be disproportionately more
sympathetic to a newly reelected President Trump than to the ``Radical
Left Thugs'' supposedly causing mayhem in the streets of their towns
and cities. Those who hope to be saved by a U.S. military devoted to
the protection of the Constitution are living in a fantasyland.
Resistance could come from the Governors of predominantly
Democratic States such as California and New York through a form of
nullification. States with Democratic Governors and Statehouses could
refuse to recognize the authority of a tyrannical Federal Government.
That is always an option in our Federal system. (Should Biden win, some
Republican States might engage in nullification.) But not even the
bluest States are monolithic, and Democratic Governors are likely to
find themselves under siege on their home turf if they try to become
bastions of resistance to Trump's tyranny. Republicans and
conservatives throughout the Nation will be energized by their hero's
triumph. The power shift at the Federal level, and the tone of menace
and revenge emanating from the White House, will likely embolden all
kinds of counter-resistance even in deep-blue States, including violent
protests. What resources will the Governors have to combat such attacks
and maintain order? The State and local police? Will those entities be
willing to use force against protesters who will likely enjoy the
public support of the president? The Democratic Governors might not be
eager to find out.
Should Trump be successful in launching a campaign of persecution
and the opposition prove powerless to stop it, then the Nation will
have begun an irreversible descent into dictatorship. With each passing
day, it will become harder and more dangerous to stop it by any means,
legal or illegal. Try to imagine what it will be like running for
office on an opposition ticket in such an environment. In theory, the
midterm elections in 2026 might hold hope for a Democratic comeback,
but won't Trump use his considerable powers, both legal and illegal, to
prevent that? Trump insists and no doubt believes that the current
administration corruptly used the justice system to try to prevent his
reelection. Will he not consider himself justified in doing the same
once he has all the power? He has, of course, already promised to do
exactly that: to use the powers of his office to persecute anyone who
dares challenge him.
This is the trajectory we are on now. Is descent into dictatorship
inevitable? No. Nothing in history is inevitable. Unforeseen events
change trajectories. Readers of this essay will no doubt list all the
ways in which it is arguably too pessimistic and doesn't take
sufficient account of this or that alternative possibility. Maybe,
despite everything, Trump won't win. Maybe the coin flip will come up
heads and we'll all be safe. And maybe even if he does win, he won't do
any of the things he says he's going to do. You may be comforted by
this if you choose. What is certain, however, is that the odds of the
United States falling into dictatorship have grown considerably because
so many of the obstacles to it have been cleared and only a few are
left. If 8 years ago it seemed literally inconceivable that a man like
Trump could be elected, that obstacle was cleared in 2016. If it then
seemed unimaginable that an American president would try to remain in
office after losing an election, that obstacle was cleared in 2020. And
if no one could believe that Trump, having tried and failed to
invalidate the election and stop the counting of electoral college
votes, would nevertheless reemerge as the unchallenged leader of the
Republican Party and its nominee again in 2024, well, we are about to
see that obstacle cleared as well. In just a few years, we have gone
from being relatively secure in our democracy to being a few short
steps, and a matter of months, away from the possibility of
dictatorship.
Are we going to do anything about it? To shift metaphors, if we
thought there was a 50 percent chance of an asteroid crashing into
North America a year from now, would we be content to hope that it
wouldn't? Or would we be taking every conceivable measure to try to
stop it, including many things that might not work but that, given the
magnitude of the crisis, must be tried anyway?
Yes, I know that most people don't think an asteroid is heading
toward us and that's part of the problem. But just as big a problem has
been those who do see the risk but for a variety of reasons have not
thought it necessary to make any sacrifices to prevent it. At each
point along the way, our political leaders, and we as voters, have let
opportunities to stop Trump pass on the assumption that he would
eventually meet some obstacle he could not overcome. Republicans could
have stopped Trump from winning the nomination in 2016, but they
didn't. The voters could have elected Hillary Clinton, but they didn't.
Republican senators could have voted to convict Trump in either of his
impeachment trials, which might have made his run for president much
more difficult, but they didn't.
Throughout these years, an understandable if fatal psychology has
been at work. At each stage, stopping Trump would have required
extraordinary action by certain people, whether politicians or voters
or donors, actions that did not align with their immediate interests or
even merely their preferences. It would have been extraordinary for all
the Republicans running against Trump in 2016 to decide to give up
their hopes for the presidency and unite around one of them. Instead,
they behaved normally, spending their time and money attacking each
other, assuming that Trump was not their most serious challenge, or
that someone else would bring him down, and thereby opened a clear path
for Trump's nomination. And they have, with just a few exceptions, done
the same this election cycle. It would have been extraordinary had
Mitch McConnell and many other Republican senators voted to convict a
president of their own party. Instead, they assumed that after Jan. 6,
2021, Trump was finished and it was therefore safe not to convict him
and thus avoid becoming pariahs among the vast throng of Trump
supporters. In each instance, people believed they could go on pursuing
their personal interests and ambitions as usual in the confidence that
somewhere down the line, someone or something else, or simply fate,
would stop him. Why should they be the ones to sacrifice their careers?
Given the choice between a high-risk gamble and hoping for the best,
people generally hope for the best. Given the choice between doing the
dirty work yourself and letting others do it, people generally prefer
the latter.
A paralyzing psychology of appeasement has also been at work. At
each stage, the price of stopping Trump has risen higher and higher. In
2016, the price was forgoing a shot at the White House. Once Trump was
elected, the price of opposition, or even the absence of obsequious
loyalty, became the end of one's political career, as Jeff Flake, Bob
Corker, Paul D. Ryan and many others discovered. By 2020, the price had
risen again. As Mitt Romney recounts in McKay Coppins's recent
biography, Republican Members of Congress contemplating voting for
Trump's impeachment and conviction feared for their physical safety and
that of their families. There is no reason that fear should be any less
today. But wait until Trump returns to power and the price of opposing
him becomes persecution, the loss of property and possibly the loss of
freedom. Will those who balked at resisting Trump when the risk was
merely political oblivion suddenly discover their courage when the cost
might be the ruin of oneself and one's family?
We are closer to that point today than we have ever been, yet we
continue to drift toward dictatorship, still hoping for some
intervention that will allow us to escape the consequences of our
collective cowardice, our complacent, willful ignorance and, above all,
our lack of any deep commitment to liberal democracy. As the man said,
we are going out not with a bang but a whimper.

Chairman Green. I now recognize Mr. Brecheen for 5 minutes
of testimony--or witness questioning.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Alexandra, would you mind moving that just a little bit
forward here, so I can----
Colonel Paris, can you see that or am I obstructing your
view?
Colonel Paris. I believe I can see it, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. Alexandra, would you mind--I'm sorry--can we
shift it just a little bit to your left, Alexandra? There we
go. OK. Better?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. So this is a picture I took yesterday on
the grounds, looking out of that second-story window that has
the corridor that connects the AGR building, the American Glass
Research building, with where the shooter's location--and I'm
going to stand up and I'm going to point to the shooter's
location as we were made aware.
From that ``X'' is where the shooter was, shared with us,
his body was found. From this viewpoint, there's some videos
that make it look like he's more this direction, but from the
perception, it kind-of is confusing, but he was more toward
that opposite side. This window, second story, it's the second
window from the right side, that window has this view where
they could clearly--those ESU officers that were stationed,
given access by the property owner to that window, could see
the shooter had they been--stayed in that manned position.
This is their moving toward the location of President Trump
with the red barns back here. His stage was right in front of
that. You can see a window here that is absolutely going to
obstruct the view to be able to look to the 20 or 30 different
barn structures--the cattle building and the sheep building and
the hog building, the rodeo arena by the pond, the many
structures. There's 50 buildings within a 500-yard radius of
where President Trump was at. So many vulnerabilities.
Do you see a problem with that window being in the way of
someone being able from this position to be able to, you know,
take care of the asset?
Colonel Paris. A casement window would present a tactical
concern for full field----
Mr. Brecheen. I understand potentially, you know, this was
air-conditioned and on top of the second-story building wasn't,
so maybe that was a consideration.
But ultimately, Secret Service is the one who made the
determination of placement or contacting or making sure the
plan was in coordination with the property owner for allowing,
gaining admittance from the property owner for this second-
story window. Is that correct? That was Secret Service's plan?
Colonel Paris. Correct. Ultimately, it's on----
Mr. Brecheen. It's on Secret Service for that plan. All
right.
My question is, if it's their plan, did they not indicate
that someone had to stay manned in that location? Because we're
being told that when the two officers, local PD, were trying to
lift themselves on the opposite side to get a look at the
gentleman, and he turns his gun, and then they dropped off the
building. This would've been the perfect opportunity, if
someone to be on the radio, they could've taken him out from
this location.
Did the Secret Service plan not include directives from
staying in those positions?
Colonel Paris. I don't know, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. You don't know.
All right. Here's another question. With the 2 minutes that
you said that there was an opportunity from the time that they
were hoisted up, looked at the shooter, are you all--you're
given responsibility as this is delegated in the outer
perimeter to secure the area, why weren't they able to
immediately call their supervisor, who would then be authorized
to issue a hold on the asset or a ``get him off the stage''
call?
Why does it have to be, as your testimony says, they were--
they took a picture, sent it to Secret Service 20 minutes
before the incident of the shooting, and they have to wait for
a response. Why is not the line of communication--I understand
on different radio frequencies--why were they not empowered to
say, if we see something suspicious, then State police or local
law enforcement, sheriffs department, each one, the head
official of each one of those departments, if we entrusted them
with enough responsibility to secure that environment, then we
ought to give them the responsibility to issue a hold call
because of something that they see as a threat.
Are they empowered to do that or does it have to all go
through Secret Service to issue a hold?
Colonel Paris. I can only say what I know about our--the
State police operations plan, and I do not know the answer to
your question, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. So----
Colonel Paris. I do not know the answer. I don't know what
the protocol would be to issue the hold order. Just as a point
of clarification that I tried to clean up with the Congressman
from New Jersey before, when the 2 municipal officers were--1
was hoisted----
Mr. Brecheen. Can I jump on that, that 2 or 3 minutes,
because I got limited time here. That's----
Colonel Paris. That was seconds before. That was seconds
before Crooks started firing.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. You had said earlier today it was 2 or 3
minutes. But you're saying seconds before.
Colonel Paris. I wanted to make sure I cleaned that up for
the second time, yes, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. But even if they're hoisted--your
testimony today, if I understood you correctly, it was 2
different officers that were hoisting to get a look at him, not
the ones who were manned in this view.
Colonel Paris. That is my understanding, yes, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. So had they remained in there, they
immediately would've seen the incident taking place, if they
were on the same line of communication, and they could've taken
the asset out.
Colonel Paris. I'm remiss to say that because I don't know
what their general rules of engagement and assignment were from
the Secret Service.
Mr. Brecheen. Just looks to me like a major breakdown of
communication. This procedure looks to me like it is lapsed
with the ability of someone who, if they entrust them with the
ability to secure this perimeter, they ought to be empowered
enough to be able to give the authority on their comms to issue
a hold. I don't understand that.
With that, I'd yield, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I just, I'm going to say this, because I have thoroughly
enjoyed both of your testimony today, and there are a lot of
guys up here on both sides of the aisle that are charged about
this, that their emotion is not intended to communicate a lack
of trust in the Pennsylvania State Police or--I mean, you're
being incredibly helpful today. Some of the things that we've
discovered from your testimony have brought some frustration to
our folks, and I hope you'll understand it in that context. But
the energy is not directed at you.
The failure to set up appropriate communication systems and
to make decisions when they become aware of someone pointing a
rangefinder is what's got people upset. That's on Secret
Service. So I just wanted to make sure y'all heard that from
me, and I----
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Chairman? If I was amped up a little bit,
I concur. So greatly respect what you're doing.
Colonel Paris. Thank you.
Chairman Green. I now recognize Ms. Lee for 5 minutes of
testimony.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this hearing
and for organizing this committee's trip to Butler,
Pennsylvania.
For us, being on the ground in Butler, Pennsylvania,
yesterday made clear the severity of the security failures on
Saturday, July 13, those failures that almost allowed former
President Donald Trump to be assassinated.
Unfortunately, what has followed that failed assassination
attempt is an erosion of public trust related to those
responsible for keeping the President and the attendees of the
rally safe.
We've heard that because of a sloped roof law enforcement
was not able to safely secure the area that day. We've heard
reports that certain officers abandoned their posts due to
weather conditions. We've heard the Secret Service attempt to
shift blame to State and local law enforcement, asserting that
they failed to secure certain areas in the perimeter.
Secret Service Chief Cheatle's resignation this morning is
the first of many steps that need to be taken, and today's
hearing is just the beginning of our process to get clear,
accurate information about this issue, about the failures
associated with that day, and ensure that, not only Congress,
but that the American public get the answers that they deserve
about these events.
Mr. Yoes, I'd like to start with you. The Secret Service is
always the lead in providing security for these types of events
that involve one of their protectees, but they clearly rely on
their partnerships with State and local law enforcement as they
move to different locations around the country.
Are you concerned that former Director Cheatle's comments
to ABC News, which many people heard as blame-shifting to local
law enforcement, could undermine the level of trust between
State and local authorities and Secret Service when they come
to communities around America?
Mr. Yoes. Yes, I absolutely do, and our organization
actually issued a press release stating just that. Our
relationship--it's impossible for a Federal agency to do their
function without including local law enforcement. That's a
given. That relationship is built on trust. When comments were
made like what made on ABC, then we felt a need to call her out
on it.
Ms. Lee. Do you believe that the Federal Government's
statements to the public, to the American people, after this
attempted assassination have helped or harmed public trust in
law enforcement overall?
Mr. Yoes. You know, I'll say this, the very powers that we
have or the ability to do our job as law enforcement officers
is directly related to trust. In an investigation there's a
fine line between what you do in order to protect an
investigation and also be accountable to the public you serve.
When you don't walk that fine line, then it does create
distrust, and it does cause a lot of confusion. It causes
people to fill in their own blanks, and as a result, this is
what we see.
Sharing accurate information is important to keep everyone
informed, so that it doesn't run in different directions.
Ms. Lee. As the American people wait for an after-action
report, what can or should law enforcement agencies at any
level be doing to address concerns about transparency and
protect that public trust?
Mr. Yoes. Well, I'll start right here. I mean, you have the
Pennsylvania State Police have filled in a lot of gaps that
should've been filled in a long time ago. This is information
that should be known to everyone. It is, you know, essential
facts. It doesn't change. It is what it is, and sharing this
information lets everyone know exactly what occurred and gives
us some insight of things that we need to correct.
Ms. Lee. You've been here now throughout this day,
throughout questioning from a number of Members of this
committee. As this committee continues to investigate the
failures that resulted in this shooting, what are some of the
key questions that you believe should be asked about the
assassination attempt as well as the management and
organization of Secret Service more broadly?
Mr. Yoes. Well, you know, again, I have to, you know, be
up-front in the fact that I have no direct knowledge to this
incident or things that unfold. I would just speak in just
general terms.
The first question, and I think we all need to ask is, with
so many elevated positions available, what steps were taken to
protect those assets? I don't know the answer to that, but
there were a lot of places.
We learned a lot of lessons going back there to President
Kennedy. Higher locations create unique problems, and as a
result they should've been part of any action plan. I'm not
saying they weren't. I'm just saying that we see the end result
of what happened here. So obviously we have a failure there.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Bishop [presiding]. The gentlelady yields back.
Now, recognize the gentleman in whose district this tragedy
occurred, fine Representative from Pennsylvania, Mr. Kelly.
Mr. Kelly. Thank you, Mr. Bishop. I appreciate Chairman
Green's allowing me to be here, and then also to be in Butler
yesterday which is my home town. I'm 4 miles from this
location.
My concern actually started on July 5, when I was told that
former President Trump was coming to Butler, and I said, that's
great. They said, yes, and he's going to be at the Butler Farm
Show. I said you must mean the Big Butler Fair. They said, no,
the Butler Farm Show. I said, who did a site visit? The answer
is, we've already made our determination.
My question to them was, so then what you just told me is
nobody's been to that site. I will just tell you right now that
what you are planning there is not proper for the crowd that's
going to show up.
At that point, the person on the phone said, Mr. Kelly,
there will be 6- or 7,000 people there. I said, well, that
tells me even more about the fact that you have no idea where
you're going and historically what has happened whenever
President Trump had come to Butler. We got 55,000 people at
that rally.
He said that was before when he was President, he's no
longer President.
So being there, not only just myself but also my wife, 3 of
my grandchildren, 1 of my sons, and so many friends that were
there that day, I think it all comes down to the same question
that we always ask when we get to these situations: What did we
know and when did we know it?
I think forever now people are going to look at what
happened and say, we knew there was something wrong. We could
see it.
I would just put it to you that had we acted quicker, Mr.
Comperatore would still be alive today, President Trump would
not have been wounded, and 2 other people who were hurt that
day would not have been wounded.
In a greater sense, the American people have been wounded
in a way that they have lost faith, trust, and confidence in
how we protect certain people. This goes far beyond that--and I
appreciate you both being here, and I'll tell you what, you
really have given us testimony based on what your whole careers
have been about, and that is protecting people.
For some reason, on July 13, we knew something was wrong.
Every person I've talked to that was there that day or
responsible for protection says, we did our job. I said, so
then you're saying that somebody else didn't do their job. The
answer is, well, that's to be decided later on.
So I would just say, first of all, I meant what I said, I
think the American people now are deeply wounded and the faith,
trust, and confidence we need to have in our Government has
been fading, has been fading for too long.
Obviously with the Pennsylvania State Police, I've talked
to the Pennsylvania Police since then. Mr. Yoes, thank you for
your career.
But at the end of the day, we don't have the answers we
need to have, and I just--and I said it earlier, and I mean it,
there is no reason for Corey Comperatore to be dead today.
There is no reason for President Trump to have been wounded or
two other members in the audience that day to have been wounded
had we done what we knew before we let it go any further than
that. That could've been stopped early on.
Nobody can convince me that when people see somebody on the
roof of a building, and pointing to him and yelling, there's
somebody up there that needs to be taken care of, and other
people who were there, that eyewitnesses have said they watched
him go onto those grounds, and every time they said, there's
something wrong, somebody is going in the wrong direction and
shouldn't be there, and the answer comes down, you don't know
what you're talking about, there's nobody there.
So as we continue looking at this, I think we have a lot of
testimony today, and again, I thank you for being here, but I
just submit to you that the victims of that day, innocent
people, none of it had to happen. We knew before-hand, and we
could've prevented it, but we failed to act when we should've
acted.
So I appreciate your careers and everything you've done.
Chairman, I appreciate the fact that I've been able to be
here today and that you came to our town yesterday in a town
that I have lived--this spot is a place I've been at many,
many, many times. I just cannot understand why we didn't act
when we knew there was something wrong.
At the very least, they could've taken President Trump off
the podium and some of the other activity after that never
would've taken place.
So thank you for having me here. Thank you both, Colonel,
Mr. Yoes, thank you so much for being here. I appreciate it.
But there is far, far more we have to learn.
Thank you, sir.
Chairman Green. Thank you.
We're going to do another round of questioning, and I don't
know, Mr. Correa, if you're going to want to ask any other
questions or----
Mr. Correa. I'll have a couple, sir.
Chairman Green. OK. Sounds good. So you'll follow me and
then we'll go around.
I just want to get back to this text message that was sent
at about 20 to 25 minutes prior. That text message was a
picture of Crooks. Was it a picture of him pointing the
rangefinder or of him just looking suspicious?
Colonel Paris. Chairman, I have not seen the picture that
was sent, so I don't know. But my understanding is, to the best
of my briefings, it was the pictures that were initially taken
by Butler ESU.
Chairman Green. OK. So that was the 62 minute prior.
OK. At 20, 25 minutes prior, though, someone saw him
pointing a rangefinder and taking range estimation or range
readings, right?
Colonel Paris. I think--I don't want to speculate as to
what he actually was doing with the rangefinder, but the
rangefinder, my understanding, was the heightened suspicion,
yes, sir.
Chairman Green. He was pointing it. I mean, he was--I mean,
because a rangefinder--I guess you can have a digital and do it
like this. But there are also rangefinders you look through and
you have a reading.
Do you know the description of the rangefinder?
Colonel Paris. I do not. It was not briefed to me----
Chairman Green. OK. But there was concern, and that was
relayed to the command post, and that was a PSP guy in the
Secret Service command post, via a text message 20-something
minutes before. You think it included the fact that the guy had
a rangefinder?
Colonel Paris. My understanding, yes.
Chairman Green. OK. OK. Then you mentioned that the 2 ESU
guys that were in the second story, honestly in truth, to me it
appears to be a second building behind it that got joined by
all these different--the break-up of that whole complex and the
intricacies of, you know, places to hide, move around, you
know, all the little alleyways is because they built
turnaways--or not tunnels, but hallways that were covered
between each of these different buildings. So it's actually a
separate building with an amended----
Colonel Paris. Connector.
Chairman Green. Yes. So there are two guys in that
building. They leave to go look for the guy, the suspicious
person?
Colonel Paris. My understanding is yes, according to
interviews.
Chairman Green. So they were not manning--they did not have
oversight on that rooftop because they were out looking for the
guy?
Colonel Paris. Correct. My understanding is it was--the
grounds around there, to see it photographed now or on your
tour yesterday without scores of people traversing from
different parking areas to make ingress into the secure
perimeter, that there was a concerted effort to try and
identify and make contact with him----
Chairman Green. Sure.
Colonel Paris [continuing]. In conjunction with other--I
was briefed that there were 2 other suspicious individuals
simultaneous to this not terribly too far away distance-wise. I
don't have the specifics. But this was all occurring
contemporaneously.
Chairman Green. But one of them, Crooks, had a rangefinder,
and so they leave and they go look. He's suspicious. That
leaves that building with two sets of eyes that could have
observed it, granted, by exposing themselves--and, by the way,
I would think they could stay in the building as opposed to
being on top of it for their own sort-of defilade position. I
get that as a sniper works. But, you know, you've got to be
able to see it.
So, anyway, they leave. Did they not--was Secret Service
notified that they were leaving to go look for this guy and,
thus, those eyes on top of the building gone?
Colonel Paris. I do not know. The other thing that I do not
know is where else Butler ESU sent that information. I have not
been briefed on that.
Chairman Green. Who told them to go look? Do you know if
they were told to go look?
Colonel Paris. I do not know, sir.
Chairman Green. We just know that they did go look?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir. I said a very concerted effort
with all of those alcoves and all of those buildings----
Chairman Green. Sure.
Colonel Paris [continuing]. Was made. There were 2
additional officers who--again, I don't know the specifics of
the time line. I don't know the specifics of the logistics of
how that information was relayed, but I'm briefed that they
came and they made a very concerted effort to try and locate
Crooks.
Chairman Green. But it seems to me that that was leaving
that extra set of eyes on top of the building. You know, I
just--it would be something, if I were the site commander at
that point, I'd want to know if 2 guys were leaving a post
where they have observation on a building and that somebody
relayed that to me so that I would know, wait a minute, now, 2
sets of eyes that were on the building--you know what I'm
saying? It's like if you pull security, if you pull your
lateral security in an ambush or something--I'm talking like an
Army guy now--as a commander you're going to know that that
guy's moved away from there and now he's got a blindspot,
right.
So I just want to make sure--I want to dig into that a
little bit more. Obviously, you don't have the answer, so we'll
dig elsewhere. But I find it interesting that they leave--if
this guy is so suspicious, has a rangefinder, they leave their
post that they are manning to go look for him, yet Secret
Service--and they get told about it 20 to 25 minutes before-
hand, but Secret Service still lets the President go on stage.
I'm just totally blown away by that. But, again, there's more
details to be had.
Thank you for being here. I really appreciate it.
I'm going to turn it over now to the Ranking Member for his
5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Correa. Gentlemen, thank you for being here today.
Commissioner Paris, Mr. Yoes, we're looking at a rearview
mirror of what happened. A lot of good questions from both
sides of the aisle.
Commissioner Paris, you don't have the luxury of time.
You're protecting the Governor, and you'll be protecting high-
profile candidates in your battleground State like right about
now. I am trying to figure out how we help you do your job a
whole lot better.
Mr. Kelly, his line of questioning was interesting, and I
consider it important because that's his background--that's his
backyard. He asked, Who decided the site of the event? It's a
good question.
The bigger question is, who OKs, who approves the site of
an event? I come back to what I said earlier, which is one of
those officers on the ground said, Lou, he said, who's in
charge? The Secret Service says good or bad. Does the campaign
then say good or bad or does the campaign have the ability to
override the Secret Service at an event?
I say--and I asked this question from you, Commissioner
Paris, you're going to have to make these decisions here real
soon. Because if I'm here where you're at today, today you've
learned some lessons. The 13th to today, we've all learned some
lessons. You have to execute, sir. It's not your
responsibility. It's not our responsibility. It's all of us,
our responsibility. I want to know how we can help you clarify
these lines of command, so to speak, to make sure that we
minimize the possibilities of this happening again.
Who makes the decisions? Who's in charge? What are the
lessons we've learned today, gentlemen?
Sir, what is it that we can do to make sure that it's not
going to be on your shoulders? You're not going to be able to
resign. You have to execute.
Please.
Colonel Paris. I appreciate your comments very much. I can
say that through the Governor and the legislature and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, we are very supported, and we
have the resources, I believe, moving forward to rise to the
occasion.
The Secret Service remains the agency with the most
experience traditionally when you talk about organizational
knowledge to carry this forward. Responsible for the
Pennsylvania State Police, I pledge that any and all support
that we can give to keep all Pennsylvanians safe, which is what
6,400 civilian and enlisted Pennsylvania State Police show up
every day to do, we will do. We want a robust republic, and we
want to secure people's ability to express their views. We have
worked diligently and will continue to work diligently to make
sure that that happens, sir.
Mr. Correa. Commissioner Paris, you are the thin blue line,
keeps us safe. Secret Service is an even thinner line that
keeps, in many ways, our democracy functioning, protecting us.
They have to score 100 percent. They cannot let one bad thing
happen as they did on the 13th.
I want to make sure that we know, that we give the Secret
Service the ability to make those decisions when it comes to
the safety of our candidates and elected officials. For the
third time I'm going to repeat those words that were told to me
by an individual, law enforcement individual on the ground when
he said, Lou, who's in charge? Is it the campaign or is it the
Secret Service?
I'd like to get to the bottom of that and make sure it's
the Secret Service that's in charge. I don't know who is in
charge, and I hope to God that we do find out, and I hope it's
the Secret Service. If it is the Secret Service, that we affirm
that they are in charge, because the buck stops somewhere, and
it's got to be here, this committee, the Government, with us in
Congress.
Gentlemen, thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Mr. Bishop [presiding]. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Colonel Paris and Mr. Yoes, I appreciate your patience in
continuing through with this questioning. I would submit that I
think your candor, Colonel Paris, has been very refreshing, and
it paints a clear contrast from what was the testimony of the
director of the Secret Service yesterday, who's now resigned.
But her resignation doesn't resolve a thing. In fact, the
criminal investigation that your department is undertaking that
presumably Butler authorities may be involved in, the FBI is
undertaking, those don't really resolve anything. They affix
criminal liability of someone who presumably, if they acted
alone, is dead.
What is the most important issue is we have a national
security crisis. We have right now, according--the only person
who's been inactivated, as I understand it, is the sharp
shooter who took the perp out. The people who made what appear
to be unbelievably horrendous decisions, un--you can't even
imagine. It boggles the mind the decisions that were made.
They're still in place. We have multiple protectees moving
around the country every day. Those same people, I don't even
know if they've changed anything about what they're doing.
Presumably you would think so, but we don't know that. Well, I
think we need to learn as much as possible from you.
I will say as a note of departure, I don't think--from what
I've heard, you've made pretty clear, the Pennsylvania State
Police didn't do anything wrong. I don't know whether Butler
County ESU might have done something wrong, so let me----
Mr. Correa. I never said they did----
Mr. Bishop. OK. All right. But it's clear to me as a bell
that Secret Service, everyone's characterized it as a colossal
failure, because it's obvious to everyone concerned that that's
the case. The 2 who were--I want to get one thing. I
understand--transpired while I was absent from the hearing for
a bit. Do I understand that the 2 Butler ESU officers who one
hoisted the other to the roof line where Crooks turned and
leveled the rifle at him, those were 2 different ESU officers
than the ones that originally spotted Crooks from the second
floor. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. So just to be clear, my understanding is the
2 officers that responded, and one hoisted up the second one,
were not part of Butler ESU. They were 2 separate municipal
officers who were tasked with a different responsibility.
Mr. Bishop. OK.
Colonel Paris. I would speculate, as an example, to say a
traffic post or a----
Mr. Bishop. Understood.
Colonel Paris. They responded. I don't know, again, the
specifics as to how they were alerted. But just to be clear,
they were 2 separate, yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. OK. The ESU, the Butler ESU officers who
spotted Crooks, do I understand correctly they spotted him from
the second floor of the AGR building?
Colonel Paris. That is my understanding, yes, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Were they posted there in order to maintain
overwatch on the roof or were they generally assigned roving
responsibility to be in the vicinity of that building?
Colonel Paris. I can't answer that, and I would defer to
the Secret Service as to what the communication was and the
assignment given.
Mr. Bishop. Yes. Put that picture of the building up
because I asked for it. I don't even know if I'll fit it in at
this point.
So that's--yes. You see, so the--Crooks was on the building
directly facing the camera here, and you see the window open to
the left. That's the second story of the AGR building where
those ESU officers spotted Crooks, correct?
Colonel Paris. That's my understanding.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Did they advise their senior--you know,
their command that they were departing that location to look
for Crooks? Do you know that?
Colonel Paris. I do not know, sir.
Mr. Bishop. Why did they stay away from that position for
so long?
If I understand correctly, the picture of Crooks was texted
about 20, 25 minutes ahead of the shooting. Is that correct,
first of all?
Colonel Paris. Could you ask me that one more time, sir? I
just want to make sure because----
Mr. Bishop. Was the picture of Crooks that they took, did
they take that picture and send it up into their command about
20, 25 minutes before the shooting?
Colonel Paris. What I want to be specific about is when the
PSP member in the command post received it, and I believe
that's in the vicinity of 20 to 25 minutes, with the caveat
prior put on the record about a series of events, not a time
line minute by minute.
Mr. Bishop. So you don't know----
Colonel Paris. But I don't know--I don't specifically know.
I believe the pictures of Crooks were taken at some point
before that when he was identified as being suspicious, based
on my prior testimony from the briefings that I had, because he
was----
Mr. Bishop. OK. I get it. But at least we've got a fairly
long numbers of minutes, 10, 15, 20 minutes. Why did they not
return to that post? Do you know that?
Colonel Paris. I do not know, sir. My understanding is that
there was a very concerted effort at that point to actively
search and locate him and dispel that suspicion.
Mr. Bishop. You mentioned that you have asked for and not
received--I don't know if you call it the site plan from the
Secret Service has not been given to you. Has there been
anything else that you've asked for in the course of your
investigation that's been denied or made inaccessible to you,
other than the site plan?
Colonel Paris. Again, I want to be clear. No, I'm not aware
of anything else that we've asked for. We have not been denied.
I just believe we haven't received it yet. So I want to make
sure I'm not mischaracterizing, that we asked for it and we
have yet to receive it.
Mr. Bishop. Yes, we never get denied stuff. We just never
get it.
My time having expired, I recognize the gentleman from New
York, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman.
Colonel, I want to reiterate the appreciation this
committee has for your energy, your stamina, your focus, your
candor. It's regrettable that some of our Federal colleagues
are not at the table with you today. We would have liked to
extract from them some of the facts from 10 days ago. My
colleagues from both sides of the aisle, I think, asked good,
fair questions of you, and you gave good, fair, accurate
responses to them that helps us understand July 13 a little
more. It was only 10 days ago. We're probably only in the
infancy of that investigation of our oversight
responsibilities, but you've provided us a lot.
I want to use the remainder of my time to look forward.
There's going to be a lot of conjecture about what happened,
who's at fault. But putting that aside, we've talked about
flaws that happened on July 13, the tactical flaws about
communication, strategic ones like lack of drones,
administrative ones like command and control and who has what
authority, what are the rules of engagement.
So I wanted to ask you, Colonel--and it's been said--
Pennsylvania is going to have a number of more rallies,
appearances where the public is going to interact with
Presidential candidates from both sides of the aisle. What are
you going to do? How are you going to assert yourself in your
leadership role to reduce the likelihood of an incident like
this, specifically with respect to tactics? We understand that
radio communications were a weakness. Do you have a perspective
on looking forward how you might command your officers in a
different manner to ensure that, from a tactical perspective,
specifically with communications, that these events are held
differently in the future, sir?
Colonel Paris. So, yes, I'll start with referring to the
testimony of Congressman Luttrell about reinforcing and
reiterating to try and mitigate any potential complacency. The
Pennsylvania State Police maintains the Pennsylvania Criminal
Intelligence Center. We're always trying to lean forward and
glean as much criminal intelligence as we can, not only
generated within the ranks of the Pennsylvania State Police,
but our local partners, our county partners, and through task
force collaborations that we have with multiple Federal
agencies.
I can tell you that we will not back away from the Secret
Service. We will lean forward to support them, and all of the
resources of the Pennsylvania State Police will be brought to
bear to keep Pennsylvanians and those visiting the Commonwealth
safe.
Mr. LaLota. Have you considered communications
specifically, different radios, training on those radios, other
communications devices, be it digital or voice or whatever?
Have you considered prospectively either acquiring new
technology, implementing new training, or otherwise developing
tactics that allow not only State and local to communicate
better with each other, but also that communication to be
shared more effectively with your Federal partners?
Colonel Paris. I would say in the short term coming up to
the election, you know, there's an extreme temporal component
there that would make that difficult. Maintaining critical
communications during any operation, be it an investigation of
a traffic crash or a major investigation, a Cavalcante manhunt,
an Eric Frein manhunt, a 95 bridge disaster, a derailment of a
train on the border with Pennsylvania, a 6-hour running gun
battle in Juniata County, we're always looking to get better,
and communications that we maintain are a critical part of
that.
So I can commit that, you know, we will try to get better.
If there is something that these future endeavors which we've
committed at the top of the testimony to be a part of proves
that we can be better, we're always looking every day to get
better.
Mr. LaLota. I know that Members are allowed to, through the
appropriations process, advocate for more resources to come to
their State and local law enforcement partners for things like
communication devices. I know that I've been able to lean into
that process here, and I'm sure that Mr. Kelly and others from
the Pennsylvania delegation would endeavor to use Federal funds
to help augment your ability to increase your ability to
communicate among each other and also with Federal partners.
I want to move to strategy, thinking a little more outside
the bubble in the days and weeks leading up to an event.
Colonel, do you have a sense on prospectively technology to
use, like drones, other decisions you might make, like
stationing somebody on a nearby high vantage point like a water
tower? You've heard some feedback from some informed members
here today. Are those things helpful for you to plan moving
forward to seize opportunities, both technological and
physical, for events moving forward?
Colonel Paris. Short answer is yes. You know, our
undercover assets and the surveillance and intelligence
gathering is something we rely on heavily. We do have some
drone capabilities that we're always looking to augment, but
they're a phenomenal tool. Certainly their use will only expand
into the future, probably long after my career and somebody
who, you know, comes well after, but we're always looking
forward to lean forward and do the job better, sir.
Mr. LaLota. I think what I heard, Colonel, from the
totality of the interactions today was administrative issues,
issues related to command or control, rules of engagement, who
thought they had what authority, who thought they had to call
somebody to do something.
Colonel, do we have your commitment that you'll lean as far
forward as possible and essentially command by negation, that
you'll do everything that was within your power until you're
told to stop to ensure the safety of Presidential candidates?
Colonel Paris. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Bishop. The gentleman yields back.
Chairman Green is going to return momentarily, so I want to
keep the hearing going pending his return. I've got a few more
questions, and so I will call a third round of questioning. Let
me then recognize myself for 5 minutes.
Colonel Paris, did you say--I think I heard you say in the
course of the hearing that you believe that Mr. Crooks fired 8
shots and that 8 shell casings were recovered. Did I hear that?
Colonel Paris. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. OK. Were they all recovered in the vicinity of
his body?
Colonel Paris. I'm told that they were.
Mr. Bishop. OK. When--the information--let's see. The
information concerning, you know, having identified Crooks as a
suspicious figure was relayed and the text message was sent to
the Secret Service command center. PSP was present, I
understand. Is that correct?
Colonel Paris. The PSP member who received those from
Butler ESU?
Mr. Bishop. That's what I want to clarify first. Was it a
PSP member who received the----
Colonel Paris. So I can comment that it was a PSP member
who received that from Butler ESU.
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. And passed it, and then advised
Secret Service.
Colonel Paris. Immediately advised Secret Service and then
passed it, at their direction, for----
Mr. Bishop. To a telephone number, texted the information
to a telephone number----
Colonel Paris. That's what I was briefed.
Mr. Bishop [continuing]. That was given by the Secret
Service representative.
Colonel Paris. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. Did the Secret Service representative indicate
to whom that connected, who was being sent the information via
that number?
Colonel Paris. I do not know. Our understanding was, from
an interview that we conducted, that it was some sort of
tactical asset of the Secret Service.
Mr. Bishop. Was there any comment or discussion in the
command center about the advisability of keeping the President
off the stage until the matter was resolved, either at that
moment or later?
Colonel Paris. I do not know, and I would only underscore
what I said before, the distinction between suspicion versus a
threat. At that point I think concerning, but it was still--the
perspective at the time was suspicious and not yet a threat.
Mr. Bishop. How did--so the information was relayed from
ESU officers to a PSP officer. Do I understand that correct?
Colonel Paris. Yes.
Mr. Bishop. Did ESU have command officers in the command
center?
Colonel Paris. That was asked earlier. I guess I received a
briefing, and my understanding was that there were Butler
County representatives in the command post, but I cannot
definitively tell you from any briefings that I've had who and
when they were there.
Mr. Bishop. Do you have any insight why the Butler ESU
officers transmitted that information to a PSP representative
rather than to a Butler ESU representative in the command
center?
Colonel Paris. I understand that there was--the Butler ESU
person from whom it came and the PSP member to whom it was sent
had--they essentially knew one another.
Mr. Bishop. Was there any mechanism in place to monitor the
location presence of the ESU officers who were at the second
floor window and departed from there to go look for Crooks? Was
any kind of communication on-going in the command center about
that?
Colonel Paris. I don't know.
Mr. Bishop. All right. Is that a regular practice in PSP
operations to have someone monitoring the location presence,
posting absence from posts of members of your force?
Colonel Paris. I would say in general you need to know
where your assets are deployed, but I would also say, depending
on what the prior rules of engagement are, there may be a
situation that could realistically, outside of the example
we're discussing today, that, you know, we would expect our
people to make a decision in the immediate moment to address
another issue.
Mr. Bishop. All right. I yield back.
I recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Correa, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Again, gentlemen, thank you for being here.
Something Mr. LaLota said that I want to emphasize and
underline, which is, gentlemen, I hope you lean forward when it
comes to making decisions, making what your gut tells you is
the right decision when you're out there trying to protect
American lives, especially those of candidates.
The situation is an interesting one because in this
committee we have been talking about domestic terrorism as
being a bigger threat to the United States than foreign
terrorism. I would imagine, based on the facts that we know
today, this is a domestic individual that God knows what
motivated him to do what he's doing. He was looking up
information--according to what I've read, he was looking up
both Democrat and Republican candidates. God knows what set him
off or where he was going or what targets he was really focused
on other than possibly the opportunity. This is not good news
because this is essentially a lone wolf, it would appear, that
just--God knows what motivated him.
I'm bringing this up because, Mr. Yoes, you represent the
thousands of police officers in this country, lot of them doing
the job to the best of their abilities, and yet these are
challenges that are very hard to take on. How do you--I mean,
based on what your officers say out there, what is it that we
can do to make your job better? What is it that we can do to
begin to get a grip on these lone-wolf attacks that are
domestically motivated and grown?
Mr. Yoes. Well, sir, I'm not too sure I have a easy answer
for you on that one. I will tell you that we live in
extraordinary times right now where we've gone from talking to
people to talking at people. I think what you see over a period
of time, this has eroded to a point where, I think through
social media or whatever events, we've built a community around
our own belief systems. I think that in some ways is what
empowers some people who act out on things. We may never
understand why some people take the actions they do. It's just
I think we're just in some extraordinary times with so much
hate in our country, and that's across the board.
As a law enforcement officer, you know, we went through
that period of time of the dehumanization of law enforcement,
and it certainly took a toll on us as a profession.
I'll give you some examples of how dangerous it is to be a
police officer right now. Last year there were 378 officers
that were shot in the line of duty. Sixty died. The number of
ambush attacks on law enforcement officers were over 100.
That's last year. This year, already the first 6 months, we're
at 200 officers have been shot in the line of duty.
Mr. Correa. Last year?
Mr. Yoes. Last year was 376.
Mr. Correa. This year we're at?
Mr. Yoes. This year we're at 200 just in the first 6
months. So we're on par or will exceed what last year's been.
There's just so much hatred in our country right now. I think
that--I agree with the statements made by pretty much everyone
in this room. We need to turn the rhetoric down. I think it's
not serving to anyone. The hatred that we have across this
country is permeating into everything we have, and that's--
everybody owns a little bit of responsibility with it. We need
to focus on finding solutions to problems rather than blaming
others for what the problems are.
I know that that's not your question, but I think it's----
Mr. Correa. Well, actually, you are answering my question,
sir.
Mr. Yoes. I'm sorry, what?
Mr. Correa. You are answering my question.
Mr. Yoes. Yes. So what can be done, sir? We really need to
turn our rhetoric down. We need to--we need to recognize
reality. This is the reality when it comes to law enforcement.
The large--the majority of violent crime in this country is
committed by a small percentage of people, and when we're able
to separate them from the people that they prey on, we impact
crime. We struggle in this country because law enforcement
officers are doing their job to try and separate that. But I
think our system has just so many layers in it that shows that
it's fractured, and we really need to get back to the real
business of protecting the people we serve. That's the--the end
of the day, that's what's most important.
So we just--we live in some extraordinary times. I look at
what happened here on the political stage. It doesn't surprise
me, because this has been happening across our country, across,
you know, a number of individuals.
Mr. Correa. Commissioner Paris, any thoughts?
Colonel Paris. I would just say that we endeavor to try and
be the most professional that we can to earn that respect every
day. I think every encounter of the millions of calls of
service that troopers answer across 45,000 square miles of the
Commonwealth is an opportunity to establish that relationship
and be professional and do the right thing. That's what I
think, you know, sometimes the more complex the problem, the
more simple the solution in terms of keeping our focus on being
professionals, doing the right thing at the right time, and
working, showing up every day and earning it.
Mr. Correa. I'd like to conclude by saying that--thank you
for your service to our country and to our communities, keeping
us safe. Consider us--I think I can speak for everybody up
here--consider us as partners of yours. Work with us, talk to
us, not at us, but with us, so we can figure out how to solve
some of these issues. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, my time is up.
Mr. Bishop. The gentleman yields back.
All time having expired in these second rounds of
questioning, I would yield to the Ranking Member for a closing
statement if you have one, sir.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I do.
Again, to repeat myself, thanks to our witnesses for being
here today. I want to thank our Chairman for calling this most
important hearing.
July 13 was a tragedy. Can't let it happen again, and
that's why we're here today, oversight to get the facts. I
believe that we have started getting some facts. A whole lot
more work to be done, but we're going in that direction.
We do have a lot of questions for the Secret Service, for
local law enforcement. As Mr. Ivey said, the locals didn't get
a lot of notice when it came to this campaign event for a
Presidential candidate. We need to do better. The American
public is relying on us to get some answers. They want to make
sure that we're doing the best we can to guard our democracy by
guarding our candidates to office.
As we get closer to the November election, like you both
have said, we've got to watch the rhetoric. We've got to tone
it down. I've heard those words in this committee. Right after
January 6, we echoed those same words from both sides, Tone it
down, folks, and we're still there.
We can do better. We can do better for this country, for
democracy. We need to, again, set an example for the rest of
the world. All of us together, we can do this.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, and I yield.
Mr. Bishop. I thank the gentleman.
I'm going to give the Chairman's closing statement for him.
But it's prepared here, and I think that is the appropriate way
to end.
Before I do that, I want to say thank you to the witnesses,
especially Colonel Paris, you. I will say that the North
Carolina Highway Patrol is an institution in my State that I
have not, until I had occasion to serve in the legislature and
then subsequently run for Congress and serve districts that
have constantly changed in North Carolina, and I have seen
institutionally how the State highway patrol has then fed the
sheriffs' offices over the course of time, with the elected
sheriffs who've come up in that institution. I don't know that
much about your organization, but you remind me of the fine men
and women of the North Carolina Highway Patrol, and I
appreciate--I really do appreciate your candor.
Tomorrow, the director of the FBI, Christopher Wray, will
be testifying before the Judiciary Committee, on which I also
serve, and I hope he'll be candid. I believe there are moments
when the sanctity of criminal investigations needs to be
tempered by the fact that the Nation needs answers to a
national security crisis, as I suggested before, that you have
been candid while still protecting the sanctity of the
investigations that are on-going--or of which your agency is a
part, and I appreciate that very much.
So during this hearing we got the news that Director
Cheatle resigned, after refusing to give straightforward
answers to Congress and the American people about the Secret
Service's failures on July 13--seeing the Chairman return, I'm
going to pause and let him give his statement which I had
commenced.
Chairman Green [presiding]. However necessary as it was,
Director Cheatle's indisputably overdue resignation is only the
first step on the path of accountability and reform.
Today's hearing was a vital step in obtaining more
information about what happened in Butler, Pennsylvania, but
Congress has a lot of work ahead of us. I think today as we've,
you know, questioned these professionals who've served their
communities and their States for their lifetime, we've
discovered a lot of facts, particularly about the operation.
You know, yesterday when we were on the site, we learned
about the planning failures. Today we've learned about conducts
of the operation failures, communications and things like that,
people moving and maybe not notifying, those kinds of things.
Secret Service making a decision to not stop the President
when a guy's using a rangefinder and is described as
suspicious-looking, I just--boggles the mind.
We're going to continue to investigate the failures of the
Secret Service. Our mission is very clear. We've got to get to
the bottom of it. This can't ever, ever happen again.
I want to thank both of you for serving and for a very long
testimony today. Thanks for sticking around and letting us--
we're going to have lots of other people come in here, and
we're going to get granular on all of this stuff. But this is
the closest that anyone's come to taking the life of a
President or a Presidential candidate in over 4 decades. It can
never happen again. It just simply cannot.
So we're going to continue our fact-finding to figure out
exactly how it happened, much like a after-action review would,
identify all those areas, and ensure that Secret Service,
whomever steps up to take that leadership role now, does so and
addresses these things.
Again, thank you, gentlemen, for being here.
If there are Members--what often happens in our committee
hearing, they'll have questions that come to them. They have a
few days to generate written questions. Would you be open to us
sending those to you and you just send a letter back with the
answers in writing?
OK. Thank you. I appreciate the affirmative nods.
Again, thanks for being here.
I think both sides of the aisle did an amazing job.
You made some closing comments, Mr. Correa. Did you get a
chance to?
Mr. Correa. I did.
Chairman Green. OK. I'm sorry I missed them. I'm sure they
were----
Mr. Correa. You can give me a second shot and I can repeat
myself.
Chairman Green. I'll go watch the tape.
The committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:37 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Questions From Honorable Clay Higgins for Christopher L. Paris
Question 1. To the best of your ability and organizational
knowledge/expertise please answer the following questions. If your
agency/organization was not present or privy to such information,
please speak to best practice standard operating procedures.
What agency was given primary jurisdiction over the crime scene at
the Butler Farm Show? Why was the crime scene, given its significance,
trampled and released prematurely, and what protocols were or were not
followed in preserving it?
Answer. The Butler Farm Show crime scene was jointly managed by the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Pennsylvania State Police
(PSP). The FBI has Federal jurisdiction to investigate crimes
associated with the attempted assassination of the former President of
the United States. The PSP has State jurisdiction over the homicide of
one of the spectators, the officer-involved shooting which resulted in
death of Matthew Crooks (Crooks), and the attempted homicides and
related crimes associated with the 2 additional spectators who were
shot and injured.
In coordination with the FBI, the crime scene was secured,
constantly monitored and maintained by PSP personnel 24 hours a day
while the FBI Evidence Response Team (ERT) took the lead on processing
the scene. The scene was released on Sunday July 18, 2024, after both
agencies concurred that the physical processing of the scene was
concluded. Both agencies are experienced in managing large crime scenes
and appropriate practices were utilized in this case.
Question 2. What rationale was behind the decision not to station a
counter-sniper team at the water tower during the event?
Answer. The PSP defers to the United States Secret Service (USSS)
for details regarding the security planning.
Question 3. Can you provide details on the ladder used in the
incident, including its purchase location, date of purchase, and
whether it was pre-staged? Additionally, where was the ladder located
during the incident?
Answer. A ladder was purchased by Crooks at the Bethel Park ``Home
Depot'' prior to the event. The ladder purchased by Crooks was
recovered in a wooded area adjacent to the parking lot of a permanently
closed ``Bed Bath and Beyond'' in Bethel Park and was not used by
Crooks at the time of the shooting. The FBI secured that ladder along
with the purchase receipt as evidence. The ladder observed in published
photos of the scene was owned by local law enforcement and placed there
after the shooting and was used by law enforcement to access the roof
where Crooks was shot.
Question 4. What procedures were followed for the media equipment
left behind at the scene? Where is this equipment currently, and what
is the established chain of custody?
Answer. The media equipment which was initially left at the scene
was secured as part of the crime scene. None of that equipment was
ultimately retained as evidence. It was covered to protect it from
inclement weather and was subsequently released to the owners when the
crime scene processing was complete.
Question 5. Regarding the weapon used in the incident, can you
detail its purchase history, including location and date? Was the
weapon pre-staged by the shooter, and what methodology did you use to
identify the owner of the weapon? Additionally, what are the specifics
of the weapon, such as stock folding and optics, and what circumstances
led to it being thrown from the roof?
Answer. The FBI took possession of the weapon, fired cartridge
casings, and related items, which were transported to the FBI crime
laboratory in Quantico, VA for analysis. Preliminary trace information
from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF)
indicated the firearm was purchased by Crooks' father in 2015. The PSP
has no information indicating the weapon was pre-staged by Crooks. The
purchase history was determined the evening of the shooting by the ATF.
All information regarding the purchase of the firearm is retained by
the ATF. The FBI will prepare a ballistics report on the firearm and
the PSP defers to the FBI on details related to the weapon. The PSP has
no information the weapon was thrown from the roof. Crooks' weapon was
found by law enforcement on the roof after the shooting and collected
as evidence.
Question 6. What agency is responsible for the chain of custody of
the evidence collected at the scene, where is this evidence stored, and
when will it be available for examination?
Answer. The FBI is responsible for the evidence collected at the
scene and PSP defers to them regarding the storage location and
potential examination.
Question 7. When and where was the autopsy of the suspect
conducted, what were the findings, where is the report, and what is the
current status of the corpse?
Answer. The autopsy of Crooks occurred on Sunday July 14, 2024, at
the Allegheny County Medical Examiner's Office. The autopsy revealed
Crooks was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head. The autopsy
report has not yet been provided by the Allegheny County Medical
Examiner. The body of Crooks was released to his family.
Question 8. What information is available regarding the casings
(manufacturer, caliber) and projectiles recovered from the scene?
Answer. The FBI will be producing a detailed ballistics report on
the firearm and PSP defers to the FBI on details related to the
analysis of the weapon, ammunition, and fired cartridge casings.
Question 9. What steps have been taken to reconstruct the crime
scene, including the hydraulics, railings, and other relevant aspects?
Answer. The PSP defers to the FBI to describe ERT's analysis and
mapping of the crime scene.
Question 10. Has everyone present in the video footage been
identified, and have all potential witnesses been interviewed? What
agencies are coordinating this effort? If so, what were the findings?
Answer. It is unclear what video footage is being referenced, but
the PSP can report that in excess of 950 interviews have been conducted
to date, and additional interviews are anticipated. The PSP and FBI are
coordinating and conducting joint interviews. While the investigations
are on-going, the preliminary findings indicate Crooks acted alone and
was responsible for the shooting of the former President of the United
States, and 1 homicide and 2 attempted homicides of rally attendees on
July 13, 2024. PSP is not aware of any evidence to indicate that co-
conspirators or accomplices were involved in the planning or execution
of this incident.
Question 11. Can you provide details on the bicycle involved,
including where and when it was purchased, its type, and its current
location?
Answer. The investigation has not revealed any information
indicating that a bicycle was involved in any way.
Question 12. What type of backpack was involved in the incident,
where and when was it purchased, and where is it currently located?
Answer. The backpack was collected as evidence by the FBI and
remains in their custody. At this time, the PSP does not have
information regarding the specific type of backpack or how or when it
was acquired by Crooks.
Question 13. What are the specifics of the drone and its controller
used by the suspect, and what evidence has been gathered from these
items?
Answer. The drone was recovered from Crooks' vehicle during a law
enforcement search of the vehicle following the shooting. Both devices
are being analyzed by the FBI. The PSP defers to the FBI for any
specific information obtained from the analysis.
Question 14. Is there any audio recording available from the drone
used by the suspect?
Answer. The PSP defers to the FBI for any specific information
obtained from the analysis of the drone.
Question 15. What information has been retrieved from the suspect's
cell phone and laptop, and how is this data being analyzed?
Answer. Both devices are being analyzed by the FBI. The PSP defers
to the FBI for any specific information obtained from the forensic
analysis.
Question 16. Are there any video and audio recordings from the
suspect's drone, cell phone, or laptop, and what do these recordings
reveal?
Answer. These items are being analyzed by the FBI and the PSP
defers to the FBI for any specific information obtained.
Question 17. What activities and details have been uncovered
regarding the suspect's social media accounts?
Answer. Federal search-and-seizure warrants were executed for these
accounts and the PSP defers to the FBI for any relevant information
obtained.
Question 18. Was there any effort by local law enforcement
including but not limited to Butler Emergency Services Unit,
Pennsylvania State Police, Butler County Sheriff, Pittsburgh Police, or
Alleghany County Police to access the overlook room after the shooter
was spotted on the roof, and what were the findings of such efforts?
Answer. The investigation indicates a member of the Butler County
Emergency Services Unit (ESU) returned to the window of the overlook
room just as the shooting occurred.
Question 19. How many interviews have been conducted in relation to
this incident, who were they with, and what were the main points of
these interviews?
Answer. More than 950 interviews have been conducted to date,
including all Federal, State, and local law enforcement personnel
present at the time of this incident. Interviews are on-going and have,
or will include, those responsible for planning the rally, members of
the public, associates, family, past employers, school contacts, and
others who may have had interactions with Crooks. The main points of
the interviews are to determine the existence of any co-conspirators,
potential motive, the time line leading up to and immediately following
the shooting, etc.
Question 20. How many local, State, and Federal law enforcement
officers were present at the event, and how many of these officers were
SWAT-certified?
Answer. The PSP defers to the USSS for the exact number. The PSP
had 32 members assigned to the Butler County rally detail for various
security posts. Of the PSP personnel assigned, 4 Troopers were members
of the PSP Special Emergency Response Team (SERT) who were involved in
securing the motorcade route. PSP SERT members were not assigned to
sniper or counter-sniper positions. The PSP defers to the USSS and
Butler County officials to categorize the number of local officers who
identify as ``SWAT-certified.''
Question 21. Was intelligence regarding the Iranian threat
disseminated among all law enforcement agencies as part of the pre-
mission briefing, and if so, what was the nature of this dissemination?
Answer. PSP personnel were not made aware of an Iranian threat as
part of the pre-mission briefing.
Question 22. What radio communications were active before and
during the event, and does the local law enforcement dispatch, monitor,
and record all frequencies used on that day?
Answer. Radio communications consisted of USSS (believe multiple
channels--not recorded), Butler ESU (recorded), Butler County Dispatch
(recorded), and PSP Tactical Channel (recorded). All recordings have
been preserved. Monitoring radio transmissions is the responsibility of
the respective agency.
Question 23. What media permits were issued for the event, who
issued them, and were there any unusual media requests?
Answer. The PSP does not have this information and defers to the
USSS.
Question 24. Why were local law enforcement drones not deployed
during the event, considering their common usage in tactical
operations? If not, what was the reasoning for such a decision?
Answer. No PSP drones were requested by the USSS. The USSS
prohibits use of drones during the time the protectee is on-site.
Question 25. What Federal Government satellites were positioned
over Butler during the event, and has the USSS requested satellite
imagery from other Federal agencies?
Answer. The PSP does not have this information and defers to the
USSS.
Question 26. What information is known about the suspect's
background, including details about their parents, home, room, nearby
woods, animals, pets, journals, diaries, books, and readings?
Answer. The PSP defers to the FBI for information related to
Crooks' character profile.
Question 27. Where was the unified command post located during the
event, which agencies manned it, and what communications protocols were
in place?
Answer. A representative from the USSS, the PSP, and Butler County
were present in the Secret Service Security Room (Command Post) located
in the Butler Farm Show Office building. Butler County maintained a
separate mobile command post, which was staffed with a Butler ESU
member and a Butler Emergency Services Representative. Each agency's
representative had access to their respective agency's communications
frequencies and was responsible for sharing information with the other
agencies. Additionally, dispatch for the local police officers on
traffic posts was handled by the Butler County 9-1-1 Center.
Questions From Honorable Clay Higgins for Patrick Yoes
Question 1. To the best of your ability and organizational
knowledge/expertise please answer the following questions. If your
agency/organization was not present or privy to such information,
please speak to best practice standard operating procedures.
What agency was given primary jurisdiction over the crime scene at
the Butler Farm Show? Why was the crime scene, given its significance,
trampled and released prematurely, and what protocols were or were not
followed in preserving it?
Question 2. What rationale was behind the decision not to station a
counter-sniper team at the water tower during the event?
Question 3. Can you provide details on the ladder used in the
incident, including its purchase location, date of purchase, and
whether it was pre-staged? Additionally, where was the ladder located
during the incident?
Question 4. What procedures were followed for the media equipment
left behind at the scene? Where is this equipment currently, and what
is the established chain of custody?
Question 5. Regarding the weapon used in the incident, can you
detail its purchase history, including location and date? Was the
weapon pre-staged by the shooter, and what methodology did you use to
identify the owner of the weapon? Additionally, what are the specifics
of the weapon, such as stock folding and optics, and what circumstances
led to it being thrown from the roof?
Question 6. What agency is responsible for the chain of custody of
the evidence collected at the scene, where is this evidence stored, and
when will it be available for examination?
Question 7. When and where was the autopsy of the suspect
conducted, what were the findings, where is the report, and what is the
current status of the corpse?
Question 8. What information is available regarding the casings
(manufacturer, caliber) and projectiles recovered from the scene?
Question 9. What steps have been taken to reconstruct the crime
scene, including the hydraulics, railings, and other relevant aspects?
Question 10. Has everyone present in the video footage been
identified, and have all potential witnesses been interviewed? What
agencies are coordinating this effort? If so, what were the findings?
Question 11. Can you provide details on the bicycle involved,
including where and when it was purchased, its type, and its current
location?
Question 12. What type of backpack was involved in the incident,
where and when was it purchased, and where is it currently located?
Question 13. What are the specifics of the drone and its controller
used by the suspect, and what evidence has been gathered from these
items?
Question 14. Is there any audio recording available from the drone
used by the suspect?
Question 15. What information has been retrieved from the suspect's
cell phone and laptop, and how is this data being analyzed?
Question 16. Are there any video and audio recordings from the
suspect's drone, cell phone, or laptop, and what do these recordings
reveal?
Question 17. What activities and details have been uncovered
regarding the suspect's social media accounts?
Question 18. Was there any effort by local law enforcement
including but not limited to Butler Emergency Services Unit,
Pennsylvania State Police, Butler County Sheriff, Pittsburgh Police, or
Alleghany County Police to access the overlook room after the shooter
was spotted on the roof, and what were the findings of such efforts?
Question 19. How many interviews have been conducted in relation to
this incident, who were they with, and what were the main points of
these interviews?
Question 20. How many local, State, and Federal law enforcement
officers were present at the event, and how many of these officers were
SWAT-certified?
Question 21. Was intelligence regarding the Iranian threat
disseminated among all law enforcement agencies as part of the pre-
mission briefing, and if so, what was the nature of this dissemination?
Question 22. What radio communications were active before and
during the event, and does the local law enforcement dispatch monitor
and record all frequencies used on that day?
Question 23. What media permits were issued for the event, who
issued them, and were there any unusual media requests?
Question 24. Why were local law enforcement drones not deployed
during the event, considering their common usage in tactical
operations? If not, what was the reasoning for such a decision?
Question 25. What Federal Government satellites were positioned
over Butler during the event, and has the USSS requested satellite
imagery from other Federal agencies?
Question 26. What information is known about the suspect's
background, including details about their parents, home, room, nearby
woods, animals, pets, journals, diaries, books, and readings?
Question 27. Where was the unified command post located during the
event, which agencies manned it, and what communications protocols were
in place?
Answer. I am writing on behalf of the members of the Fraternal
Order of Police to respond to written questions for the record
submitted to me by Representative G. Clay Higgins (R-LA), a Member of
the Committee on Homeland Security stemming from the hearing entitled,
``Examining the Assassination Attempt of July 13th.''
All of Representative Higgins' questions were regarding the
assassination attempt on former President Donald J. Trump and all were
specific to the site of the attack and subsequent on-site
investigation. I was not involved in the advance of the site and have
none of the information that Representative Higgins is seeking. My
response will address, in general terms, the role played by State and
local law enforcement when we provide support and assistance to the
U.S. Secret Service (USSS) at an event or appearance of one of their
protectees.
As I stated in my testimony, the law enforcement mission is a
shared mission and law enforcement at every level routinely cooperates
and collaborates with one another. Law enforcement in our country is
highly decentralized--more than 90 percent of U.S. law enforcement
officers serve at the State and local level in more than 18,000
different jurisdictions. Working events featuring a former President or
major Presidential candidate requires a robust and coordinated security
effort among Federal, State, and local agencies. The USSS is tasked
with leading these efforts, but the success of these operations relies
heavily on the seamless integration and cooperation of local law
enforcement agencies.
Communication between all agencies involved in the event is
critical. Participating agencies need to be involved from the initial
advance, which typically occurs days before an event, to the final
departure and the debrief. This includes real-time communications
during the event, the lack thereof which may have been a factor during
the rally in Butler.
Before, during, and after these events, local law enforcement works
under and at the direction of the USSS, which must ensure that all
agencies involved in the event have a clear understanding of their
roles and responsibilities. The local agencies contribute local
knowledge, resources, and personnel to augment the capabilities of the
USSS to ensure that the event is adequately staffed and that all
contingencies are covered. Our presence is a vital part of the security
matrix, but the USSS is ultimately responsible and the final arbiter of
any and all security matters affecting their protectee and the public.
During these events, local law enforcement officers should--when
possible--be part of the command posts and communication centers to
facilitate real-time information sharing and rapid response to emerging
situations. As noted, this may have been an issue in Butler on 13 July.
In conclusion, the partnership between local law enforcement and
the U.S. Secret Service is critical to keeping everyone safe at these
events--the public, the protectee, and the officers working the event.
Close collaboration between USSS advance teams and protective details
with local law enforcement agencies should exemplify the best of
interagency cooperation and underscore our collective commitment to
national security.
We must learn from the critical failure of security at the event in
Butler. We need to know how and why this security failure occurred to
ensure that future events better provide for the safety and security
for our leaders and the public attending these events. From a law
enforcement and security standpoint, the coming election will be an
extraordinary challenge for the Secret Service. They will be advancing
and planning security for the candidates at sites all across the Nation
for the next 3 months. In making and executing these plans to protect
the candidates and event attendees, they will need to rely on State and
local law enforcement to ensure the protective mission is successful. I
can assure this committee that these local and State agencies stand
ready to assist in any way we can, but I would underscore that the
ultimate responsibility for security at these events is entirely that
of the U.S. Secret Service.
On behalf of the more than 377,000 members of the Fraternal Order
of Police, thank you both for the opportunity to testify at the hearing
and respond to these questions. If I can provide any additional
information on this matter, please do not hesitate to contact me or
Executive Director Jim Pasco in our Washington, DC office.

[all]
