- SECURING OUR NATION FROM WMDs: A REVIEW OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY'S COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION OFFICE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SECURING OUR NATION FROM WMDs: A REVIEW
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECU-
RITY'S COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DE-
STRUCTION OFFICE

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MARCH 20, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-56

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-574 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman

Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                  Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Daniel S. Goldman, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Ms. Mary Ellen Callahan, Assistant Secretary, Countering Weapons
of Mass Destruction, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. Herbert O. Wolfe, MHS-PA, Acting Chief Medical Officer,
Acting Director, Office of Health Security, U.S. Department of
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Ms. Tina Won Sherman, Ph.D., Director, Homeland Security and
Justice, U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21

SECURING OUR NATION FROM WMDs: A REVIEW OF THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY'S COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION OFFICE

----------

Wednesday, March 20, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:34 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Anthony D'Esposito
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives D'Esposito, LaLota, Strong,
Brecheen, and Carter.
Mr. D'Esposito. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology will come
to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to provide Members the
opportunity to evaluate the work of DHS's Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Office and the Office of Health Security to
assess their respective roles in preventing, mitigating, and
responding to chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
threats.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology will review the Department of Homeland Security's
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office and the Office of
Health Security and examine their efforts to secure this great
Nation from weapons of mass destruction.
I would like to welcome our witnesses. Thank you for your
work to protect this great Nation from chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear threats. We look forward to hearing
from each of you.
The Department of Homeland Security was created following
the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, and brought
together 22 Federal agencies to coordinate and streamline
efforts to protect our homeland.
Shortly after the Twin Towers collapsed, a series of
letters laced with anthrax were sent to Congressional office
buildings, news outlets, and postal facilities, killing 5
Americans and injuring 17. The 2001 anthrax attacks highlighted
the means to which bad actors will go to terrorize innocent
people and the need for the U.S. investment in CBRN security
and defense.
Twenty-three years later, the risk of biological terrorism
and weapons of mass destruction has not gone away. Recognizing
the need to streamline and prioritize countering CBRN threats,
the CWMD Office was established in 2017 and authorized by
Congress and President Trump in 2018.
The mission of the Department of Homeland Security's
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office is to reduce
vulnerability and protect American cities from a WMD attack by
supporting operational partners on the ground. For example,
CWMD's Securing the Cities program has equipped State and local
agencies with nearly 48,000 items and pieces of equipment with
detection and deterrence capabilities to protect communities
across this country from radiological threats.
In October 2023, a Houston police officer discovered
dangerous levels of radiation in a metal scrapyard after his
STC-provided personal radiation detector detected radiation
during his commute to work. The hazardous material was
identified and safely removed. These capabilities are critical
for safeguarding this great homeland.
Last July, I attended the Securing the Cities annual
conference, where emergency managers from across the country
gathered for training and coordination. I was grateful to
attend and proud of STC's work to fortify a network of State,
local, and Federal partners that are committed to defending the
United States of America from a potentially catastrophic
nuclear or radiological attack.
In October, CWMD held a ChemPrep program in Nassau County
to review local chemical incident-related concerns, gaps, and
vulnerabilities, to discuss potential opportunities to optimize
local preparedness. I was very pleased with the local outreach
and support to first responders on Long Island, the same island
that Members of this committee on both sides of the aisle--
myself, Congressman LaLota, Congressman Garbarino, and now
Congressman Suozzi--represent.
With numerous bad actors and threats confronting our
Nation, CWMD has provided U.S. Customs and Border Protection
with radiation portal monitors to scan cargo for potential
threats.
While the CWMD Office plays an essential role in equipping
State and local partners with equipment and training to counter
CBRN threats, there are opportunities to improve the
effectiveness of this office. Although the office was
established to streamline internal DHS operations and
coordinations with States and localities, many reorganizations
have taken place, and workplace morale has consistently
received low rankings by CWMD Office personnel.
When the Department of Homeland Security Act was passed in
2002, section 872 allowed the Secretary to reorganize,
establish, or consolidate operations within the Department. In
2022, the Secretary used this authority to reallocate some
health security and biosecurity functions to the newly-created
Office of Health Security, less than 5 years since the Office
of Health Affairs was reorganized into CWMD. Such constant
restructuring can be confusing and frustrating for employees
and stakeholders. I'm looking forward to learning more about
the Office of Health Security, the benefit of its move out of
CWMD, and differentiating between the biodefense work of OHS
with that of CWMD.
I am also eager to hear an update on CWMD's BioWatch
program, which is a monitoring system that collects and tests
air samples for biological agents that may be used in a
bioterrorism attack. This program has not kept pace with
technological advancements since it was first created in
response to the 2001 anthrax attacks and requires 12 to 36
hours before successfully verifying a biological agent and
warning the public.
In 2019, DHS began a major acquisition program, Biological
Detection for the 21st Century, BD21, to move toward the next
generation of national biodetection. BD21 was intended to
address some of BioWatch's limitations, including significantly
shortening its time to detect. However, it seems that BD21 has
been abandoned.
The President's fiscal year 2025 budget request refers to
the program as, ``obsolete,'' and states that CWMD will
transition into a new, ``environmental biodetection capability
development and maturation'' project. I would like to
understand how this new project will be different. Ultimately,
I hope that CWMD is on a fast track to finally obtaining the
biological technology that America needs.
Despite the obstacles the CWMD Office has faced, I believe
that we should work together to remedy these challenges and to
help the office succeed in its mission of enabling operational
partners and preventing WMDs from ever harming this great
country. That is also why I was proud to introduce H.R. 3224, a
bill to extend the authorization of this office, and I urge my
colleagues in the Senate to take up this bill immediately.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses on the
opportunities and challenges confronting the CWMD Office as
well as the Office of Health Security. Thank you all for this
work in this field and for your commitment to this country.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]
Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito
March 20, 2024
Today the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology will
review the Department of Homeland Security's Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office (CWMD) and the Office of Health Security and examine
their efforts to secure our Nation from WMDs. I'd like to welcome our
witnesses. Thank you for your work to protect our Nation from chemical,
biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) threats. We look forward
to hearing from each of you.
The Department of Homeland Security was created following the
terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, and brought together 22
disparate Federal agencies to coordinate and streamline efforts to
protect our homeland. Shortly after the Twin Towers collapsed, a series
of letters laced with anthrax were sent to Congressional office
buildings, news outlets, and postal facilities, killing 5 Americans and
injuring 17.\1\ The 2001 anthrax attacks highlighted the means to which
bad actors will go to terrorize innocent people and the need for U.S.
investment in CBRN security and defense.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.fbi.gov/history/famous-cases/amerithrax-or-anthrax-
investigation; https://nihrecord.nih.gov/2022/05/13/2001-anthrax-
attacks-revealed-need-develop-countermeasures-against-biological-
threats#:?:text=The%20attacks-%20lasted%20a%20few,doctors%20had-
%20experience%20treating%20anthrax.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Twenty-three years later, the risk of biological terrorism and
other weapons of mass destruction has not gone away. Recognizing the
need to streamline and prioritize countering CBRN threats, the CWMD
Office was established in 2017 and authorized by Congress and President
Trump in 2018. The mission of the Department of Homeland Security's
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office is to reduce
vulnerability and protect American cities from a WMD attack by
supporting operational partners on the ground.
For example, CWMD's Securing the Cities Program (STC) has equipped
State and local agencies with nearly 48,000 items of equipment with
detection and deterrence capabilities to protect communities across the
country from radiological threats.\2\ In October 2023, a Houston police
officer discovered ``dangerous levels of radiation'' in a metal
scrapyard after his STC-provided personal radiation detector (RPD)
detected radiation during his commute to work. The hazardous material
was identified and safely removed. These capabilities are critical for
safeguarding our homeland from WMDs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ CWMD Briefing. March 12, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Last July, I attended the Securing the Cities annual conference,
where emergency managers from across the country gathered for training
and coordination. I was grateful to attend and proud of STC's work to
fortify a network of State, local, and Federal partners that are
committed to defending the United States from a potentially
catastrophic nuclear or radiological attack.
In October, CWMD held a ChemPrep program in Nassau County to review
local chemical incident-related concerns, gaps, and vulnerabilities,
and to discuss potential opportunities to optimize local preparedness.
I was very pleased with the local outreach and support to first
responders on Long Island.
With numerous bad actors and threats confronting our Nation, CWMD
has provided U.S. Customs and Border Protection with Radiation Portal
Monitors to scan cargo for potential radiological threats.
While the CWMD Office plays an essential role in equipping State
and local partners with equipment and training to counter CBRN threats,
there are opportunities to improve the effectiveness of this office.
Although the Office was established to streamline internal DHS
operations and coordination with States and localities, many re-
organizations have taken place, and workplace morale has consistently
received low rankings by CWMD Office personnel.
When the Department of Homeland Security Act was passed in 2002,
Section 872 allowed the Secretary to reorganize, establish, or
consolidate operations within the Department. In 2022, the Secretary
used this authority to reallocate some health security and biosecurity
functions to the newly-created Office of Health Security (OHS), less
than 5 years since the Office of Health Affairs was reorganized into
CWMD. Such constant restructuring can be confusing and frustrating for
employees and stakeholders. I'm looking forward to learning more about
the Office of Health Security, the benefits of its move out of CWMD,
and differentiating between the biodefense work of OHS with that of
CWMD.
I am also eager to hear an update on CWMD's BioWatch program, which
is a monitoring system that collects and tests air samples for
biological agents that may be used in a bioterrorism attack. This
program has not kept pace with technological advancements since it was
first created in response to the 2001 anthrax attacks and requires 12-
36 hours before successfully verifying a biological agent and warning
the public.
In 2019, DHS began a major acquisition program, Biological
Detection for the Twenty-First Century (BD-21), to move toward the next
generation of national biodetection. BD-21 was intended to address some
of BioWatch's limitations, including significantly shortening its time-
to-detect. However, it seems that BD-21 has been abandoned. The
President's fiscal year 2025 budget request refers to the program as
``obsolete'' and states that CWMD will transition into a new
``Environmental Biodetection (EBD) Capability Development and
Maturation'' project. I would like to understand how this new project
will be different. Ultimately, I hope that CWMD is on a fast track to
finally obtaining the biological detection technology that America
needs.
Despite the obstacles the CWMD Office has faced, I believe that we
should work together to remedy these challenges and to help the Office
succeed in its mission of enabling operational partners in preventing
WMDs from ever harming our homeland. That is also why I was proud to
introduce H.R. 3224, a bill to extend the authorization of this Office,
and I urge my colleagues in the Senate to take up this bill. I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses on the opportunities and
challenges confronting the CWMD Office, as well as the Office of Health
Security. Thank you all for your work in this field.

Mr. D'Esposito. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman and my good friend from Louisiana, Mr. Carter, for
his opening statement.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Good afternoon to our panel experts.
I want to thank the witnesses for being here today to
discuss the importance of countering weapons of mass
destruction and the Office of Health Security.
CWMD and OHS plays a critical role in fortifying our
Nation's defense against threats that can pose considerable
harm to our communities. CWMD improves our Nation's capability
to plan for, detect, and guard against chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear threats.
OHS is the central office. It serves as the principal
medical work force, health and safety, and public health
authority for some 260,000 Department of Homeland Security
employees.
Pursuant to CWMD Act of 2018, the office was set to sunset
on December 21, 2023, but the sunset was subsequently extended,
and now it's set to expire when the continuing resolution
expires, which is on this Friday.
I want to thank my friend and Chairman D'Esposito for
working in a bipartisan manner in front to reauthorize CWMD. I
am proud to cosponsor his bill, H.R. 3224, the Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction Extension Act of 2023. As
authorizers, we should do our part to make sure that all
programs and offices have support and there is no question as
to whether this office or any other office that protects the
Nation from threats has an uncertain future.
We should always--our No. 1 job is to make sure that we
properly fund and provide the resources to keep America safe,
notwithstanding whatever party or philosophical views we may
have. This is, in fact, one of the most significant bipartisan
issues that we have to undertake.
CWMD operates critical programs like Securing the Cities,
STC, which provides 14 local governments, including my home
town. I was proud to be the lead sponsor on this bill.
I know, Ms. Callahan, that you had the opportunity to visit
New Orleans to do a walkthrough. So I hope you had a chance to
enjoy the weather, the food, and, of course, the warm hearts of
the people of New Orleans, my home town.
With detection equipment, training exercise, support
operation, technical subject-matter expertise, and programmatic
support is so critically important to making sure that things
like the Super Bowl and Mardi Gras and high-populated
activities are safe, not just in New Orleans, but across the
country, and certainly in the other 14 cities that are part of
the STC. STC is working with New Orleans to prepare for the
Super Bowl. We continue to support important events like Mardi
Gras, Jazz Fest, the Sugar Bowl, any other reason.
We have millions and millions of people who visit New
Orleans for their--the hospitality and wonderful access to
transportation and our world-class convention center. Shameless
plug there. But we're also obviously very excited about having
this extra barrier of protection because we know the threats
are, in fact, real.
I introduced H.R. 4403, the Securing the Cities Improvement
Act, which passed the House earlier this month. My bill will
help cities build and maintain their security capabilities
against nuclear or radiological threats. I look forward to
discussing the STC's impacts on domestic preparedness.
While CWMD is doing great work, one concern that I have
seen highlighted repeatedly in the Partnership for Public
Service and the Government Accountability Office, GAO, report
is internal morale issues.
One GAO report highlighted the merger of predecessor
offices under CWMD caused low morale and that the offices'
missions were unclear under the new structure. Some employees
had difficulty understanding how the missions should align
under the new structure. However, a more recent GAO report has
highlighted that CWMD is working on its work-force morale.
I want to thank GAO for their work on helping the committee
understand how this new office is functioning. I look forward
to hearing today from CWMD how you have improved your work-
force morale.
OHS is also an integral part of the Department and was
formerly part of CWMD until 2022. As a separate component, OHS
optimizes the health, wellness, and safety of the DHS work
force and enhances efforts to counter health threats that pose
risk to our Nation.
In recent years, they have managed medical and public
health initiatives to help thousands of people resettling in
the United States through Operation Allies Welcome to--Welcome
and Uniting for Ukraine. It is imperative to recognize and
support the critical work carried out by both CWMD and OHS in
securing our homeland.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today
regarding the recent fiscal year 2025 budget request and any
additional concerns and successes the office would like to
discuss. We're here to serve. We're here to hear from you.
We're here to determine how we as a committee can do more to
make sure that your jobs are easier to do and that you are
funded to do the things that you are Constitutionally-mandated
to do, and that is to make sure that we have a safe and
wholesome community.
So with that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Troy Carter
March 20, 2024
CWMD and OHS play a crucial role in fortifying our Nation's
defenses against threats that could pose considerable harm to our
communities. CWMD improves our Nation's capability to plan for, detect,
and guard against chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
(CBRN) threats. OHS is the central office that serves as the principal
medical, workforce health and safety, and public health authority for
the 260,000 Department of Homeland Security employees.
Pursuant to the CWMD Act of 2018 the office was set to sunset on
December 21, 2023, but the sunset was subsequently extended and is now
set to expire when the continuing resolution expires, which is on
Friday. I want to thank Chairman D'Esposito for working on a bipartisan
front to reauthorize CWMD. I am a proud cosponsor of his bill, H.R.
3224, the ``Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Extension Act of
2023.'' As authorizers, we should do our part to make sure that all
programs and offices have support and there is no question as to
whether this office or any other office that protects the Nation from
threats, has an uncertain future.
CWMD operates critical programs, like Securing the Cities (STC),
which provides 14 local governments, including New Orleans--my home,
with detection equipment, training, exercise support, operational and
technical subject-matter expertise, and programmatic support. STC is
working with New Orleans to prepare for Super Bowl LIX (59) and
continues to support important events such as Mardi Gras. To ensure
such work is not hindered, I introduced H.R. 4403, the ``Securing the
Cities Improvement Act,'' which passed the House earlier this month. My
bill would help cities build and maintain their security capabilities
against nuclear or radiological threats. I look forward to discussing
STC's impact on domestic preparedness.
While CWMD is doing great work, one concern that I have seen
highlighted repeatedly in the Partnership for Public Service and the
Government Accountability Office (GAO) reports is internal morale
issues. One GAO report highlighted that the merger of predecessor
offices under CWMD caused low morale and that the Office's missions
were unclear under the new structure. Some employees had difficulty
understanding how their missions should align under the new structure.
However, a more recent GAO report has highlighted that CWMD is
working on its workforce morale. I want to thank GAO for their work on
helping the committee understand how this new office is functioning. I
look forward to hearing today how CWMD has improved workforce morale.
OHS is also an integral part of the Department and was formerly
part of CWMD until 2022. As a separate component, OHS optimizes the
health, wellness, and safety of the DHS workforce and enhances efforts
to counter health threats that pose a risk to our Nation. In recent
years, they have managed medical and public health initiatives that
have helped thousands of people resettling in the United States through
Operations Allies Welcome and Uniting for Ukraine. It is imperative to
recognize and support the critical work carried out by both CWMD and
OHS in securing our homeland.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today regarding the
recent fiscal year 2025 budget request and any additional concerns or
successes the offices would like to discuss.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Other Members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
March 20, 2024
The Department of Homeland Security's Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office (CWMD) and Office of Health Security (OHS) play
vital roles in preparing the Nation against threats, whether natural or
man-made. That is why I continue to be concerned about CWMD's
authorization, which is currently scheduled to sunset on Friday.
This committee has worked on a bipartisan extension for CWMD, but
it is not yet law. Congress needs to pass a long-term reauthorization
for the office. I look forward to arriving at a solution so CWMD can
continue to fulfill its important role in homeland security.
Under past leadership, there have been questions and criticisms
about CWMD's technologies and workforce morale. In 2019, I worked on a
bicameral, bipartisan effort with the Senate to encourage more
transparency at CWMD and obtain information about the programs that
were the subject of criticism. One such program was Biowatch, CWMD's
premier biodetection program. This program is now over 20 years old and
has not had significant updates during its life. CWMD initiated BD-21,
an acquisition program to replace the aging BioWatch technology, but
the anticipated upgrades have not come to fruition.
Last year, the Department announced the Environmental BioDetection
Capability Development and Maturation Project, which appears to be the
next step in biodetection. I look forward to learning more about this
project today. CWMD's workforce morale issues have repeatedly been
identified as a concern, as I mentioned. Since its establishment, CWMD
has been either ranked the lowest or close to the lowest in the annual
Best Places to Work in the Federal Government survey. I look forward to
hearing how Assistant Secretary Callahan has been working to improve
employee morale and what plans there are for the future. The morale and
mental health of the DHS workforce has long been a priority of mine.
This Congress, I introduced H.R. 2577, the Suicide Prevention and
Resiliency for Law Enforcement Act, which directs DHS to address the
mental health and wellness of its agents and officers in a
comprehensive manner to improve care and reduce the stigma associated
with seeking help. H.R. 2577 would establish the Law Enforcement Mental
Health and Wellness Program to be overseen by the Department's Chief
Medical Officer, who we have before us today.
Established in 2022, the Office of Health Security is tasked with
ensuring DHS workforce resiliency and emergency response planning,
policy, and oversight in collaboration with other agencies. In recent
years, OHS has also overseen the medical and public health programs for
tens of thousands of people resettling in the United States--these
programs include Operations Allies Welcome and Uniting for Ukraine.
I look forward to hearing today how OHS, while still very new, is
pursuing its mission and working with other components at DHS.

Mr. D'Esposito. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this very important topic
critical to our national security.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. D'Esposito. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative.
You may be seated. Thank you.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
The Honorable Mary Ellen Callahan serves as the assistant
secretary for the Department of Homeland Security's Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction Office. CWMD leads DHS efforts to
safeguard the United States of America against chemical,
biological, radiological, and nuclear threats. Previously, Ms.
Callahan served as the chief of staff to the deputy secretary
of the Department.
Dr. Herbert Wolfe is the acting chief medical officer and
acting director of the Office of Health Security for DHS. He
oversees the medical, public health, and work force health and
safety activities across the Department. Prior to the
establishment of OHS, he served as the deputy assistant
secretary for health security within CWMD.
Dr. Tina Won Sherman is the director in the Government
Accountability's Office Homeland Security and Justice team. She
oversees work on the protection of the Nation's critical
infrastructure assets, the security of the United States
transportation system, and additional equities within the
Department of Homeland Security, including the CWMD office.
I thank all the witnesses for taking the time and being
here with us today.
I now recognize Ms. Callahan for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MARY ELLEN CALLAHAN, ASSISTANT SECRETARY,
COUNTERING WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Ms. Callahan. Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter,
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to speak with you today. I appreciate the
opportunity to discuss the Department of Homeland Security's
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office and our efforts
to safeguard the Nation from chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear threats, also known as CBRN.
The DHS CWMD Office has a unique value proposition in the
CBRN space. CWMD was created by Congress 5 years ago to be a
single point of CBRN expertise within DHS. We are the hub for
the Department's weapons of mass destruction, or WMD/CBRN
activities, providing coordination, strategy, and policy
guidance, intelligence analysis, operational support, and
researching technologies. With your support, the creation of an
office solely focused on CBRN threats streamlined the ability
of DHS to resource and execute this critical mission.
My priorities for the office include focusing on the
outstanding CWMD employees and bolstering our relationships
with our important State, local, and Federal partners. I have
been leading CWMD for 8 months. The work force at CWMD is among
the most talented, mission-focused, and knowledgeable work
forces I have ever experienced. At its founding, however, the
office faced challenges, including frequent leadership changes,
faltering morale, and staff turnover.
Therefore, my first priority at CWMD is to further build a
collaborative, safe, and productive work environment. The CWMD
team deserves this. With that said, the uncertainty around
CWMD's future has had a devastating effect on the morale and
retention of the office's highly-skilled and in-demand work
force.
My employee morale and well-being plan has three elements.
First, we've been encouraging professional development,
including individual development plans and professional
training. We've just launched a mentoring program where I am
among the mentors.
Second, we are working to better integrate the activities
of each of the 5 directorates to make sure that the CWMD staff
has complete awareness of the office missions. As a result of
education and communication, I've seen better synergies and
coordination between and among the directorates, which leads to
a more engaged work force.
Third, we are looking for ways to connect with our
colleagues on a more personal note. We host quarterly in-person
get-togethers in our establishing interest groups. I hold
weekly office hours to engage with the work force one-on-one.
All of these actions are playing a significant role in
improving CWMD's employee morale. However, without enduring
reauthorization, CWMD will likely face steady attrition.
In addition to better integrating my office, I'm committed
to strengthening our assistance to and our relationship with
our stakeholders, including our State, local, and Federal
partners.
CWMD has integrated the prevention and detection of all
CBRN threats with our DHS partners through training, equipment,
and technical assistance to CBP, HSI, TSA, Coast Guard, and
Secret Service. We also serve as a peer organization to CISA
and FEMA in the life cycle of CBRN incident management. We, of
course, work seamlessly with our colleagues at the Office of
Health Security on public health and biological threats.
I'm working to further the operational--further integrate
the operational support of all of these components with our
planning, research, and support work at CWMD.
Even with all this Federal activity, the most unique role
CWMD plays in the CBRN ecosystem is our relationship with State
and locals. CWMD provides radiological and nuclear detection
capabilities in 14 high-risk regions in the United States
through the Securing the City programs. Those regions are
preparing to work seamlessly with the FBI and the Department of
Energy in the event of an incident.
On Monday, I was in New Orleans, along with Representative
Carter's team and the FBI and DOE, in order to see a portion of
the CBRN preparation for the 2025 Super Bowl, along with city
and State teams. Last year, Securing the City trained over
14,000 State and local first responders. Our BioWatch program
is in over 30 jurisdictions. We are working to update our
environmental biodetection capabilities, all while providing
steady-state coverage for these jurisdictions.
Between Securing the City and BioWatch, CWMD provides
steady-state detection for 40 percent of the population. For
the rest of the country, our mobile detection deployment team
was deployed 188 times last year, providing support in 48
States, 2 territories, and 1 Tribal unit. All of this work with
our stakeholders is intended to prepare and promote collective
readiness and to safeguard the Nation from CBRN threats in the
homeland.
Chairman, Ranking Member, thank you for this opportunity to
speak with you today.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Callahan follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mary Ellen Callahan
March 20, 2024
introduction
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to speak with
you today. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office's
(CWMD) efforts to safeguard the Nation from chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) threats.
The DHS CWMD Office has a unique role and value proposition in the
CBRN space. Established in accordance with Public Law 115-387, the
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of 2018, (CWMD Act of 2018)
CWMD is the single point of CBRN expertise within the Department and
the linchpin to detect CBRN threats in the homeland. I thank our
dedicated experts in CWMD, and our Federal, State, and local partners
for their commitment to the Nation's security.
CBRN threats present dynamic challenges to the Nation's security.
These threats may emanate from nation-states, terrorists, lone actors,
violent extremists, or natural causes. The risks are constantly
evolving due to the evolution of technologies--for example, artificial
intelligence (AI)--as well as the potential of spillover of animal
pathogens to human populations.
Responding to this threat environment, CWMD is the hub for the
Department's WMD/CBRN activities, providing coordination, strategy and
policy guidance, intelligence analysis, operations support, and
developing and deploying CBRN technologies through our research,
development, testing, evaluation, and acquisition initiatives. With
your support, the creation of an office solely focused on WMD/CBRN
threats has elevated and streamlined the ability of DHS to successfully
resource and execute this critical mission, including further
integrating the prevention and detection of all CBRN threats with our
DHS stakeholders.
CWMD is better able to protect the homeland through its
relationships with State, local, Tribal, and territorial (SLTT)
partners in order to equip them with CBRN training, equipment,
technical assistance, and exercises. SLTT first responders are likely
to be the first to identify a CBRN incident. As a Nation, we are better
protected in light of CWMD's expansive relationships throughout the
Nation-wide CBRN ecosystem. This enhanced protection is a direct result
of the CWMD Act of 2018.
I appreciate the subcommittee's leadership and bipartisan efforts
to reauthorize CWMD and applaud House passage of H.R. 3224, the
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Extension Act of 2023. I look
forward to your continued support and stand ready to assist in the on-
going CWMD reauthorization process. An on-going challenge is the
termination of CWMD. I will reflect upon some of these challenges
throughout this testimony.
In August 2023, I assumed the role of assistant secretary for CWMD.
My priorities for the Office are to (1) maintain a collaborative, safe,
and productive work environment; (2) ensure risk-based mission
capability across the broad spectrum of CBRN threats, including
ensuring that CBRN detection acquisition programs are informed by both
intelligence and stakeholder requirements; (3) further integrate CWMD's
support and partnerships into DHS operational components and
Headquarters offices, including the Science and Technology Directorate,
and the Office of Health Security; (4) broaden partnerships across the
Federal Government; and (5) strengthen assistance to and the
relationships with SLTT partners.
CWMD provides extensive training, equipment, and technical
assistance to U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), Homeland
Security Investigations, Transportation Security Administration, United
States Coast Guard, and United States Secret Service. We also serve as
a peer organization to the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the life
cycle of CBRN incident management.
The President's fiscal year 2025 budget requests $418 million to
support 259 Federal staff and the programs critical to the CWMD
mission. CWMD allocates the $418 million across 4 appropriations:
Operations and Support; Research and Development; Procurement,
Construction, & Improvements; and Federal Assistance--largely to SLTTs.
The programs, activities, and funding request that I will discuss
today represent some, but by no means all of CWMD's work to mitigate
the risks to the homeland.
risk-informed approach to protect against cbrn threats
CWMD conducts national and tailored threat- and location-dependent
risk assessments to support decision making to protect the homeland
from CBRN threats. Our capstone document, the CBRN Strategic Risk
Assessment Summary (SRAS), provides a comprehensive, data-driven
approach that integrates CBRN threat, vulnerability, and consequence
information to inform DHS and SLTT stakeholder decision making related
to risk. The outputs from the SRAS are used to analyze existing
capability gaps identified within the CBRN defense architecture with
the intent of reducing CBRN risk as well as assisting in resource
prioritization for FSLTT partners.
CWMD is building upon its long-standing, legislatively-mandated
Global Nuclear Detection Architecture in developing chemical and
biological defense architectures. These nascent architectures will
allow CWMD to better understand the complex CBRN defense space by
identifying key stakeholder capabilities needed to coordinate
detection, analysis, and reporting of unauthorized uses of WMD/CBRN
materials and weapons. The architectures will assist CWMD and our
partners in conducting data-driven, defensible analytical activities
such as capabilities-based assessments to identify and inform
mitigation of capability gaps, including strategy, policy, operations,
and resource allocation decisions.
cbrn threats enhanced by artificial intelligence
CWMD is evaluating emerging technology threats in WMD/CBRN, such as
from AI. Responsible use of AI holds great promise for advancing
science, analyzing large complex datasets beyond human cognitive
abilities, solving urgent and future challenges, and improving daily
life. However, potential AI misuse poses consequential risk, requiring
society-wide mitigation efforts.
The variety of publicly-available AI models provides physical and
life science researchers the enhanced ability to ideate novel
biological and chemical agents and design experiments and to
troubleshoot experimental procedures encountered during experiments. As
AI technologies advance, use of these tools will likely lower the
barrier for all actors across the sophistication spectrum to
conceptualize and conduct CBRN attacks. To contain these risks,
government and industry must work together to reinforce policies and
codes of conduct based on voluntary commitments to mitigate against
misuse of AI and AI-enabled tools.
Integration of AI into CBRN prevention, detection, response, and
mitigation capabilities could yield important or emergent benefits.
CWMD has already started applying AI to certain fields such as cargo
screening, biosurveillance, and detection technologies, but other areas
are fertile for further research in our mission. In each of these
areas, developing an appropriate adoption strategy for next-generation
AI-enabled technologies and interagency collaboration and lessons
learned will be vital to implementation success.
DHS, in coordination with the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy and the Department of Energy, is tasked with
conducting an evaluation of the CBRN-specific risks of AI and how AI
could be applied to mitigating CBRN threats. CWMD's centralized role
and subject-matter expertise enable us to explore ways to leverage AI
for our collective benefit while identifying novel CBRN risks to the
homeland because of lower barriers to entry for malign actors. CWMD is
supporting the Secretary's mandate in the Executive Order on Artificial
Intelligence to evaluate the potential for AI to be misused to enable
the development or production of CBRN threats.
warning of biological threats and incidents in time to save lives
CWMD's flagship biodefense programs aim to provide early warning of
biological attacks or incidents with the goal of enabling a rapid
response to save lives.
National Biosurveillance Integration Center (NBIC)
The National Biosurveillance Integration Center integrates,
analyzes, and distributes information about on-going and emerging
biological incidents to help ensure the Nation's responses at all
levels of government are well-informed, save lives, and minimize
economic impact. NBIC is unique in the biosurveillance community in
that it looks across all biological threats--pandemics, accidents, and
bioterrorism--and across multiple sectors--wildlife, human health,
agriculture, and the environment. NBIC also provides deep analysis on
the impact of these biological threats to homeland security.
NBIC disseminates biosurveillance tools, analysis, and information
to support common situational awareness and operational responses. NBIC
is expanding its reach into partner biosurveillance organizations and
systems to greatly enhance its analytic capabilities to handle the
increasing complex information needs of leaders within the Department
as well as our Federal and SLTT partners.
BioWatch
As the homeland's only operational biodetection capability, CWMD's
BioWatch Program gives warning of an airborne bioterrorist attack in
over 30 major metropolitan areas across the United States, covering
over a third of the U.S. population. Outward signs and symptoms of a
biological attack may emerge slowly. BioWatch can detect the presence
of certain biological agents in the air after release by a terrorist or
other bad actor in order to marshal an earlier response.
Managed by CWMD, the BioWatch program is locally operated and
supports coordination among scientists, laboratory technicians,
emergency managers, law enforcement officers, and public health
officials. Partnerships developed through participation in BioWatch
have led to vast collaboration and planning efforts across all aspects
of the CWMD mission. This includes more than 300 trainings delivered by
BioWatch staff annually to nearly 1,700 jurisdictional stakeholders and
Federal interagency partners covering all aspects of CWMD's
biodetection, incident characterization, and notification and response
activities. CWMD's comprehensive CBRN mission provides training and
layered defenses for all the BioWatch jurisdictions.
Additionally, the program facilitates over 100 exercises and drills
in the jurisdictions per year. These activities not only help the
jurisdictional stakeholders in their individual preparedness efforts,
but provide countless opportunities to engage with other stakeholders,
establish relationships and communication strategies, and improve
overall situational awareness of partner activities that is vital to
enable an effective response to an incident of any kind.
The BioWatch technology is proven, reliable, using polymerase chain
reaction technology (PCR). PCR technology is the national standard and
results are laboratory validated.
Environmental Biological Detection (EBD)
CWMD has the mission to aid in the detection of biological agents
that pose the highest risk to public health and safety. CWMD's EBD
efforts attempt to expand capabilities using a risk-based approach and
advance developments that enable broader detection capabilities and
decrease the time line for treatment of aerosolized biological attacks.
Current EBD activities include the development of capabilities to
improve warnings to public health officials, better inform SLTT
response, and accelerate treatment decisions. EBD is focused on
developing and deploying near-term mature technologies to meet BioWatch
enhancement recommendations from our recent Integrated Project Team
review, completed with input from SLTT stakeholders. EBD will also
incorporate developing modeling capabilities, cybersecurity
capabilities, and technology solutions.
chemical preparedness and chemical defense
Chemical Preparedness
CWMD established the ChemPREP Program to partner with SLTT
stakeholders to examine each local jurisdiction's unique chemical risks
and vulnerabilities, evaluate their ability to respond, and provide
training to enhance their readiness. ChemPREP also seeks to connect
local jurisdictions with other Federal resources to improve
coordination and overall preparedness.
CWMD has conducted 7 ChemPREP engagements in 5 States (NY, MA, FL,
AZ, TX) working with front-line responders from 14 Federal
organizations and 109 State and local organizations and partners
including from Nassau and Suffolk Counties in New York. We are planning
with New Orleans, LA to assess and optimize security in the
jurisdiction in advance of next year's Super Bowl. In an effort to
accelerate and expand the chemical defense knowledge base throughout
the country for our SLTT partners, in fiscal year 2024 CWMD is working
with the Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers to develop
standardized ChemPREP training for wider distribution.
Chemical Defense
In response to a 2018 Government Accountability Office (GAO) audit,
CWMD established the DHS Chemical Coordination Group (CCG) in 2019 to
meet the evolving threat from chemical attacks and incidents. This body
is composed of representatives from DHS offices and agencies with
significant chemical defense equities and serves as the primary
coordination mechanism for DHS chemical defense. CWMD has hosted 3 DHS
Chemical Defense Program Reviews, bringing DHS components together to
do deeper-dive discussions on topical areas.
intelligence and information sharing
The Intelligence Division of CWMD serves as the departmental lead
for intelligence support related to all CBRN threats while also
providing intelligence support to the DHS Office of Health Security and
other Federal agencies on food, agriculture, veterinary, and health
security threats. The Division provides strategic and operational
threat intelligence and expertise to ensure DHS and its Federal and
SLTT partners are equipped with timely and accurate intelligence to
plan for, detect, and protect against threats. Supporting national and
Departmental strategic objectives, the Intelligence Division produces
an annual CWMD Homeland Threat Assessment to inform senior leaders and
policy makers.
At the operational level, we provide threat intelligence on foreign
and domestic CBRN threats; naturally-occurring environmental threats;
and food, agriculture, veterinary, and health security threats. The
Division also creates tailored products and presentations to Federal
and SLTT partners and stakeholders upon request.
In fiscal year 2023, the Division published its third annual
program of analysis. Through more effective planning, the division
increased overall production to 263 products from fiscal year 2022 to
fiscal year 2023. The division also saw a significant increase in
unique organizational customers; new customers included DHS operational
components and headquarters offices, the Food and Drug Administration,
and Department of State.
detecting radiological and nuclear (r/n) threats to prevent attacks
An act of radiological or nuclear (R/N) terrorism could have a
devastating impact on the United States. DHS began the Securing the
Cities (STC) Program to enhance the Nation's ability to detect and
prevent terrorist attacks and other high-consequence events using
nuclear or other radiological materials. CWMD provides detection
equipment, training, exercise support, operational and technical
subject-matter expertise, and programmatic support through a
cooperative agreement grant process with eligible U.S. regions. STC is
functioning in 14 high-risk areas across the Nation. The STC Program
uses a regional approach to R/N detection that allows for a layered
defense posture to increase the probability of detection. In addition,
coordination with the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), Department
of Energy, and their specialized teams ensures a timely hand-off and
rapid response to possible terrorism.
The program works close with STC stakeholders in these
jurisdictions, including training and equipping first responders and
law enforcement officials with specialized R/N equipment, and providing
support for R/N detection exercises. Each region is creating its R/N
training and detection protocols in consultation with CWMD. Several of
the STC regions are sprinting toward maturation to be prepared for the
2026 World Cup. In 2023, STC facilitated approximately 330 training
courses with over 14,000 SLTT operators trained.
CWMD's Mobile Detection Deployment Program (MDDP) enhances CBRN
detection and R/N interdiction capabilities by deploying equipment and
technical support for State and local surge operations and events of
national significance. MDDP significantly expands our protective
footprint to help support SLTT law enforcement in CBRN detection. In
fiscal year 2023, MDDP was deployed 180 times into 42 States, 2
territories, and 1 Tribal area.
developing and deploying technologies to support operations
CWMD works to ensure implementation of robust domestic CBRN
detection architectures through deployment of technologies. CWMD's
research and development (R&D) program manages efforts to develop and
demonstrate science and technologies that address gaps in the detection
architecture, improve performance of CBRN detection and analysis, and
reduce the operational burden of detection systems in the field. CWMD
R&D's mission is to provide novel solutions that can be implemented in
the field, and at scale. CWMD's Test and Evaluation Division conducts
rigorous and comprehensive assessments to ensure that the technologies
acquired by CWMD are both effective and suitable for the CBRN detection
and prevention mission.
CWMD's Acquisition Division develops, acquires, and supports CBRN
detection systems to deliver capabilities for operational partners to
counter WMD threats. For example, CWMD's Acquisition Division is
deploying 216 new enhanced Radiation Portal Monitors (RPMs) at specific
high-volume ports of entry, improving detection capability and
minimizing nuisance alarms. Moreover, CWMD is collaborating with CBP to
minimize close-proximity interference between non-intrusive inspection
equipment and existing RPM technology. CWMD acquires small-scale
portable CBRN detection systems that can be carried, moved, or worn by
the user. Most recently, from fiscal year 2020 to fiscal year 2024,
CWMD procured over 36,000 new Personal Radiation Detectors (PRDs) for
the DHS operational components and STC partners.
the cwmd workforce
The CWMD workforce is among the best and brightest in the Federal
Government who work behind the scenes. The accomplishments of this team
make the Nation safer.
Initially, the office faced challenges, including frequent
leadership changes, faltering morale, and staff turnover as discussed
in the July 2022 GAO report, Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction:
DHS Office Has Opportunities to Improve Partner Services and Employee
Morale (GAO-22-106133), subsequently there were some promising signs in
improving morale and stakeholder feedback.
Uncertainty around CWMD's future reversed many of those gains and
had a devastating effect on the morale and retention of the office's
highly skilled and in-demand workforce. From October 2023 through
February 2024, CWMD lost 24 Federal employees, approximately 10 percent
of our Federal workforce, with 12 employees leaving in December 2023
alone--more than 3 times the average loss in a month. This represents a
loss over 300 person-years of CWMD/CBRN experience. Backfilling these
critical vacancies should help morale, but a long-term or permanent
reauthorization is paramount to attracting and retaining high-quality
candidates.
CWMD leadership recognizes that transparency and keeping staff
informed are critical to an engaged workforce. Since September, I
conducted 17 virtual town halls with an average of 450 staff and
contractors. The primary topics for the town halls last autumn were
related to potential office termination; since January, we have focused
the town halls on mission highlights from the staff perspective,
employee resources, our mentoring program, social events, and office
engagements.
I hold open office hours to engage with the workforce collectively
and one-on-one in order to hear directly what is most important to
them. I have also sent 25 weekly newsletters and bulletins highlighting
the key work of the agency and upcoming events. Additionally, CWMD
hosted 6 Lunch & Learns with an average of 130 participants.
All these actions play a significant role in improving CWMD
employee morale. However, without long-term or permanent
reauthorization, CWMD will face steady attrition. The administration
has long sought permanent reauthorization to ensure CWMD has a fully-
engaged workforce capable of continuing critical national security
programs that support front-line operators and local communities.
conclusion
CWMD remains focused on countering CBRN threats. While we are a
relatively new office, we have matured quickly. We closely coordinate
DHS efforts across the countering-WMD mission, provide our Federal and
SLTT partners with CBRN detection equipment, and run programs to
protect the Nation from CBRN security threats.
CWMD's unique role and value proposition in the CBRN space is the
cornerstone of providing layered prevention and detection of CBRN
threats. CWMD is the linchpin between our DHS and SLTT stakeholders and
the Federal partners who would provide the response in the event of a
CBRN incident. We are maturing detection and preparation capabilities
to support stakeholders, while also better integrating our unique
expertise within the Department and the overall CBRN ecosystem. I am
committed to ensuring the CWMD prevention and detection mission is
well-integrated with our DHS operational components and offices.
On behalf of the CWMD staff who work tirelessly to keep the
homeland and the American people safe, I look forward to our continued
work with Congress to achieve an enduring reauthorization of our
office. Thank you again for the opportunity to testify and I look
forward to your questions.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Ms. Callahan, and thank you for
your work.
I now recognize Dr. Wolfe for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HERBERT O. WOLFE, MHS-PA, ACTING CHIEF MEDICAL
OFFICER, ACTING DIRECTOR, OFFICE OF HEALTH SECURITY, U.S.
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Wolfe. Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today about the great work being done by
the dedicated personnel of the Office of Health Security, or
OHS. It's truly an honor to be here today to talk about the
work that we are doing.
I have served as the acting chief medical officer and
acting director since January 2023, and prior to that, as the
deputy chief medical officer and deputy director since the
office creation in 2022. I joined the Department in 2019 after
nearly 30 years of Federal public service.
The challenges of the past 5 years exemplify how nearly
every homeland security threat has a health security nexus.
From acts of terror to a global pandemic, surges in migration,
cyber attacks directed at critical infrastructure, including
health care, natural disasters across the country, to
international response efforts spanning nearly every continent,
DHS is at the center of it all and often operating as the lead
Federal agency.
To answer the enduring health security challenges we face,
DHS established OHS in July 2022 to serve as the principal
medical, work force health and safety, and public health
authority for DHS. The dedication of our staff and our earnest
response to these challenges reflect the earnest--or enduring
impact, hope, and vision of OHS; one that is grounded in
agility, subject-matter and technical expertise, deep
relationships with our interagency and State and local
partners, and an unwavering commitment to the physical and
mental health resiliency of our work force in the Nation.
Today, OHS positions the Department to have a proactive,
unified, and robust response to the ever-evolving health
security landscape. Health security is, after all, a core tenet
of homeland security.
The over 260,000 dedicated men, women, and working animals
of the Department work tirelessly to secure the Nation from the
many threats we face. The office that I am privileged to lead,
which is comprised of exceptionally talented medical, public
health, and work force and health safety experts, collaborates
with leaders from across the Department, the interagency, and
with our State and local partners to strengthen the Nation's
health security while providing for a safer and healthier DHS
work force.
Health, after all, is our greatest possession, and I'm
proud to serve alongside many who are leading and championing
the physical, mental, and work-life health of the DHS work
force, including those on the front line.
Those in the work force that we serve include 90,000 front-
line law enforcement officers and agents, 44,000 U.S. Coast
Guard uniform members, 4,000 EMTs and paramedics, 640 United
States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps officers,
60,000 civilian employees who are veterans, and 4,000 four-
legged employees of the Department. We also provide leadership
and oversight of DHS, medical and public health policy,
standards of care, and health care services provided to
noncitizens, ensuring the delivery of high-quality care to
those in our custody.
I stand in awe and am humbled by the commitment of my OHS
colleagues. I've had the privilege to lead them as we mobilized
to stand up our domestic public health measures in response to
the Ukraine-Russia conflict, to deploy to the Southwest Border
to provide technical public health assistance and
implementation of care improvement actions, to build on the
lessons learned from Operation Allies Welcome, to work
tirelessly with our partners on the food security is homeland
security mission, to plan for and enable better preparedness
and response to the health and medical impacts of CBRN, to
ensure we optimize mental health and wellness resources for our
work force, to leverage research and development and academic
partners to develop approaches to known and novel health
threats, to harness technology to provide high-quality data and
analysis to program managers and decision makers, and last but
not least, to assist our EMTs and paramedics on missions around
the United States, and so much more.
Chairman, Ranking Member, and Members of the subcommittee,
on behalf of the incredible, talented, and dedicated team at
OHS that works at the intersection of health security and
homeland security, as well as all the public health, medical,
and work force health and safety teammates across the
Department, we thank you for your support. I look forward to
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Dr. Wolfe follows:]
Prepared Statement of Herbert O. Wolfe
March 20, 2024
introduction
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the invitation to testify
today on the important work of the Department of Homeland Security's
(DHS or Department) Office of Health Security (OHS). I appreciate the
opportunity to discuss the workforce health and safety, medical, and
public health activities of the Department.
I have served as the acting chief medical officer and acting
director of OHS since January 2023, and prior to that, as the deputy
chief medical officer and deputy director since the establishment of
OHS in July 2022. I joined DHS in 2019, after nearly 30 years of
Federal public service across multiple U.S. Government agencies
including the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the
U.S. Department of Defense, the National Security Council, and the
intelligence community. I look forward to speaking about how DHS is
strengthening our Nation's health security through leadership and
partnership, a safer and healthier DHS workforce, and optimal care for
those entrusted to us.
health security at the forefront of homeland security
The challenges of the past 5 years exemplify how nearly every
homeland security threat has a nexus to health security. From acts of
terror to a global pandemic, surges in migration to cyber attacks
directed at critical infrastructure sectors such as health care,
natural disasters across the country to international response efforts
spanning nearly every continent--DHS is at the center of it all and
often operating as the lead Federal agency. I want to start by
highlighting the work we are doing to protect our greatest asset--the
extraordinary DHS workforce.
Each and every day, the over 260,000 dedicated personnel--in
addition to nearly 4,000 working animals--perform remarkable duties at
land, air, and sea, in disaster zones, and at the many offices that
enable our frontline workforce to deliver services efficiently and
effectively. This mission is both dynamic and relentless and OHS makes
it a priority to protect those who protect the Nation.
The Department effectuates our mission through an integrated
framework of policies, programs, standards, and practices--recognizing
an intrinsic linkage between psychological, physical, and emotional
health. In addition to revitalizing the DHS Safety and Health
Leadership Council, the Department became an affiliate member in the
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health's Total Worker
Health Program in 2023 and continues to make significant enhancements
to our workforce safety, protection, and resiliency programs.
DHS prioritizes programs focused on mental health and wellness,
particularly for law enforcement personnel serving on the front line
and the nearly 60,000 veterans within the DHS workforce. We appreciate
Congress' support for legislation to advance critical psychological
readiness programs such as peer support, stigma reduction, lethal means
safety, and our capabilities to understand and reduce suicides through
a systematic, standardized, and data-driven approach. OHS led the
revision and finalization of an updated DHS Workforce Health and
Wellness Program that expands the category of health promotion
activities to include mental health and new types of physical fitness.
The inclusion of mental health into this new policy positions DHS as a
leader across the Federal Government, offering the workforce dedicated
time to address their mental wellness.
We are also exploring innovative ways to expand and standardize
Employee Assistance Programs, including for our international
workforce, and Dependent Care Programs such as child care subsidy and
emergency back-up care. DHS increased offerings of initiatives such as
micro-workouts, mindful minutes, and Wellness Wednesdays that help
employees and their family members balance work-life responsibilities
and improve physical health. These programs--and many more--provide our
operational components with front-line employees greater flexibility to
implement workforce health and wellness programs consistent with and
aligned to their specific mission, operational requirements, and
workforce needs. Healthier and supported DHS employees keep the Nation
and the communities in which we live and serve, safer.
OHS works closely with diverse governmental and nongovernmental
partners to promote the delivery of high-quality health care for those
in our care and custody. This year, we look forward to operationalizing
the DHS Child Well-Being Program. This program will deploy licensed and
experienced mental health professionals across all U.S. Customs and
Border Protection (CBP) Southwest Border Sectors to support the well-
being of children in our care through trauma-informed, culturally-
sensitive support, and coordination. The Program will augment existing
processes that impact children without increasing time in custody and
enable CBP to focus its resources on those who pose a threat to our
national security, public safety, and border security.
To support medical and public health planning in the maritime mass
migration environment, OHS collaborated with the U.S. Coast Guard
(USCG) and Homeland Security Task Force--Southeast (HSTF-SE) to update
Operation Vigilant Sentry (OVS), Annex Q for Medical, Health, and
Safety for the first time in a decade. Since 2022, OHS brought together
over 20 organizations--including many State and local agencies--via 18
exercises and planning workshops, culminating in the finalization and
issuance of a new Annex Q in May 2023. However, our work did not stop
there; OHS and HSTF-SE partners continue to collaborate in a series of
validation exercises and workshops.
Alongside many partners, OHS had a significant role in coordinating
domestic medical and public health activities during Operation Allies
Welcome (OAW). In the months after, we found that many organizations
shared DHS's desire to improve operations, implement changes based on
the experiences, and strengthen preparedness for future medical
operations during global mass movement of displaced individuals. In
October 2023, OHS hosted a multi-agency workshop in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania with 40 attendees from 18 different agencies, including
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Administration for
Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR), Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC), and State and local partners--all collaborating
on ensuring that lessons learned do not become lessons lost. Like OVS,
we continue this important work and are excited to plan for the next
in-person workshop in Philadelphia in May 2024.
The Department also supports response efforts to mitigate the
impacts of infectious diseases. OHS actively represents DHS equities in
multi-lateral engagements related to global health security initiatives
like the International Health Regulations, Pandemic Accord, and the
North American Preparedness for Animal and Human Pandemics Initiative.
In collaboration with the CDC, OHS co-leads an interagency effort to
update the Federal coordination framework for mass isolation and
quarantine in response to an infectious diseases event.
OHS also coordinates the Department's food, agriculture, and
veterinary (FAV) defense activities. Over the past 6 months, OHS led
the development of the first national-level risk assessment for the
food and agriculture sector in support of the November 2022, National
Security Memorandum (NSM) 16 on Strengthening the Security and
Resilience of U.S. Food and Agriculture. This assessment was conducted
in coordination with Sector Risk Management Agencies to identify high-
consequence and catastrophic incidents impacting the sector's critical
infrastructure, essential workforce, and consequences of climate
change. This first risk assessment also establishes an iterative cycle
to evaluate high-level risks to the food and agriculture sector. In
partnership with agencies such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
we are also advancing other deliverables in NSM-16 that DHS will lead
and partner on.
OHS success is achieved through partnerships. For example, some of
our closest partners within DHS include the Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office, the Science and Technology Directorate, the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, FEMA, and USCG. OHS
works side-by-side with DHS components by providing the critical
subject-matter expertise and technical assistance on public health and
medical aspects of chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, FAV,
and global health security threats--a ``One-DHS-Health'' model of
coordination.
maturation of the office of health security
July 2024 marks the second anniversary of OHS's establishment.
Congressional support has helped to create and sustain an innovative
organization that recognizes the interconnected nature of health and
unites previously fragmented lines of effort within DHS to enable and
oversee proactive and holistic health security preparedness, response,
and recovery. OHS is uniquely positioned for highly-specialized
missions including mobilization of expertise to improve medical
operations management for DHS missions and to enhance DHS's role as a
support agency for multiple Emergency Support Functions.
OHS deeply appreciates working side-by-side with our operational
partners. In order to meet mission requirements at the point of
delivery, OHS is building its regional footprint by forward-deploying
highly specialized clinicians to all 10 domestic geographic regions as
defined by FEMA and ASPR. Currently, OHS has personnel rostered in
regions 5, 6, and 9, with plans to further develop our regional
footprint. Focusing on the nexus of public safety, medicine, and public
health, these Federal personnel--with qualifications in areas such as
emergency medicine, trauma and critical care, medical toxicology, and
infectious diseases--serve as an important technical resource for DHS
operational components and State and local, Tribal, territorial, and
other stakeholders.
OHS continues to make significant strides to unify and standardize
the provision of health care services across the Department. For
example, as part of our role in supporting the 4,000+ personnel of the
DHS Emergency Medical Services (EMS) System, we reinstated the DHS EMS
Training and Education Advisory Council (EMSTEAC). The EMSTEAC is the
focal point for standardization of EMS-related protocols, procedures,
austere medicine coursework and other training, and high-quality
working dog handler medical care programs.
OHS is advancing programs that unify and integrate DHS medical and
public health data systems. On-going development of the Medical
Information eXchange (MIX), the technology backbone of a unified
electronic health record program, enables proactive identification,
analysis, and decision making related to emerging health security
issues within our workforce, those in our care, and the public we
serve. The MIX will also serve as a fusion point for the total
workforce protection mission, integrating systems like the DHS-wide
Safety Data System that is currently in development.
OHS also serves as the Department's Liaison to the Commissioned
Corps of the U.S. Public Health Service. DHS counts over 640 Public
Health Service Officers among its workforce serving across 10 different
offices and components. These officers deliver or oversee critical
health care, public health services, and preparedness and response
activities during steady-state and crises--ashore and afloat.
Our greatest asset is our workforce. In alignment with the U.S.
Government Accountability Office's recommended best practices,\1\ OHS
continues to implement enduring employee engagement programs such as
monthly pulse surveys, a Culture Working Group and Champions Program,
and continuous quality improvement to ensure we recruit and retain a
world-class workforce that delivers high-quality, efficient, and
effective programming, policy, and operational initiatives. The 2023
Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey and our internal programming
indicates that OHS has consistently high morale and employees believe
their work is impactful, meaningful, and contributes to the common
good. I am proud to lead such a talented workforce of dedicated
civilians and uniformed personnel that consistently meets the highest
standards of public service.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Government Reorganization: Key Questions to Assess Agency
Reform Efforts (GAO-18-427).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The programs and initiatives highlighted today represent only a
portion of the work that OHS does as the principal medical, workforce
health and safety, and public health authority for DHS. The President's
budget requests $57.7 million in fiscal year 2025 funds to support 76
Federal staff and the critical programs they operationalize. We look
forward to working with Congress to secure the necessary resources that
enables OHS to strengthen health security, advance our mission, and
provide the appropriate oversight and operational expertise to ensure
high-quality health programs for our workforce and those in our care.
conclusion
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you again for holding today's
hearing and for the opportunity to discuss OHS. Your on-going support
for the Department's workforce resilience, public health, medical, and
occupational safety, and health programs ensures that the Department is
prepared and well-positioned for a proactive and agile response to an
evolving health security landscape. Thank you for considering the
legislative proposal to authorize OHS, which will codify and solidify
those authorities, positions, and responsibilities aligned under OHS.
I look forward to your questions.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Dr. Wolfe.
I now recognize Dr. Sherman for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TINA WON SHERMAN, PH.D., DIRECTOR, HOMELAND
SECURITY AND JUSTICE, U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Sherman. Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter,
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me today to
speak on behalf of my agency, the U.S. Government
Accountability Office.
The intentional use of chemical, biological, radiological,
and nuclear weapons remain real-world threats for those
domestically and abroad. The risks posed by those weapons are
significant, and each one is unique in terms of their ability
to be detected, prepared for, mitigated, and recovered from.
Five years into its existence, the Department of Homeland
Security's Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office
carries out the difficult mission of enabling operational
partners at the Federal, State, local, Tribal, and territorial
levels to promote the readiness for and prevention of the use
of weapons of mass destruction against the United States.
The last time GAO testified about CWMD in front of this
committee in 2021, we reported that the office needed to help
integrate and coordinate the Department's chemical defense
activities. CWMD has efforts under way to identify and
harmonize those activities across the Department. This is even
more critical given the stoppage in chemical security
inspections resulting from the lapse in authorization for DHS'
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program.
We also told this committee that CWMD faced information-
gathering and collaboration challenges as part of the National
Biosurveillance Integration Center. NBIC has since enhanced its
ability to collect information using open-source data, and most
of the stakeholders we recently spoke with found value in its
written products. However, NBIC could take additional steps to
assess the support it provides to its FSLTT partners.
At that time, we additionally highlighted continued
problems with BD21, the acquisition program to replace the
existing BioWatch early warning system, such as the technical,
readiness, and feasibility of the technologies for the program
given the inherent limitations and uncertainties for use in
biodetection. With the BD21 acquisition now canceled, CWMD will
need to forge a new path forward to replace the 20-year-old
BioWatch system still operating in major metropolitan areas
Nation-wide.
We also at the time shared with the subcommittee that the
Securing the Cities program, which provides equipment and
training for first responders, had not clearly communicated
potential program changes to or addressed risks to sustain
detection capabilities for the program.
In the latest report GAO is issuing today, we found that
CWMD has improved in these areas and recommended it better
communicate expectations and measures to participants for how
the office will assess them against their new implementation
plan next fiscal year.
Last, we reported in 2021 that CWMD's work force had
continued to experience low morale, following the merger of its
two predecessor components that held differing missions,
expertise, and cultures. It has since also undergone another
reorganization to establish the Office of Health Security, this
all without permanent leadership. CWMD now has that leadership
with Assistant Secretary Callahan and is continuing to take
steps to strengthen employee engagement despite the uncertainty
tied to CWMD's reauthorization.
We remain hopeful that CWMD will remain responsive to GAO's
recommendations as we continue to provide oversight support for
the subcommittee, and clearly demonstrate its effectiveness in
meeting its mission across the range of threats it was
established to address.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Sherman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tina Won Sherman
March 20, 2024
gao highlights
Highlights of GAO-24-107426, a testimony before the Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology, Committee on Homeland Security,
House of Representatives.
Why GAO Did This Study
Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons have the
potential to kill thousands of people. To manage threats in these
areas, Federal statute established CWMD in December 2018 by
reorganizing functions of predecessor offices in DHS.
This statement describes findings from GAO's reports on CWMD's
programs from August 2018 through March 2024. They address challenges
and opportunities for the effective operations and implementation of
CWMD's chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear security
activities.
To conduct prior work, GAO reviewed relevant laws, policies,
strategic plans, and other documents. GAO also interviewed Federal,
State, industry, and other officials.
What GAO Recommends
GAO has made 18 recommendations since 2018 to address the
challenges discussed in this statement. As of March 2024, DHS has
implemented 9 recommendations, partially implemented 1, and not
implemented 3. GAO made 5 additional recommendations to CWMD in March
2024. GAO will monitor CWMD's progress to implement all of the
remaining recommendations.
weapons of mass destruction.--dhs has made progress in some areas, but
additional improvements are needed
What GAO Found
The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has made progress in
addressing challenges that GAO identified related to the Countering
Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD). However, additional
improvements are needed. The following summarizes progress made and
challenges remaining in several of CWMD's key areas, reported by GAO
since 2018.
Chemical defense.--GAO reported on challenges and progress in
CWMD's chemical defense efforts. In August 2018, GAO found that DHS had
not fully integrated and coordinated its chemical defense programs and
activities among its component agencies. By not doing so, DHS risked
missing opportunities to leverage resources, share information, and
improve its effectiveness in addressing chemical threats through
improved integration and coordination. To address GAO's recommendation,
CWMD issued a Chemical Defense Strategy in December 2019 that
established goals and objectives that included integrating and
coordinating DHS's chemical defense capabilities. DHS subsequently
issued an implementation plan in September 2021 that involved CWMD and
several participating DHS component agencies.
Biodefense.--GAO reported on challenges with two of DHS's
biosurveillance efforts that CWMD oversees--the Biological Detection
for the 21st Century program and the National Biosurveillance
Integration Center. In May 2021, GAO found that DHS did not (1) apply
best practices when conducting technology readiness assessments for its
Biological Detection for the 21st Century program; or (2) conduct these
assessments before key acquisition decision points. In response, DHS
revised its program guide to incorporate best practices, but as of
March 2024, had not demonstrated that it is conducting such assessments
before key acquisition decisions. In November 2023, GAO reported that
the National Biosurveillance Integration Center documented its efforts
to obtain adequate personnel and develop new technology, but did not
clearly define performance measures and associated time frames in its
strategic planning documents. As of March 2024, DHS reported it was
developing a strategy and implementation plan for the center that will
include milestones, actions, targets, and time frames. GAO will monitor
DHS's efforts.
Radiological and nuclear detection.--In March 2024, GAO reported on
CWMD's Securing the Cities program, which is designed to enhance the
nuclear detection capabilities in select cities. GAO found that CWMD
took steps to strengthen program outreach among its partners, but had
not clearly communicated performance expectations. GAO will monitor
DHS's efforts to address these and other challenges.
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and Members of the
subcommittee: I am pleased to be here today to discuss our work on the
Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office (CWMD).
Chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear weapons--
collectively known as weapons of mass destruction--have the potential
to kill thousands of people in a single incident. A Federal statute
established CWMD within DHS in December 2018 to plan for, detect,
deter, respond to, and defend against the threats of such weapons. In
carrying out this mission, CWMD coordinates with partners at the
Federal, State, and local levels and provides them with technology,
training, and information. CWMD's partners include DHS components, such
as U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and the Coast Guard; other
Federal agencies, such as the Department of Defense, the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the Department of Health and Human Services, and the
Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration; and
first responders and public health officials.
Since its establishment, we have evaluated multiple aspects of
CWMD. This statement describes our prior work on progress and
challenges CWMD faces in managing key programs, including those related
to chemical security, biodefense, nuclear and radiological security,
and acquisitions. We also examine recent information regarding CWMD's
employee morale.
This statement is based on our prior work issued from August 2018
through March 2024 on various CWMD efforts. It also includes updates on
the status of previous recommendations we made during that time. To
conduct our prior work, we reviewed relevant Presidential directives,
laws, regulations, policies, strategic plans, and other documents, and
interviewed Federal, State, and industry officials. More information on
our scope and methodology can be found in each of the reports cited
throughout this statement. The work upon which this statement is based
was conducted in accordance with generally accepted Government auditing
standards. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit
to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
We believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for
our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.
background
CWMD's Formation
The Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of 2018 established
CWMD in statute by consolidating functions that had been previously
carried out by DHS's Domestic Nuclear Detection Office and Office of
Health Affairs.\1\ CWMD's primary statutory missions are coordinating
with other Federal efforts and developing a strategy and policy for DHS
to: (1) plan for, detect, and protect against the importation,
possession, storage, transportation, development, or use of
unauthorized chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear materials,
devices, or agents in the United States; and (2) protect against an
attack using such materials, devices, or agents against U.S. people,
territory, or interests.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296, title XIX,
 1900-1931, 116 Stat. 2135, as added by the Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Act of 2018, Pub. L. No. 115-387,  2(a)-(c), (e), (g)
132 Stat. 5162 (classified at 6 U.S.C.  590-597, including  591
notes). Prior to enactment, on October 6, 2017, DHS notified Congress
of its intent to exercise its authority under 6 U.S.C.  452 to
consolidate some offices having chemical, biological, radiological, and
nuclear functions into a new office, effective December 5, 2017.
According to DHS officials, the formation of CWMD consolidated the
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office, most of Office of Health Affairs,
and chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear policy functions
formerly performed by the DHS Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans, as
well as elements of the Office of Operations Coordination. DHS
subsequently abolished Domestic Nuclear Detection Office and Office of
Health Affairs.
\2\ 6 U.S.C.  591g, 592. The Assistant Secretary for CWMD reports
to the Secretary of Homeland Security. See id.  591.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CWMD Programs
CWMD manages several programs specific to its mission to protect
the U.S. against chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear
attacks.
Chemical defense strategy.--Since the establishment of CWMD in
2018, the CWMD has undertaken actions to address chemical threats. For
example, according to CWMD officials, it engaged with 17 U.S. cities to
provide training on chemical threats to the mass transit sector. CWMD
also led the effort to develop DHS's Chemical Defense Strategy, issued
in December 2019. Subsequently, in September 2021, DHS issued the
Chemical Defense Strategy Implementation Plan, which CWMD also took the
lead in developing, as part of a workgroup that involved 16 DHS
component agencies.
BioWatch.--In an effort to provide early warning, detection, or
recognition of a biological attack, DHS created the BioWatch program in
2003 in response to a perceived urgency to deploy useful--even if
immature--technologies in the face of potentially catastrophic
consequences. This perception led to the rapid deployment of the
initial BioWatch system which modified existing air monitoring
technology to collect biological aerosol samples for lab testing.\3\
Currently, the BioWatch program collaborates with more than 30 BioWatch
jurisdictions throughout the Nation to operate approximately 600
aerosol collectors. It is a Federally-managed, locally-operated system
with collectors deployed primarily in outdoor locations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, an
aerosol may be defined as a suspension of particles or droplets in the
air and includes airborne dusts, mists, fumes, or smoke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to a 2011 report from the National Academies, DHS's rapid
deployment of the system meant that BioWatch was deployed without
sufficient testing, validation, and evaluation of its technical
capabilities.\4\ In 2015, we reported on limitations to DHS's
understanding of the system's capabilities. DHS began a new
biodetection technology acquisition program in 2019 called Biological
Detection for the 21st Century (BD21) to potentially replace the
BioWatch program. Figure 1 depicts first responders practicing a
BioWatch safety drill.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Institute of Medicine and National Research Council, BioWatch
and Public Health Surveillance (Washington, DC: National Academies
Press, 2011).

National Biosurveillance Integration Center.--The Implementing
Recommendations of the 9/11 Commission Act of 2007 (9/11 Commission
Act) established the National Biosurveillance Integration Center (NBIC)
within DHS.\5\ NBIC's objective is to integrate and analyze information
from health surveillance systems across the Federal Government and
support the interagency biosurveillance community. To achieve this
objective, NBIC collaborates with Federal partners who have missions or
resources that support NBIC's activities. The center also develops a
range of written analytical products on biodefense for distribution to
a broad range of stakeholders that include Federal partners,
Congressional officials, private-sector and international recipients,
as well as State, local, Tribal, and territorial governments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Pub. L. No. 110-53, title XI,  1101, 121 Stat. 266, 375-79
(Classified, as amended, at 6 U.S.C.  195b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Securing the Cities.--DHS initiated the Securing the Cities (STC)
program in fiscal year 2007 as a pilot in the New York City, Jersey
City, and Newark region. The mission of the STC program is to enhance
the ability of the United States to detect and prevent the malevolent
use of nuclear and radioactive materials that pose risks to high-risk
urban areas. As such, the STC program seeks to reduce the risk of a
successful deployment of a nuclear or radiological weapon against
cities and surrounding metropolitan areas in the United States. STC
does so by providing, among other things, equipment and training to
State and local partners to detect nuclear and radiological material
before an incident involving these materials occurs. The STC program
has expanded over the years and currently includes 13 participating
regions across the United States.
Technology acquisitions.--CWMD, like its predecessor agency--the
Domestic Nuclear Detection Office--acquires technologies to support
partners in DHS components such as CBP and the Coast Guard, as well as
State and local partners. Detection devices provided by CWMD to these
partners include personal radiation detectors (cell phone-size devices
worn by first responders to alert them when radioactivity levels exceed
natural levels) and radiation isotope identification devices (detectors
that can identify the specific material emitting the radiation). Figure
2 shows examples of types of nuclear and radiological detection
equipment.

dhs has made progress addressing past challenges, but additional
improvements are still needed
Our past work, issued since CWMD's establishment in 2018,
identifies progress and challenges in key aspects of CWMD's program
areas, including chemical defense, biodefense, radiological and nuclear
detection, acquisitions, and employee morale. Our work resulted in 13
recommendations, and, as of March 2024, 9 were implemented, 1 was
partially implemented, and 3 are not yet addressed. In addition, we
have made 5 new recommendations to CWMD in our report issued today on
STC.\6\ Below are examples of issues we've identified across CWMD's
programmatic areas and the extent to which those issues have been
addressed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ GAO, Nuclear Terrorism Prevention: DHS Has Strengthened the
Securing the Cities Program, but Actions are Needed to Address Key
Remaining Challenges, GAO-24-106922 (Washington, DC: Mar. 20, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chemical Defense
In August 2018, we found that DHS consolidated some chemical
defense programs and activities into CWMD, but DHS had not fully
integrated and coordinated its chemical defense programs and
activities.\7\ Several DHS component agencies--including CBP, the Coast
Guard, and Science & Technology--conduct similar activities, such as
acquiring chemical detectors or assisting local jurisdictions with
preparedness, separately, without DHS-wide direction and coordination.
As component agencies carried out chemical defense activities to meet
their unique mission needs, there was a risk that DHS may miss an
opportunity to leverage resources and share information that could lead
to greater effectiveness in addressing chemical threats. Therefore, we
recommended that the assistant secretary for CWMD develop a strategy
and implementation plan to help DHS guide, support, integrate, and
coordinate chemical defense programs and activities.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ GAO, Chemical Terrorism: A Strategy and Implementation Plan
Would Help DHS Better Manage Fragmented Chemical Defense Programs and
Activities, GAO-18-562 (Washington, DC: Aug. 22, 2018.)
\8\ GAO recommended the Assistant Secretary for CWMD develop a
strategy and implementation plan to help the Department of Homeland
Security, among other things, guide, support, integrate, and coordinate
its chemical defense programs and activities; leverage resources and
capabilities; and provide a roadmap for addressing any identified gaps.
GAO identified this as a priority recommendation and describes CWMD's
actions to implement it in GAO, Priority Open Recommendations:
Department of Homeland Security, GAO-22-105702 (Washington, DC: July
15, 2022)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CWMD addressed the recommendation by issuing the Chemical Defense
Strategy in December 2019. The strategy includes overarching goals and
a range of related objectives establishing a departmental approach to
combating chemical threats and incidents. The importance of a
coordinated chemical defense strategy across DHS is especially
important given that, as of March 2024, the statutory authority for the
Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards program--DHS's primary
regulatory program for chemical facility security--had not been
reauthorized since expiring in 2023.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ In July 2023, the statutory authority for the Chemical Facility
Anti-Terrorism Standards (CFATS) program (6 C.F.R. Part 27) expired.
See Pub. L. No. 116-150,  1(a), 134 Stat. 679 (2020) (classified at 6
U.S.C.  621 note). According to DHS, the Department cannot enforce
compliance with the Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
regulations without Congressional authorization, which means that DHS
cannot require facilities to report potentially dangerous chemicals or
perform inspections.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biodefense
CWMD manages two significant efforts to defend against biological
attacks--BD21 and the NBIC.
In 2021, we reported on DHS's effort to replace BioWatch with a new
system--BD21.\10\ The BD21 program faces risks, such as the possibility
of increased false alarm rates, due to technology limitations and
uncertainties with combining technologies for use in biodetection.
While we found that the BD21 program was following DHS acquisition
policy and guidance, we identified limitations in the program's
technology readiness assessments, which DHS uses to reduce risk within
its technology acquisition programs. Specifically, DHS issued its
technology readiness assessment/manufacturing readiness assessment
guide in September 2020, but we found it did not follow some of the
practices in GAO's best practice guide for technology readiness
assessments.\11\ Therefore, we recommended that DHS fully incorporate
the best practices outlined in GAO's guide into DHS's guide, such as
including information about how the Department will ensure objectivity
and independence. DHS addressed this recommendation by May 2022. We
also recommended that DHS ensure the BD21 program conducts high-quality
technology readiness assessments of all critical technologies for BD21
before key acquisition decision points. As of March 2024, this
recommendation has not been implemented.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ GAO, Biodefense: DHS Exploring New Methods to Replace BioWatch
and Could Benefit from Additional Guidance, GAO-21-292 (Washington, DC:
May 20, 2021).
\11\ GAO, Technology Readiness Assessment Guide: Best Practices for
Evaluating the Readiness of Technology for Use in Acquisition Programs
and Projects, GAO-20-48G (Washington, DC: Jan. 07, 2020). To develop
the guide, GAO worked with practitioners and technology experts from
across the Federal Government, commercial industry, nonprofits, and
academia to ascertain the generally accepted best practices for
conducting high-quality technology readiness assessments.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also recommended in our 2021 report that the BD21 program
address a key capability gap. Specifically, we found that existing BD21
program acquisition documentation lacked sufficient detail describing
how a ``situational awareness and common operating picture
capability''--which DHS identified as a gap--will differ from or
leverage the NBIC. Therefore, we recommended that DHS ensure the BD21
program office clarifies--within its acquisition documentation--the
``situational awareness and common operating picture capability''
identified as a gap. This clarification should include the specific
functionality, sources of information, and distinction from existing
common operating picture functions at DHS, such as NBIC. DHS has not
implemented the recommendation as of March 2024.
In November 2023, we reported that the NBIC--within CWMD--
identifies, tracks, and characterizes biological events using open-
source, Federal, and private-sector data sources.\12\ NBIC integrates
these data to develop written products and support its information
sharing and coordination activities. Additionally, in recent years,
NBIC began taking steps to address challenges in accessing needed data,
obtaining adequate personnel, and developing new technologies. NBIC's
efforts were guided by two strategic planning documents, but these
documents did not have clearly-defined performance measures and time
frames for accomplishing milestones.\13\ For example, one milestone is
to strengthen relationships with relevant DHS components. However, NBIC
did not include information on the specific actions for achieving the
milestone or how it would assess progress toward achievement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ GAO, Biodefense: National Biosurveillance Integration Center
Has Taken Steps to Address Challenges, but Could Better Assess Results,
GAO-24-106142 (Washington, DC: Nov. 29, 2023).
\13\ Department of Homeland Security, Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office, Strategy for Integrated Biosurveillance, Fiscal
Year 2018 Report to Congress, (Washington DC: July 30, 2019);
Department of Homeland Security, Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
Office, Strategy for Integrated Biosurveillance--NBIC Implementation
Plan Fiscal Year 2022-2023, (Washington, DC; Mar. 29, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommended that DHS ensure that NBIC develops future strategic
planning documents with clearly-defined performance measures and
associated time frames. DHS concurred with this recommendation and, in
March 2024, reported that it is developing an NBIC strategy and
implementation plan that will include performance milestones, actions,
targets, and time frames. DHS expects to complete these actions by June
2024 and GAO will monitor its efforts to do so.
Radiological and Nuclear Detection
In May 2019, we identified several limitations in CWMD's efforts to
implement the STC program.\14\ We found that CWMD did not collect
information needed to fully track the regions' use of STC funds for
approved purposes and to assess regions' performance in the
program.\15\ We made 4 recommendations to CWMD, including that the
agency more fully assess regions' performance by collecting data on
achievement of key performance metrics and milestones and enforcing
reporting requirements. DHS fully implemented the 4 recommendations as
of October 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ GAO, Combating Nuclear Terrorism: DHS Should Address
Limitation to Its Program to Secure Key Cities, GAO-19-327 (Washington,
DC: May 13, 2019).
\15\ The STC program seeks to reduce the risk of a successful
deployment of a nuclear or radiological weapon against select regions,
consisting of cities and surrounding metropolitan areas in the United
States. STC currently works with 13 participating regions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of 2018 also
included a requirement for CWMD to develop an implementation plan,
including the goals of the STC program and a strategy to achieve them.
CWMD issued this plan in June 2021 and assessed the program's
performance based on this plan in August 2022. The act also required
that the CWMD assess performance of the STC program based on this plan,
which it completed in August 2022. The act included a provision for GAO
to evaluate CWMD's implementation plan and progress in achieving and
sustaining STC program capabilities, which is the report we issued in
March 2024.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ GAO, Nuclear Terrorism Prevention: DHS Has Strengthened the
Securing the Cities Program, but Actions are Needed to Address Key
Remaining Challenges, GAO-24-106922 (Washington, DC: Mar. 20, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We found in our March 2024 report that CWMD has taken multiple
steps to strengthen the STC program and continues working with the
regions to address challenges and ensure continued progress toward
achieving and sustaining their detection capabilities. Specifically,
CWMD has incorporated lessons learned from implementing the STC program
over the years. Further, it has addressed our prior recommendations to
strengthen the program, including increasing outreach, developing
planning and reporting guidance, and providing long-term Federal
sustainment funding. Along with these improvements, CWMD is working
with the STC regions to address challenges they continue to face
implementing their programs, such as staff attrition, training
availability and scheduling, partner engagement, and expansion of their
programs.
We also found in our March 2024 report that CWMD's planned approach
for assessing STC program performance, which includes its
implementation plan with measurable outcomes, generally follows key
practices we have identified in our prior work for building and using
evidence to manage and evaluate results of Federal efforts.\17\ In June
2023, CWMD released an updated version of its STC Implementation Plan
detailing its current planned approach for implementing the program and
assessing regional performance using a set of short-, medium-, and
long-term outcomes. We compared CWMD's planned approach with 13 key
practices and 29 supporting actions for using evidence to more
effectively manage and assess the results of Federal programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ GAO, Evidenced-Based Policymaking: Practices to Help Manage
and Assess the Results of Federal Efforts, GAO-23-105460 (Washington,
DC: July 12, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our analysis identified that CWMD's planned approach for assessing
STC program performance generally follows 8 of the 13 key practices,
and partially follows 5 of the practices. Furthermore, we found that
the CWMD was incorporating 24 of the 29 key actions that supported
implementing the 13 key practices. As CWMD is in the process of
implementing its revised assessment approach, with plans to begin
formally assessing regional performance in 2025, opportunities exist
for it take additional actions to increase accountability for results
being achieved through the STC program. We made 5 recommendations,
including that CWMD clearly communicate performance expectations to the
STC regions and improve its tracking of their progress. This entails
ensuring that the STC regions are reporting consistent, complete, and
accurate information in their quarterly performance reports so that
CWMD can set reliable targets and benchmarks for the performance
assessments. DHS concurred with these 5 recommendations and we will
monitor DHS's efforts to implement them.
Technology Acquisitions
In 2022, we found that CWMD continued to carry out functions of its
predecessor offices, including the former Domestic Nuclear Detection
Office.\18\ For example, it continued to acquire nuclear and
radiological detection technologies for partners in DHS components,
particularly the Coast Guard and CBP. Officials from these DHS
components provided examples of CWMD-provided technologies that meet
their mission needs. For example, Coast Guard officials told us that
CWMD provides hand-held radiation detectors as well as a new technology
that allows them to transmit information from the detectors to one of
CBP's offices for analysis. The Coast Guard officials told us that the
new transmission system filled a gap in their capabilities by enabling
more secure transmission of the information to CBP. CBP officials said
that CWMD helped them obtain software developed by the Department of
Energy that enhances their ability to analyze the data the Coast Guard
provides. According to CBP and Coast Guard officials, without these
enhanced capabilities, their ability to detect smuggled nuclear or
radiological material would be diminished. From 2019 through 2021,
according to CWMD officials, CWMD procured over 38,000 handheld
radiation detectors for its Federal partners.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ GAO, Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction: DHS Could Improve
Its Acquisition of Key Technology and Coordination with Partners, GAO-
22-104498 (Washington, DC: Apr. 19, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CWMD also continued to manage a program to acquire replacements for
certain radiation portal monitors that CBP operates at high-volume
ports. However, we found, at the time of our review in 2022, that these
new radiation portal monitors were late to deploy and may not meet CBP
needs. For example, CBP officials told us that tests of these
replacement monitors resulted in higher nuisance alarm rates than
originally anticipated. Nuisance alarms result from naturally-occurring
radioactive materials in certain consumer goods, requiring CBP officers
to conduct a secondary scan to determine that the source of the alarm
is not a threat before a cargo container or vehicle can leave the port.
Reducing such alarms is a key goal of the replacement program.
Therefore, we recommended in 2022 that CWMD reassess its acquisition
strategy for these replacement radiation portal monitors. CWMD
implemented the recommendation by reassessing its acquisition strategy
and ultimately deciding not to pursue a second phase of the radiation
portal monitor acquisition that CWMD had been pursuing when we issued
our report.
Employee Morale
DHS has faced challenges with low morale and low employee
engagement since its inception in 2003.\19\ CWMD ranked lowest of all
DHS components in employee engagement in 2022 and ranked 430 of all 432
Federal agency subcomponents in the 2022 Best Places to Work in the
Federal Government rankings.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ The Office of Personnel Management defines employee engagement
as employees' sense of purpose that is evident in their display of
dedication, persistence, and effort in their work or overall attachment
to their organization and its mission.
\20\ The Partnership for Public Service and the Boston Consulting
Group calculate these rankings using responses to questions in the
Office of Personnel Management's Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey.
Results for 2022 were the most recently available as of March 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We reported in July 2022 on steps CWMD had taken to help address
morale problems resulting from merging predecessor agencies.\21\
Specifically, CWMD took steps to identify causes of morale problems and
enhance employees' shared sense of mission. For example, CWMD used
surveys and listening sessions to gather information on the causes of
low morale. According to CWMD officials, one cause was different
cultures within the predecessor offices that merged under CWMD.\22\ For
example, CWMD officials said one of these offices coordinated with
physicists and law enforcement officials and focused on detection and
prevention; whereas another coordinated with public health officials
and focused on preparedness and response.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ GAO, Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction: DHS Office Has
Opportunities to Improve Partner Services and Employee Morale, GAO-22-
106133 (Washington, DC: Jul 19, 2022).
\22\ We have previously reported that successful agency reforms and
reorganizations, including mergers, must involve employees and their
representatives from the beginning to gain their ownership for the
changes that are occurring in the organization. GAO, Results-Oriented
Cultures: Implementation Steps to Assist Mergers and Organizational
Transformations, GAO-03-669 (Washington, DC: July 2, 2003). GAO,
Government Reorganization: Key Questions to Assess Agency Reform
Efforts, GAO-18-427 (Washington, DC: July 13, 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
According to CWMD employees, another cause of morale issues was
frequent leadership changes. As of August 2023, CWMD has had 3 acting
assistant secretaries since its establishment in December 2018. CWMD
employees said the different visions of the assistant secretaries
contributed to confusion about the office's mission.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ CWMD's first permanent Assistant Secretary assumed the role in
August 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
gao acknowledgements
Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and Members
of the subcommittee. This concludes my prepared statement. I would be
happy to respond to any questions you may have at this time.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Doctor.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes.
My first set of questions is for Ms. Callahan. As I
mentioned in my opening statement, section 872 of the Homeland
Security Act of 2002 allows the Department to reorganize,
establish, or consolidate operations. This authority was used
to establish the CWMD Office in 2017 and then used again by the
Secretary to establish the Office of Health Security in 2022.
In your opinion, have the CWMD and OHS office
reorganizations been successful?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you, sir. Yes, I believe both
reorganizations have been successful with regard to the CWMD
office in the first instance, then it subsequently was
authorized in 2018.
Bringing together all threats--chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear--was crucial. It's important. It
mirrors what other agencies are doing, and it brings together
all elements to bear. It also helps support our operational
components as well as our State and local stakeholders.
With regard to the Office of Health Security, I'll defer to
Dr. Wolfe if he thinks it's a success.
Mr. D'Esposito. That'd be great.
Ms. Callahan. Could I----
Mr. D'Esposito. Of course.
Ms. Callahan. But I will say--yes. I will say, I think that
having the Office of Health Security outside of CWMD helped
clarify several lanes. Obviously, they do public health, health
security. We do biological threats. We work together
seamlessly. Sometimes OHS takes the lead, sometimes we do. But
I think getting the medical expertise outside of the office
helps clarify OHS' role within the Department.
Over to you, Dr. Wolfe.
Mr. Wolfe. Thank you, Mary Ellen.
Yes. Chairman, related to the establishment of OHS, prior
to the establishment, when CWMD was created, it only took
approximately half of the medical and public health folks in
the Department. The remaining folks that focused on the health
of the work force went to the management directorate under the
chief human capital officer.
As we progressed through the second and third year and then
entered the pandemic, we learned that the medical and public
health and work force health and safety expertise was very
small compared to a Department that has 260,000 employees. So
one of the great benefits of the OHS 872 was bringing together
all the public health and medical activities of the Department
under one office and under one leadership.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. As we've heard, you know, sometimes the
work force--the dedicated work force that are affected by these
changes, the morale has been not so great. It's been one of the
things that we as a committee have wanted to address.
So in addition to the morale--and, I guess, if you could
just touch upon why you think that's a factor. What other
challenges have we seen in the reorganization or the
consolidation when decided by Secretary Mayorkas?
Ms. Callahan. For Health Security?
Mr. D'Esposito. It's really the same question for both of
you.
Ms. Callahan. Yep. The employee morale, one of--as I
mentioned, I have three tenets: work on professional
development, work on understanding the mission and how you fit
into that mission and how you can advance, and then third,
getting to know people on a personal level to reestablish
esprit de corps. I think those are important elements.
I also think transparency is crucial. That is one of my
philosophies. I have fortnightly townhalls. I write a column
every week in the bulletin. I try to be available. I have one-
on-one offices to go and make sure they know what's going on
and that we can be transparent.
I will note, my one last challenge is the threat of
termination, what weighed heavily on us in the fall, and we can
speak about that later.
Herb.
Mr. Wolfe. Yes. Chairman, one of the benefits we had at OHS
is we got to do the 872 second after CWMD, and so one of the
things we could do even prior to the establishment is use GAO
best practices and learn from other Federal reorganizations. So
we have not had the same challenge when it comes to morale.
A few things that we've done. One is employee engagement.
We've done a monthly survey prior to the establishment. We
continue that today. The second thing we've done is we do a
monthly all-hands.
The last thing is our monthly poll survey, and the FEVS
scores--which is the first time in 2023 that OHS was its own
office--mirror relatively good scores. Our employee engagement
and our employee experience index is above 75. We've had--
greater than 90 percent of the surveys in FEVS had a score
greater than 74 percent.
Then last, in the FEVS score, we had several that were
above 90, and those, I think, are attributed to medical folks
have a few core inherent missions. First, do no harm, and
second, to help those that are in need. So there was a real
attrition in there for that.
To your question on challenges, I think the one we continue
to face is just the enduring mission of DHS and making sure
that we communicate to the team that we've got several
communities to serve: those in our custody, the work force, and
the Nation as a whole.
Mr. D'Esposito. All right. Thank you, Doctor.
My time has expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
As I mentioned earlier, I find it concerning that the
uncertainty surrounding the reauthorization of CWMD, along with
reports of low morale, can be affecting staff retention and the
effectiveness of CWMD's mission.
Assistant Secretary Callahan, can you speak to how the
reauthorization's uncertainty has impacted CWMD's employees and
what a long-term extension or sunset repeal would mean for your
office?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you, Ranking Member. The threat of
termination for the office created a great deal of uncertainty.
It also created a distraction in the office in the fall. I
ended up having--losing 10 percent of my staff, which equaled
over 380 years of CBRN experience, Federal experience. That is
a real loss.
We are working quickly to replace them, but it would be
difficult to recruit the talented and in-demand work force to
ask them to come and join when we have, again, the potential of
a threat of termination in 2 years hence.
Also, with regard to our State and local partners, they
experienced and expressed to me anxiety about the threat of
termination, and, of course, several of them are working toward
the 2026 World Cup. When I was in Boston and in New York
recently, both of them asked about termination and looking
forward.
It is a concern. It is weighing on us. As I said, this is
an incredibly talented and mission-focused office.
Thank you.
Mr. Carter. It's unfair to ask anybody to work under these
uncertain terms. We have experts that are recruited to go other
places. The talent pool is--particularly in specified areas
like this--very thin. So we should always endeavor to give the
security of our agencies the privilege and the authority to
know that you will be able to continue to be funded and
operated.
I'm happy to hear that you say that. I know my colleagues
are listening, and we will continue to endeavor to do just
that, to fully fund and give you the security to be able to
secure us.
Ms. Callahan. Thank you.
Mr. Carter. CWMD's Securing the Cities, STC, program
provides funds for 14 local governments to counter successful
deployment of nuclear and radiological weapons in the United
States, including my home town of New Orleans. However, the
program is limited to high-risk urban areas designated by FEMA,
which can create uncertainty for local governments
participating in the program.
As you know, I introduced H.R. 4403, the Securing the
Cities Improvement Act, which would provide more stability for
STC participants. I was pleased that the bill passed the House
earlier this month.
Assistant Secretary Callahan, could you explain why this
bill is critical for the securing of cities and programs more
importantly?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you, Representative. We support
decoupling the Securing the Cities high-risk urban areas from
the FEMA designation of UASI because it's CWMD grants. We can
evaluate the threats and the CBRN risks, as we did with New
Orleans, and we support having that flexibility to identify
potentially new high-risk areas that may be included going
forward.
Mr. Carter. Dr. Wolfe, real quickly, are OHS and CWMD
preparing for emerging biological threats? If so, how?
Mr. Wolfe. Ranking Member, thanks for the question.
Certainly, I believe that we are more prepared today than we
were several years ago, but challenges remain. CWMD and OHS
share a great relationship and a partnership. A few of the
areas where I would say that we have done great are looking at
emerging threats and forecasting, whether that is deliberative
or whether that is unintentional.
Secondarily, we've done a great job in the biological
realms in the food, agriculture, and veterinary threat, both to
food security as well as to the agriculture sector.
Last, an area of concern that is shared across the Federal
interagency is we've got a very taxed and strained public
health and medical work force. Most of you know hospitals run
at almost capacity and run day-to-day on a tight operating
budget. Post-COVID, we've learned that the health and medical
work force is resilient, but they are also vulnerable.
So one of the areas that I share as a challenge is being
sure that we are prepared, investing in the work force, so
we're prepared for the next potential public health or
biological incident.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Dr. Sherman, I've got just a few seconds left, but I'd love
you to--first of all, thank you all for your incredible
service. What's your greatest fear, and what should we know as
a committee to help you allay those fears?
Ms. Sherman. When it comes to the Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Office?
Mr. Carter. Of course.
Ms. Sherman. I think the main--I'm not sure if I'd
characterize it as fear, but I think one area of----
Mr. Carter. Concern. Concern.
Ms. Sherman [continuing]. Concern, we'd like the office to
continue to focus on demonstrating its effectiveness. There are
a lot of activities and efforts under way, and the office has
demonstrated----
Mr. Carter. Let me real quickly. If one thing kept you
awake at night, one thing that we as a Member of Congress can
do--this committee more specifically--can do for you and your
agency to make your life and our lives more safe.
Mr. Chairman, I will yield after she answers.
Mr. D'Esposito. All yours.
Ms. Sherman. Yes. I'm not sure that I have a single fear
that I can communicate, but I definitely feel that CWMD in
particular has an important mission, and we definitely want to
make sure to continue to, with the support of the subcommittee,
you know, monitor its activities.
Mr. Carter. So you just had a blank check in front of you
and you didn't fill it in.
Ms. Sherman. I'm happy to speak further about, you know,
the work that we've done in this particular office. I think one
of the kind-of main focuses we have is, you know, these threats
are real, as I said in my opening statement, and we are
concerned about how the Federal Government is taking steps
across--not only within the homeland security enterprise but
across the Federal Government and across Nation-wide to be able
to help address those threats.
One of the challenges that we feel is experienced as a
result is the fact that there needs to be, again, a
coordination, a real understanding of the range of threats to
make sure that there aren't any specific capability gaps that
exist, you know, as a result of the efforts that are under way.
We--you know, we would like to continue to work to ensure that
CWMD is helping to identify those gaps across the Federal
Government, as well as with SLTTs, to be able to address those
threats.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much, Mr. Ranking Member.
I just want to point out--really, to Ms. Callahan's point
and I think to concerns of all of you--the bill that--my bill
that came out of this committee and then passed full committee
in a bipartisan fashion. So I think that shows the commitment
that this committee and this subcommittee has to the work that
you do.
It was actually a 7-year extension, but due to the CBO
score, we also have to be realistic in what we could actually,
as a committee and a subcommittee, can get onto the floor and
pass. So that's why we're at the 2-year number. But this
committee and my bill when it was originally drafted did have a
7-year extension.
With that, I recognize my good friend and fellow New Yorker
and Long Islander, Mr. LaLota, for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito, for your
leadership and to our witnesses for being with us here today.
Like Chairman D'Esposito, I am a proud New Yorker, a proud
Long Islander, and I'm honored to represent the eastern end of
Long Island. My district's about 50, 60 miles to the east of
Manhattan, the heart of New York City.
This coming September 11 marks the 23rd anniversary of the
September 11 terrorist attacks in lower Manhattan, Shanksville,
Pennsylvania, and here at our Nation's Capital. After that day,
we as a Nation collectively vowed that we would never forget
and that we would never allow another attack of that magnitude
on American soil.
However, Mr. Chairman, I'm becoming increasingly concerned
that we are on the cusp of another major attack, and if we do
not properly prepare, we could fail to prevent another 9/11.
In fact, the director of the FBI, Christopher Wray,
testified in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee back in
December and warned Congress of another 9/11-like failure.
During that hearing, he said, ``I see blinking lights
everywhere.'' Ask any New Yorker, we know what that means, and
we'll tell you plain and simple that we're in trouble.
In addition to being a proud New Yorker, I'm a Navy
veteran, the brother of a Marine, and I served this country in
uniform with immense pride for 11 years. I can tell you from
that experience, the most effective way to thwart an adversary
and protect an asset, especially our people, is through
deterrence, the action of deterring an action or an event by
instilling doubts or fear into the consequences.
Assistant Secretary Callahan, thanks so much for being
here. As the assistant secretary for the Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Office, my first question is for you. It was
only 5 years ago that the Countering Weapons of Mass
Destruction Office within the Department of Homeland Security
was established. Do you believe that the office has served as a
deterrent for our adversaries in attempting to use a weapon of
mass destruction on U.S. soil since the office was created?
Ms. Callahan. Representative, I do believe it has served as
a deterrent, and the way it has done so is by pushing out
training, equipment, and exercises to the State and local first
responders. They're going to be the ones who are going to come
across a chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear threat,
and getting training and technology in their hands is how we
cannot only identify but prepare and respond.
Our mission is to prevent and deter CBRN threats, and I
think we're doing so with regard to our relationship with State
and locals--also in Nassau County as well as in Suffolk County,
sir--and also with working with our operational components here
in the Department of Homeland Security and then working in the
interagency with FBI and DOE. Yes, sir.
Mr. LaLota. Great. I know that Dr. Sherman resisted the
temptation to answer the question about the blank checks, and
then you referenced----
Ms. Callahan. I'll write it.
Mr. LaLota. You're going to get a shot at the same question
then.
How can you build on that success? Your answer just now,
you said technology was a key part of what we ought to be
focused on moving forward. Give Congress a sense of what else
you think we ought to be leveraging, technology and otherwise,
to be able to build on the success of the last 5 years.
Ms. Callahan. Sir, it's technology, training, and equipment
and exercises, getting the knowledge out for chemical,
biological, radiological, and nuclear threats, understanding
how to respond, do the training and exercises that I witnessed
in New Orleans just this week--because it's the first
responders. It's those State and locals who are going to be on
the ground if indeed something happens, and we are working to
get that knowledge out as far as we can.
With regard to the check that I will write, the enduring
reauthorization of the CWMD Office is crucial to make sure that
we can be that linchpin for the entire CWMD ecosystem.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. I appreciate your feedback.
You know, this committee, under Chairman D'Esposito's
leadership, has a strong bipartisan approach to how----
Ms. Callahan. We are very grateful.
Mr. LaLota [continuing]. And we're going to continue that.
We're committed to doing that.
Ms. Callahan. Thank you.
Mr. LaLota. I'm going to maybe go to a next round in the
future, Mr. Chairman, so I yield.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. LaLota.
I now recognize from Alabama and a first responder, Mr.
Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member.
I appreciate our witnesses for being here to discuss the
important work each of you are doing to secure our Nation
against weapons of mass destruction.
As you all know, BioWatch is one of the programs used to
carry out the mission of the CWMD Office by collecting and
testing air samples for biological agents likely to be used in
an act of bioterrorism.
As technology evolves, so do threats to our country. For
example, increasing access and affordability of unmanned
aircraft presents ample opportunities for bad actors to cause
harm and hysteria in our communities. Now more than ever we
depend on efficiency and effectiveness of BioWatch.
Unfortunately, this program is not operating like it should.
From breakdowns to accurate information sharing to
bureaucratic barriers and lagging procurements of biodetection
technology, DHS has fallen dangerously behind. For this reason,
I introduced the DHS Biodetection Improvement Act, which would
direct DHS to use every tool in its disposal to develop an
acquisition and procurement plan to meet the biodetection needs
of the 21st Century. The House passed this legislation earlier
this month, and I urge my Senate colleagues to do the same.
First, Assistant Secretary Callahan, to what extent is
BioWatch an operational program given past findings of its
inaccuracy and timely detection, and what plan exists for
improving it?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you, Representative Strong. BioWatch is
the only biodetection capability that this Nation has. It has
existed. It is a stable and functional process. We are working
on improving it and looking at technology and opportunities,
but it is lab-based, lab-proven, and we've worked with over 30
jurisdictions to make sure that we have an appropriate baseline
and security. BioWatch is reliable, sir.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. How long does it take from the
moment a sensor registers a bioagent to when the data is shared
with partners for response?
Ms. Callahan. Yes, sir. The materials for BioWatch are
collected either on a 12- or 24-hour basis and then are
analyzed in the lab. From the time in the lab, it takes a few
hours, somewhere between 2 and 4 hours to identify whether or
not there is aerosolized biological materials in the air.
Mr. Strong. Twelve to 24 hours, right?
Ms. Callahan. That is for the collection time. Yes, sir.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. When dealing with the threats of
bioterrorist attacks, every minute matters, every second
matters.
Ms. Callahan. Yes, sir.
Mr. Strong. Chairman D'Esposito highlighted it can take up
to 36 hours to get these results.
How many times since the start of this program has there
been a positive detection, and how many times has there been a
false alarm?
Ms. Callahan. In this room, sir, I cannot go into details,
but I can talk about it in a different room, if that would be--
happy to take that off-line, if that's OK.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Dr. Sherman, thank you for your work on reports related to
BioWatch. I understand that GAO has made multiple
recommendations about changes that need to be made to the
acquisition and procurement process.
Has DHS implemented any of those changes?
Ms. Sherman. Yes. DHS has taken steps to better inform its
acquisition process. In fact, I think as a result of BD21--the
BD21 program being canceled, it was informed in part by some of
the questions that we had raised in prior work and
recommendations that we had made regarding more informed
decision making during the acquisition process and not moving
forward with that process and spending additional funds until
there's really kind-of clear evidence and documentation of
effectiveness.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Other than passing the DHS
Biodetection Improvement Act, what is the biggest thing DHS can
do right now to improve BioWatch, in your judgment? What's the
biggest thing they can do to improve biodetection--BioWatch?
Ms. Sherman. I will say--yes, I will just say that
biodetection is an incredibly challenging task, and, you know,
we're talking about how long it takes to be able to capture a
sample and test it and confirm results.
You know, the extent to which there is a way to identify
technologies that allow for increased efficiencies in those
time frames, if those exist, then that is--you know, that would
be something that I think would result in, you know,
significant progress.
But CWMD, given its current mission, you know, should be
actively considering as it is how to continue their focus in
biodefense.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, you've touched on it just a sec. It is unique
that you worked as a fire chief. I've been a fire chief,
police, first responders. We know first-hand how critical that
is that we get that information. Forty years myself and 34
years as an emergency medical technician.
So it's so critical to our first responders, and I thank
each of you for what you do to get that information as fast as
possible.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Strong.
I now recognize from Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So I want to ask Dr. Sherman representing the GAO with the
homeland security specialty, tell me in terms of--efficiency is
something that GAO is respected for, constantly analyzing.
Where do you see resources being expended that the GAO would
say may be inefficient and could be otherwise allocated?
I'm really interested in the concept of the electric grid
and hardening our transformers. I'd like to hear if you think
that we're being inefficient in some areas and if some of those
resources could be otherwise utilized to protect what I think
is a very vulnerable grid.
Ms. Sherman. Sure. So speaking to the acquisition piece,
CWMD has gone through, not only in the biodefense space, but
also in the radiation detection space, several acquisitions
that have resulted in cancellation. I think I've mentioned it
before, that's actually not necessarily a bad thing, because if
it comes to a decision point where the office or the Department
decides that they don't have enough information to move forward
and to spend the taxpayer dollars for a particular program,
then they should make a decision to not do that.
So that is an area where I think the office has at least
taken steps and demonstrated that the--you know, again, the
kind-of efficiency piece is really critical and making sure
that there isn't continued efforts over time and spending to be
able to identify particular threats.
I would also say, one of the themes that we have throughout
the CBRN space for CWMD is going back to the message about
effectiveness. Really understanding whether the programs and
activities are working, whether the work that--in the case of
Securing the Cities, the partners that are being carried out in
the regions, having an understanding of whether or not the
support that CWMD is providing--the money, the resources--is
actually working and better protecting those regions across the
country.
So I think that that is a way to really understand whether
or not money is being well-spent as it goes toward the various
programs within CWMD.
Mr. Brecheen. Can you expound upon that? So the expenditure
funds going to localities, high-population areas, how is GAO
determining whether or not that that is a good spend for the
taxpayer? How do you run through the--how do you analyze that
accurately?
Ms. Sherman. Sure. So in the case of Securing the Cities,
for example, last year, CWMD put out an implementation plan for
its program--a new version of its implementation plan, and as
part of that plan, it was to--the office was to collect
information from the regional partners in terms of trainings,
exercises, detections, efforts that they have made that have
been tied to the resources that they've been provided to them.
We have found that CWMD, over time, hasn't done as good of
a job looking at that information, collecting that information,
making sure that it's accurate through quarterly reporting
requirements and others. So in this report that we issued
today, we made recommendations around making sure that it has
better data, it has better information from those partners to
be able to say, OK, you are successful in the efforts that
you're carrying out, being able to implement this program,
being able to be prepared as a first responder for detection
efforts, and you should be able to continue forward and ideally
obtain sustainment funding as a result of that.
Mr. Brecheen. Because I only have got 40 seconds left, Mr.
Chairman, I wanted to ask, in regards to the expenditure--and
next year we'll come back and have a conversation as to whether
or not those suggestions from GAO were implemented.
What are your thoughts, Ms. Callahan, in regards to--is
there a better allocation of resources that may not be high-
population centers regarding our electric grid, the
transformers?
My understanding, there's some information floating around
that says we have 20 transformers. That if they were all hit at
the same time, whether it's gunfire, an EMP, somebody walking
up with a device that exploded, that we could bring down our
entire electrical grid, shut down traffic, shut down cell phone
utilization. Can you speak to that?
Ms. Callahan. Sir, we agree with all the GAO's
recommendations with regards to Securing the Cities. With
regard to the electrical grid, that would be my colleagues at
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency. I know
they have spent a great deal of time on that and are working on
hardening that, but I would have to defer to those colleagues.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Brecheen.
Ms. Callahan, as you mentioned in your testimony, CBRN
threats present dynamic challenges to the Nation's security
and, ``the risks are constantly evolving due to the evolution
of technologies''.
What steps has the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction
Office taken to coordinate the threat with the intelligence
community so that the agency might better understand the
current threat environment?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you, sir. As you may know, we have a
dedicated intelligence shop just focused on CBRN threats. They
do an annual report that we're happy to brief to you and to
your staff, the CWMD Homeland Threat Assessment.
We work very closely with our intelligence community
colleagues. We also are working--having a fledgling
relationship with the National Guard Bureau and their
intelligence shop, again, to get that information out to the
first responders, to the folks in the field in the 57
different, for example, civil support teams. So trying to get
that information out.
We're also working with our colleagues--Health Security
among others--at analyzing the risks. So we've identified the
threat, but we've also looked at the risk, which include the
likelihood as well as the consequence and what the impact is.
So we're trying to have a holistic view. Yes, sir.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. What's your interaction regularly with
Customs and Border Patrol to make sure that our ports, our
ports of entry, so that they have the information necessary to
make sure that they can protect us as best they can?
Ms. Callahan. Yep. Obviously, CBP is one of our biggest
stakeholders. We support the radiation portal monitors, so 14--
almost 1,400 RPMs at the ports of entries. We also go and brief
them on threats. We've done multiple trainings, not only at
ports of entries, but also at the National Targeting Center for
that as well.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Your testimony also speaks to chemical
preparedness and chemical defense, and mentions the
establishment of the DHS Chemical Coordination Group to, quote,
meet the evolving threat for chemical attacks and incidents.
How has the expiration of CISA's Chemical Facility's Anti-
Terrorism Standards program affected our Nation's chemical
defense posture?
Ms. Callahan. Yes. Thank you, sir. The termination of CFATS
authorization--I know that's the wrong phrasing--but the end of
CFATS authorization has, in my opinion, affected our chemical
readiness with regard to identifying threats that would be in
chemical facilities.
CFATS and CWMD are siblings, and they work together
closely, and we are missing them in this--in this whole-of-
Government threat.
Mr. D'Esposito. I know we've briefly touched upon this in
my first round of questioning, but I think it's important,
because a lot of Federal agencies, especially when it comes to
our enforcement agencies, Homeland Security, Customs and Border
Patrol, Capitol Police, attrition and making sure that our work
force stays, is a concern that we have.
So in 2022, there was a ranking by Best Places to Work, and
the Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office ranked 430
out of 432. Four hundred thirty out of 432. CWMD has
consistently--has had low ratings. I know that we talked about
this briefly, but I think it's extremely important.
So you, I think, have--had identified in some cases why
morale is so low. Is there anything that you weren't able to
share in the first round of questioning? If we can go into--
because we have a little bit more time--what are the steps that
you are taking to improve the morale to make sure that we keep
our coworkers staying where they are? Because I think
institutional knowledge is something that is so important.
So what are we doing to make sure that they stay and are
enjoying working for this great government?
Ms. Callahan. Yes. Thank you, sir. Retention is crucial,
and it's incredibly important, particularly for something as
complex as CBRN threats, and we're working in multiple ways. I
mentioned my kind-of 3 tiers of my morale plan. I won't rehash
that, but I will say that we're looking for opportunities to
cross-train, to have people work within the different
directorates.
What's interesting to me is that we've--because they came
from different organizations, that in some ways they might not
have known the other side of the CB and the RN threat, so we're
looking at ways to integrate that better. We're doing
presentations on what we're doing. We're looking to look for
those synergies that were there but haven't been focused on
yet.
So, sir, I think it's professional development, I think
it's office development, and it's, candidly, just getting to
know us as people. We lost a lot of that during COVID, and
we're trying to find ways to connect in a hybrid environment.
Mr. D'Esposito. So I guess we're both confident that the
next time Best Places to Work does their rankings, we'll be far
better than 430.
Ms. Callahan. Sir, I will say the FEVS are a lagging
indicator and that it could be possible that the FEVS scores
during my time may come out, you know, after I leave, depending
on the election. So I want to say, I'm not here about FEVS
scores. I'm here about the people.
Mr. D'Esposito. Absolutely. I'm still confident. I'm
rooting for you.
Ms. Callahan. I appreciate the vote of support, and I also
share that vote.
Mr. D'Esposito. All right. My time's expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I suspect that when we have the security of knowing that
people will get a paycheck, that we'll also have morale to go
up, because Government should not run from continuing
resolution to continuing resolution. We should have the
security of people knowing that their Government and the full
faith and credit of the Government will always be protected. So
we will continue to fight to make sure that happens so you're
able to do your job even more.
So Representative Strong touched on a point that I wanted
to go. Secretary Callahan, can you tell the subcommittee where
CWMD is advancing in its biodetection capabilities?
Ms. Callahan. Thank you very much, sir. As I mentioned,
BioWatch is a reliable program right now, but we have to
improve on it, as Dr. Won Sherman said. We've got to get--make
sure that we have a shorter time period, if possible, with the
same level of standard of clarity and of accuracy.
We have looked at many opportunities. I'm happy to talk
about BD21, but I'll put that to a side right now because it's
an acquisition program. But we're looking at making a series of
incremental improvements on environmental biodetection writ
large, and that's our focus rather than kind-of to jump to the
BD21 moonshot, so to speak. That's--one of the reasons BD21
couldn't scale and couldn't be operational at this moment. But
instead, we're looking at a wide range of technologies,
opportunities, and resources to have the BioWatch steady state
while we work on incremental improvements in terms of
timeliness, response, efficiency, and so on.
Mr. Carter. Are we keeping up with the bad guys?
Ms. Callahan. We are working our darndest to keep up with
the bad guys. As as Dr. Won Sherman said, biodetection at scale
is really hard, and it's one of the reasons why BioWatch is the
only program that we have right now. But we're looking at--
we're engaging our State and local stakeholders to make sure
we're meeting their mission and their mark as we look to make
these improvements on biodetection.
But biodetection is hard. Bioattacks are also hard, I will
say, and stop there in this room.
Mr. Carter. That's an incredible challenge. So those are
not trick questions. They're questions that----
Ms. Callahan. Understood, sir.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. One, we understand and appreciate
the difficult task that you have. So we'll begin there. So the
questions we ask, we come in peace, on how we can better serve
you----
Ms. Callahan. Understood, sir.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. And you can better serve us.
So what's your approach--you mentioned stakeholders. What's
your approach to collect information, data, and to learn from
and, more importantly, teach local stakeholders, and what
relationship--and how--what does that look like?
Ms. Callahan. Yep. So, first, our relationship with
stakeholders are paramount. That's a crucial element. We are an
operational support component supporting the 5 DHS operational
supports, as well as all the State and locals that we've talked
about. I have people on my team who communicate with State and
locals every day to make sure we're transparent, we know what's
going on, we're communicating.
With regard to the GAO recommendations on data, I was
thrilled to see that because it's very consistent with my
philosophy, is that we have to have metrics. We have to have
consistent metrics and we have to have repeatable processes. We
also have the opportunity to learn from each other.
One of the things that I witnessed when I went to the
Securing the Cities meeting in Miami, which was the one after
the Chairman came to St. Elizabeths, is that the State and
locals are learning from each other. They're sharing
information. They're supporting each other. They're going and
saying, this is my best practice, this is how I work.
Boston came down to New Orleans to support for Mardi Gras,
and New Orleans is going up to support for the marathon next
month. Working together and having the information sharing is
crucial in order to have this layered defense that we've
established.
Mr. Carter. Excellent. Thank you very much.
Dr. Sherman, what has GAO's report found regarding CWMD
stakeholder outreach and engagement with SLTT partners?
Ms. Sherman. Yes, absolutely. So both with Securing the
Cities, as well as actually BioWatch and also the former
Chemical Defense Demonstration Cities Initiative, we had
previously found that the communication and engagement with
stakeholders, not only the Federal, but the SLTT partners, was
not as robust as it could have been. We have seen strides,
which is very positive.
There's been a lot of gatherings, meetings, sharing of
information, and really, you know, kind-of an understanding
that one participant in a program can learn from another.
We also know in 2022 there was an SLTT engagement strategy
that CWMD developed. We made some recommendations on how to
improve that, but it was noticeable that they had pulled the
strategy together, and so we were pleased to have seen that.
Ranking Member, if you'll indulge me. I don't have an
answer to the question regarding a blank check, but I will say,
since we haven't dabbled in it, you know, the--something to
keep me up at night would be the role of AI or the potential
when it comes to producing CBRN threats. That is something
that, of course, is part of the Executive Order, you know, will
be implemented. DHS is going to be developing an analysis to
take a look at that issue.
GAO is starting to monitor the efforts within that
Executive Order, and so I'm a little less scared at night
because I know we're going to take a look at it, but that is an
area, you know, of concern moving forward.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Dr. Sherman. My time is up.
Mr. Chairman, if you would just indulge me one quick final
question for Dr. Wolfe.
Mr. D'Esposito. Sure.
Mr. Carter. Same question on engagement. As we prepare for
the next health security risk, share with us your method or
matrix for engagement with other agencies to ensure that we
have the best practices in place.
Mr. Wolfe. Sure, Ranking Member. I'm from the northeast, so
I'll talk fast on this one.
The first with our other Federal partners. We are the
supporting agency to ESF 8, which is--the lead is HHS. When
you're a supporting agency, we need to do a better job. So the
last few years with the creation of OHS, we've done a better
job of being a solid partner for HHS ASPR and HHS CDC.
We also sit on the PHEMCE, which is the Public Health
Emergency Medical Countermeasures Enterprise. That is how the
Federal interagency decides what medical countermeasures we
should develop and invest in. Certainly, related to Assistant
Secretary Callahan's comment about BioWatch, right? We're
detecting to treat, detecting to warn. We want to make sure
we're leveraging medical countermeasures. Don't want to detect
something and then not have a treatment for someone in New
Orleans or somewhere else.
In terms of State and local, a few things we do is we
convene monthly with the fusion centers. We make sure that
health analysts are understanding what's happening in the law
enforcement mission. What we find a lot of times is health
people tend to be called when the problem is known. So we're
making sure that the fusion centers are leveraging their health
analysts prior to any issue that arises.
The other thing we do is we convene communities along the
Southwest Border and interior communities to talk about
challenges they are seeing across the community, whether that
is with migrants, whether that is just State and local issues
that they're devoting money from one program to another.
The last thing we do is we've got the food security
mission. We've done several tabletops, one in the State of
Washington, one in Oklahoma. Both of those had good
representation from the Tribes, which is one of our focal
points for 2024, which is, as we know from COVID-19, for
example, a lot of focus on Navajo Nation and making sure that
we're including, when we say SLTT, that we don't forget the
Tribal part of our State and locals.
Thanks.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. Thank you all very much.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The Members of the subcommittee
may have some additional questions for the witnesses and we
would ask that the witnesses respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:45 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
