- A CASCADE OF SECURITY FAILURES: ASSESSING MICROSOFT CORPORATION'S CYBERSECURITY SHORTFALLS AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR HOMELAND SECURITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A CASCADE OF SECURITY FAILURES: ASSESSING
MICROSOFT CORPORATION'S CYBERSECURITY
SHORTFALLS AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR
HOMELAND SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 13, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-70

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
58-996 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................    37
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    39
Prepared Statement.............................................    41

Witness

Mr. Brad Smith, Vice Chair and President, Microsoft Corporation:
Oral Statement.................................................    43
Prepared Statement.............................................    45

For the Record

Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Report, Cyber Safety Review Board..............................     2
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Article, ProPublica............................................    54

A CASCADE OF SECURITY FAILURES: ASSESSING MICROSOFT CORPORATION'S
CYBERSECURITY SHORTFALLS AND THE IMPLICATIONS FOR HOMELAND SECURITY

----------

Thursday, June 13, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 1:17 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark E. Green
(Chairman of the committee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, Higgins, Gimenez, Pfluger,
Garbarino, Greene, Gonzales, Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell,
Strong, Crane, Thompson, Swalwell, Correa, Carter, Thanedar,
Magaziner, Ivey, Garcia, Ramirez, Menendez, Suozzi, Kennedy,
and Clarke.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the committee in
recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the Department of
Homeland Security's Cyber Safety Review Board's recent report
concerning the summer 2023 Microsoft Exchange on-line cyber
incident.
Specifically, we'll examine Microsoft's view regarding the
company's security practices and challenges encountered in
preventing significant cyber intrusions by suspected nation-
state actors and its plans to strengthen security measures
moving forward.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Each and every day, the United States depends upon
Microsoft--cloud services, productivity tools, operating
systems--to carry out an array of critical missions. Microsoft
is deeply integrated into our Nation's digital infrastructure,
a presence that carries heightened respect and heightened
responsibility.
We're holding this hearing today because of the latest
Department of Homeland Security Cyber Safety Review Board,
CSRB, report. The report attributed last summer's Microsoft
Exchange on-line hack by Storm-0558, which is backed by the
Chinese Communist Party, to ``a cascade of security failures at
Microsoft''.
The determinations were based on a number of findings
detailed in the report. I have the report and would like to
introduce it into the record.
So ordered.
[The information follows:]
Report Submitted by Chairman Mark E. Green, MD

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Green. Specifically, Storm-0558 assessed
Microsoft--accessed Microsoft Exchange accounts using
authentication tokens signed by an inactive private encryption
key that Microsoft created in 2016.
The Beijing-backed actor obtained tens of thousands of
individual U.S. Government emails by compromising the Microsoft
Exchange email accounts of U.S. officials working on national
security matters relating to China.
The CSRB concluded that this intrusion would've been
prevented had Microsoft cultivated a strong security culture,
which the CSRB said, ``requires an overhaul, particularly in
light of the company's centrality in the technology ecosystem
and the level of trust customers place in the company to
protect their data and operations''.
By any measure, this cyber intrusion was not sophisticated.
It did not involve advanced techniques of cutting-edge
technologies. Instead, Storm-0558 exploited basic, well-known
vulnerabilities that could've been avoided through basic cyber
hygiene.
In other words, this was avoidable. This is extremely
concerning, and it falls to this committee to do the due
diligence and determine just where Microsoft sits and how it's
taken this report to heart.
Our goals today are simple. We want to give the company we
put so much faith in as a Government the opportunity to discuss
the lessons learned, the actions taken, and, of course, to
share where they feel the report could've been wrong.
To be clear, the U.S. Government would never expect a
private company to work alone in protecting itself against a
nation-state actor. We need to do more work to define roles and
responsibilities for public- and private-sector actors in the
event of nation-state attacks. Our Nation's adversaries possess
advanced cyber capabilities and substantial resources often
exceeding the defensive cybersecurity measures available to
even the most sophisticated companies. However, we do expect
Government vendors to implement basic cybersecurity practices.
Since this is not the first time Microsoft has been the
victim of an avoidable cyber attack, and in the light of the
report, it's now Congress's responsibility to examine the
response to this report. We must restore the trust to the
American people, who depend on Microsoft products every day. We
also must address broader questions regarding the mitigation of
economic and national security risks.
This hearing aims to shed light on these issues and ensure
Microsoft has implemented the CSRB's recommendations to
safeguard against future breaches.
As we dive into these issues, we need to keep three things
in mind.
First, closing the cyber work force gap, my top priority
for the committee this year. The security challenges we face as
a Nation are compounded by the persistent shortage of
cybersecurity professionals. As Microsoft continues its work to
invest in our cyber work force, we must harken back to the
lessons from the report. Our cyber professionals must be
trained to think security first. We must equip them with the
right skills to protect our networks and to build our systems'
security.
Second, we need to define the role of public and private-
sector entities in protecting our networks against nation-state
actors. I think the Federal Government has been silent too long
on this. These attacks have become increasingly common rather
than anomalies. We need clearly defined responsibilities so
that we can effectively respond to nation-state attacks on our
networks in a private-public partnership.
Finally, we must address a fundamental issue, the economic
incentives that drive cybersecurity investments. As the CSRB's
report recently revealed, underinvestment in essential security
measures exposed critical vulnerabilities. Changing the
economic incentives for cybersecurity investment is not about
imposing onerous regulations or stifling innovation; it's about
creating an environment where the costs of neglecting
cybersecurity are outweighed by the potential benefits of
comprehensive security measures.
Today, we will explore the steps Microsoft is taking to
strengthen its security culture through its Secure Future
Initiative. While I commend Microsoft for announcing steps to
reform its security practices, I want to hear today what
Microsoft's follow-through has been on those commitments on its
past responses to other significant cyber incidents, such as
SolarWinds.
One of my biggest concerns is Microsoft's presence in
China, our Nation's primary strategic adversary, and the
regime's responsibility for the hack we are discussing today.
Over the years, Microsoft has invested heavily in China,
setting up research and development centers, including the
Microsoft Research Asia Center in Beijing. Microsoft's presence
in China creates a set of complex challenges and risks, and we
have to talk about that today as a part of our discussion on
the security issue.
Mr. Smith, as a long-time key leader within Microsoft, I
anticipate that you will help us understand the gaps that
enabled these recent cyber intrusions. The American people as
well as the numerous Federal agencies that depend on Microsoft
deserve those assurances that their data and their operations
will be protected. Mr. Smith, we appreciate your presence here
today and look forward to your testimony.
I also would like to let the Members of the committee
know--and listen up, team--that, should your question require
an answer that would necessitate movement to a secure location,
Mr. Smith will be the only one who knows that answer once you
ask the question.
Look, China and Russia, Beijing and Moscow, are watching us
right now. If you don't think that's true, you're naive. The
last thing we want to do is empower our adversary in any way.
Members, if Mr. Smith says the answer would require a secure
facility, please accept this and ask another question. The
committee staff will determine the best way or mechanism to get
you the answer in a secure and Classified manner.
With that, I yield now, and I recognize the Ranking Member
for his opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, MD
June 13, 2024
Each and every day, the U.S. Government depends upon Microsoft
cloud services, productivity tools, and operating systems to carry out
an array of critical missions. Microsoft is deeply integrated into our
Nation's digital infrastructure--a presence that carries heightened
respect and heightened responsibility.
We are holding this hearing because of the latest Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) Cyber Safety Review Board (``CSRB'') report.
The report attributed last summer's Microsoft Exchange Online hack, by
Storm Zero Five Five Eight, which is backed by the Chinese Communist
Party, to ``a cascade of security failures at Microsoft''.
These determinations were based on a number of findings detailed in
the report.
Specifically, Storm Zero Five Five Eight accessed the Microsoft
Exchange accounts using authentication tokens signed by an inactive
private encryption key that Microsoft created in 2016. The Beijing-
backed actor obtained tens of thousands of individual U.S. Government
emails by compromising the Microsoft Exchange email accounts of U.S.
officials working on national security matters relating to China.
The CSRB concluded that this intrusion would have been prevented if
Microsoft had cultivated a strong security culture, which the CSRB
said, ``requires an overhaul, particularly in light of the company's
centrality in the technology ecosystem and the level of trust customers
place in the company to protect their data and operations''.
By any measure, this cyber intrusion was not sophisticated. It did
not involve advanced techniques or cutting-edge technologies. Instead,
Storm Zero Five Five Eight exploited basic, well-known vulnerabilities
that could have been avoided through basic cyber hygiene practices. In
other words, this was avoidable.
This is extremely concerning, and it falls to this committee to do
the due diligence and determine just where Microsoft sits as a company,
and how it has taken this report to heart.
Our goals today are simple. We want to give the company we put so
much faith in as a Government the opportunity to discuss lessons
learned, actions taken, and of course to share where they feel the
report could be wrong.
To be clear, the U.S. Government would never expect a private
company to work alone in protecting itself against nation-state
attacks.
We need to do more work to define roles and responsibilities for
public and private-sector actors in the event of nation-state attacks
on our networks. Our Nation's adversaries possess advanced cyber
capabilities and substantial resources, often exceeding the defensive
cybersecurity measures available to even the most sophisticated
companies.
However, we do expect Government vendors to implement basic
cybersecurity practices.
Since this is not the first time Microsoft has been the victim of
an avoidable cyber attack, and in light of the CSRB's report, it is now
Congress's responsibility to examine Microsoft's response to this
report. We must restore the trust of the American people, who depend
upon Microsoft products every day. We must also address broader
questions regarding the mitigation of economic and national security
risks.
This hearing aims to shed light on these issues and ensure that
Microsoft has implemented the CSRB's recommendations to safeguard
against future breaches.
As we dive into these issues, we need to keep 3 themes in mind.
First, closing the cyber workforce gap--my top priority for the
committee this year. The security challenges we face as a Nation are
compounded by the persistent shortage of cybersecurity professionals.
As Microsoft continues its work to invest in our cyber workforce,
we must harken back to the lessons from the CSRB report. Our cyber
professionals must be trained to think of security first. We must equip
them with the right skills to protect our networks and to build our
systems securely.
Second, we need to define the role of public and private-sector
entities in protecting our networks against nation-state actors.
These attacks have become increasingly common, rather than
anomalies.
We need clearly-defined responsibilities so that we can effectively
respond to nation-state attacks on our networks.
Finally, we must address a fundamental issue: the economic
incentives that drive cybersecurity investments. As the CSRB's report
recently revealed, underinvestment in essential security measures
exposed critical vulnerabilities.
Changing the economic incentives for cybersecurity investment is
not about imposing onerous regulations or stifling innovation.
It is about creating an environment where the costs of neglecting
cybersecurity are outweighed by the potential benefits of comprehensive
security measures.
Today, we will explore the steps Microsoft is taking to strengthen
its security culture through its Secure Future Initiative. While I
commend Microsoft for announcing steps to reform its security
practices, I want to hear about Microsoft's follow-through on its
stated commitments in the long term--based largely on its past
responses to other significant cyber incidents, such as SolarWinds.
One of my biggest concerns is Microsoft's presence in China--our
Nation's primary strategic adversary and the regime responsible for the
hack we are discussing today. Over the years, Microsoft has invested
heavily in China, setting up research and development centers,
including its Microsoft Research Asia Center in Beijing. Microsoft's
presence in China creates a set of complex challenges and risks that we
must also talk about today as part of our discussion about a strong
security culture.
Mr. Smith, as a long-time, key leader within Microsoft, I
anticipate that you will help us understand the gaps that enabled these
recent cyber intrusions. The American people, as well as the numerous
Federal agencies that depend on Microsoft, deserve assurances that
their data and operations are protected.
Mr. Smith, we appreciate your presence here today and look forward
to your testimony.
I also would like to let the Members of the committee know that
should their question require an answer that would necessitate movement
to a secure location, Mr. Smith will be the only one who knows that
once the question is asked.
Look, China and Russia are watching this right now. The last thing
we want is to empower our adversaries in any way.
Members, if Mr. Smith says the answer would require a secure
facility, please accept this and ask another question. The committee
staff will determine the best mechanism to get you the answers you ask
in a Classified manner.

Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I'd like
to thank you for holding this hearing on the Cyber Safety
Review Board investigation of an intrusion into Federal
networks involving Microsoft.
At the outset, I want to be clear: This is not a ``gotcha''
hearing. It's not the committee's goal to shame, embarrass, or
discredit the witness, Microsoft, or any other entity mentioned
in this CSRB report.
We have three objectives today: Accountability, securing
Federal networks, and securing the broader internet ecosystem.
Last year, we were disturbed to learn that a state-
sponsored threat actor from China had access to email accounts
of high-ranking officials at the Departments of State and
Commerce and an email account of a Member of Congress, among
others.
As the investigation unfolded, we learned that the threat
actor accessed these accounts by forging tokens using a stolen
key from 2016 and that the State Department, not Microsoft, had
discovered the intrusion.
By August, Secretary Mayorkas announced that the CSRB would
review the Microsoft Exchange on-line intrusion and the
malicious targeting of cloud environments. The CSRB engaged in
a thorough and expeditious review, and its report was released
earlier this year. I might add, the Chair just included a copy
of that report in the record.
The CSRB did exactly the kind of review it was supposed to
do, and it did so in a manner only the Government can. The CSRB
examined a serious incident and made pointed findings and
recommendations that will ultimately improve how Microsoft,
other cloud service providers, and the Government approach
security.
It is incumbent on this committee to hold Microsoft, one of
the Federal Government's most prominent IT vendors and security
partners, accountable for the findings and recommendations in
the report. Microsoft deserves credit for cooperating with the
board's investigation, but make no mistake: It's Congress's
expectation that Microsoft or any similarly-situated company
would do just the same.
Microsoft is one of the largest technology suppliers in the
world, and its products are used by governments and private-
sector entities alike. The company provides an estimated 85
percent of the productivity software used by the Federal
Government. Microsoft also sells security tools and is one of
the Government's top cloud service providers. Moreover, a
reported 25 to 30 percent of its Government revenue comes from
noncompetitive contracts, at least in part due to the terms of
its licensing agreements.
Any company with such a significant footprint in our
Federal network has an obligation to cooperate with a
Government review of how a Chinese threat actor accessed
sensitive information by exploiting vulnerabilities in one of
their products.
Turning to the report's findings, the CSRB determined that
last summer's intrusion was, ``preventable and never should
have occurred''. Additionally, it found that, ``Microsoft's
security culture was inadequate and requires an overhaul''.
As someone responsible for overseeing the security of
Federal networks that rely heavily on Microsoft and as a user
of Microsoft products myself, I find these observations deeply
troubling.
The CSRB report exhaustively described how last summer's
incident occurred and includes a thorough history of the threat
actor's previous activities. Importantly, the report observed
that the security community has been tracking the threat actor
for over 20 years.
Over that time, the threat actor has demonstrated tactics
and objectives like those we saw in last summer's attack.
Dating back to Operation Aurora in 2009 and the RSA compromise
in 2011, the threat actor has a well-documented interest
compromising cloud identity systems, stealing signing keys, and
forging tokens that would enable access to targeted customer
accounts.
For over a decade, every technology provider in the world
has been on notice and should have stepped up their approach to
securing identity and authentication accordingly, but the CSRB
found Microsoft did not do so.
While Microsoft did cooperate with the CSRB investigation,
the board found the company was slow to fully transparent--to
be fully transparent with the public, most notably about how
the threat actor obtained the signing key. To this day, we
still do not know how the threat actor accessed the signing
key.
Microsoft's explanations about why the key was still active
in 2023 and why it worked for both consumer and enterprise
accounts have not been comforting. I remain troubled that
Microsoft was reluctant to be transparent with the public that
it was not confident about the root cause of the incident.
My concerns about whether we can rely on Microsoft to be
transparent were heightened this morning when I read a
ProPublica article about how an employee alerted Microsoft's
leadership to a vulnerability in its Active Directory
Federation Service before security researchers publicly
reported it in 2017. That vulnerability, which Microsoft chose
not to fix, was ultimately used by Russian hackers to carry out
secondary phases of the SolarWinds attack in 2020.
Even more troubling, the article recounts Microsoft's
testimony before the Senate in 2021 which denied that any
Microsoft vulnerability was exploited in SolarWinds.
Transparency is a foundation of trust, and Microsoft needs to
be more transparent.
In 2002, Bill Gates said, ``When we face a choice between
adding features and resolving security issues, we need to
choose security''. The CSRB found that Microsoft had, ``drifted
away from this ethos''. I agree.
Last November, Microsoft announced the Secure Future
Initiative, touting a reinvigorated approach to security. But,
in January, Microsoft itself was compromised by Russian threat
actors who used unsophisticated tactics to access the emails of
high-level employees. Unfortunately, those emails included
correspondence with Government officials and put the security
of Federal networks at risk once again. Basic cybersecurity
tools that were not enabled would have thwarted this intrusion.
In May, following the CSRB report, Microsoft announced an
expansion of the Secure Future Initiative that committed to
making security a top priority. But, the same month, Microsoft
announced Recall, a new feature that takes and stores periodic
snapshots of a user's computer screen, which has raised
concerns among both privacy and security experts.
I understand that, last Friday, Microsoft modified the
roll-out of Recall in order to incorporate significant changes.
I hope it will continue to consider these concerns of security
and privacy as it rolls out new products.
On a final note, I've been warned that the committee's
oversight of this incident will chill private-sector
cooperation with the board in the future. That cannot and
should not be the case.
I want to put future subjects of CSRB investigations on
notice: This committee will not tolerate refusals to cooperate
with legitimate investigations undertaken by the board,
particularly when Federal networks are involved. Any effort to
obstruct CSRB investigations into cyber incidents would invite
significant scrutiny by this committee and would certainly
force expedited consideration of proposals to grant CSRB
greater investigatory powers.
Microsoft is one the Federal Government's most important
technology and security partners, but we cannot afford to allow
the importance of that relationship to enable complacency or
interfere with our oversight. National security demands that
technology providers continue the evolution toward transparency
so we can better secure the digital ecosystem.
With that, I look forward, Mr. Chairman, to a productive
conversation today about how Microsoft will improve its
security culture and thereby the security of its customers, and
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
June 13, 2024
I would like to thank the Chairman for holding today's hearing on
the Cyber Safety Review Board's (CSRB) investigation of an intrusion
into Federal networks involving Microsoft. At the outset, I want to
make clear: this is not a ``gotcha'' hearing. It is not the committee's
goal to shame, embarrass, or discredit the witness, Microsoft, or any
other entity mentioned in the CSRB report.
We have three objectives today: Accountability, securing Federal
networks, and securing the broader internet ecosystem.
Last year, we were disturbed to learn that a state-sponsored threat
actor from China had accessed the e-mail accounts of high-ranking
officials at the Departments of State and Commerce and an e-mail
account of a Member of Congress, among others.
As the investigation unfolded, we learned that the threat actor
accessed these accounts by forging tokens using a stolen signing key
from 2016 and that the State Department--not Microsoft--had discovered
the intrusion. By August, Secretary Mayorkas announced that the CSRB
would review the Microsoft Exchange Online intrusion and the malicious
targeting of cloud environments.
The CSRB engaged in a thorough and expeditious review, and its
report was released earlier this year. The CSRB did exactly the kind of
review it was supposed to do, and it did so in a manner only the
Government can. The CSRB examined a serious incident and made pointed
findings and recommendations that will ultimately improve how
Microsoft, other cloud service providers, and the Government approach
security.
It is incumbent on this committee to hold Microsoft--one of the
Federal Government's most prominent IT vendors and security partners--
accountable for the findings and recommendations in the report.
Microsoft deserves credit for cooperating with the board's
investigation. But make no mistake: It is Congress's expectation that
Microsoft--or any similarly-situated company--would do so. Microsoft's
is one of the largest technology suppliers in the world, and its
products are used by governments and private-sector entities alike. The
company provides an estimated 85 percent of the productivity software
used by the Federal Government. Microsoft also sells security tools and
is one of the Government's top cloud service providers. Moreover, a
reported 25 to 30 percent of its Government revenue comes from non-
competitive contracts, at least in part due to the terms of its
licensing agreements.
Any company with such a significant footprint in our Federal
networks has an obligation to cooperate with a Government review of how
a Chinese threat actor accessed sensitive information by exploiting
vulnerabilities in one of their products.
Turning to the report's findings: The CSRB determined that last
summer's intrusion was ``preventable and never should have occurred.''
Additionally, it found that ``Microsoft's security culture was
inadequate and requires an overhaul.'' As someone responsible for
overseeing the security of Federal networks that rely heavily on
Microsoft, and as a user of Microsoft products myself, I find these
observations deeply troubling. The CSRB report exhaustively describes
how last summer's incident occurred and includes a thorough history of
the threat actor's previous activities.
Importantly, the report observed that the security community has
been tracking the threat actor for over 20 years. Over that time, the
threat actor has demonstrated tactics and objectives like those we saw
in last summer's attack. Dating back to Operation Aurora in 2009 and
the R.S.A. compromise in 2011, the threat actor has a well-documented
interest compromising cloud identity systems, stealing signing keys,
and forging tokens that would enable access to targeted customer
accounts. For over a decade, every technology provider in the world has
been on notice and should have stepped-up their approach to securing
identity and authentication accordingly.
But the CSRB found Microsoft did not do so. And while Microsoft did
cooperate with the CSRB investigation, the board found the company was
slow to be fully transparent with the public, most notably about how
the threat actor obtained the signing key. To this day, we still do not
know how the threat actor accessed the signing key. Microsoft's
explanations about why the key was still active in 2023 and why it
worked for both consumer and enterprise accounts have not been
comforting. And I remain troubled that Microsoft was reluctant to be
transparent with the public that it was not confident about the root
cause of the incident.
My concerns about whether we can rely on Microsoft to be
transparent were heightened this morning when I read a ProPublica
article about how an employee alerted Microsoft leadership to a
vulnerability in its Active Directory Federation Services before
security researchers publicly reported it in 2017. That vulnerability--
which Microsoft chose not to fix--was ultimately used by Russian
hackers to carry out secondary phases of the SolarWinds attack in 2020.
Even more troubling, the article recounts Microsoft's testimony
before the Senate in 2021, which denied that any Microsoft
vulnerability was exploited in SolarWinds. Transparency is the
foundation of trust, and Microsoft needs to be more transparent.
In 2002, Bill Gates said ``When we face a choice between adding
features and resolving security issues, we need to choose security.''
The CSRB found that Microsoft had ``drifted away from this ethos.'' I
agree.
Last November, Microsoft announced the Secure Future Initiative,
touting a re-invigored approach to security. But in January, Microsoft
itself was compromised by Russian threat actors who used
unsophisticated tactics to access the emails of high-level employees.
Unfortunately, those emails included correspondence with Government
officials and put the security of Federal networks at risk once again.
Basic cybersecurity tools--that were not enabled--would have thwarted
the intrusion.
In May, following the CSRB report, Microsoft announced an expansion
of the Secure Future Initiative that committed to making security the
top priority. But the same month, Microsoft announced ``Recall''--a new
feature that takes and stores periodic snapshots of a user's computer
screen, which has raised concerns among both privacy and security
experts. I understand that last Friday, Microsoft modified the rollout
of Recall in order to incorporate significant changes. I hope it will
continue take the concerns of the security and privacy community
seriously as it does so.
On a final note, I have been warned that the committee's oversight
of this incident will chill private-sector cooperation with the board
in the future. That cannot--and should not--be the case. I want to put
future subjects of CSRB investigations on notice: this committee will
not tolerate refusal to cooperate with legitimate investigations
undertaken by the board--particularly when Federal networks are
involved.
Any efforts to obstruct CSRB investigations into cyber incidents
would invite significant scrutiny from this committee and would
certainly force expedited consideration of proposals to grant the CSRB
greater investigatory powers.
Microsoft is one of the Federal Government's most important
technology and security partners. But we cannot afford to allow the
importance of that relationship to enable complacency or interfere with
our oversight. National security demands that technology providers
continue the evolution toward transparency so we can better secure the
digital ecosystem. With that, I look forward to a productive
conversation today about how Microsoft will work to improve its
security culture, and thereby the security of its customers.

Chairman Green. I thank the Ranking Member for his opening
remarks.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted to the record.
I am pleased to have a distinguished witness here before us
today.
I ask that our witness please rise and raise his right
hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Chairman Green. Let the record reflect that the witness has
answered in the affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our witness.
Mr. Brad Smith currently serves as the vice chair and
president of Microsoft Corporation, where he plays a pivotal
role in steering the company's strategic direction and legal
affairs.
He joined Microsoft in 1993, initially leading the legal
and corporate affairs team in Paris, and later held various
senior roles in the legal and corporate affairs department.
Under his leadership, Microsoft has tackled significant
legal challenges and been at the forefront of critical policy
debates, including cybersecurity, privacy, and artificial
intelligence, among other issues. He has testified numerous
times before the U.S. Congress and other governments on these
key policy issues.
Before joining Microsoft, Mr. Smith worked as an associate
and then partner at Covington & Burling, a prestigious law firm
here in Washington. He holds a bachelor's degree from Princeton
University and a law degree from Columbia University.
I thank the witness for being here.
I now recognize Mr. Smith for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRAD SMITH, VICE CHAIR AND PRESIDENT, MICROSOFT
CORPORATION

Mr. Smith. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you,
Ranking Minority Member Thompson. Thank you to all of you for
the opportunity to be here today.
I think you, between the two of you, captured so well so
much of what is so important for us to talk about this
afternoon.
A lot of times in life, the most important words to heed
are words that are difficult to hear. So, as you can imagine,
as I listened to the two of you just now, it wasn't how I hoped
I might spend an afternoon in June when the year began.
But we're here for an important reason. It starts with the
role this committee plays: the protection of the homeland
security of the United States. The reality is, you cannot
protect the homeland security of this country without
protecting the cybersecurity of it as well. That is a shared
responsibility between the public and private sectors. Hence,
what you do to oversee us and others in the private sector is
critical.
I think the most important thing for me to say, the most
important thing for me to write in my written testimony, is
that we accept responsibility for each and every finding in the
CSRB report.
As you can imagine, you get a report, you look at it, it's
difficult to read; you sort-of think, how are you going to
react? When I sat down with Satya Nadella, Microsoft's chairman
and CEO, we both resolved immediately that we would react
without any defensiveness, without equivocation, without
hesitation, and we would instead use this report to make
Microsoft and the cybersecurity protection of this country
better. That's our goal.
Part of that, frankly, involves accepting responsibility,
apologizing to those that were impacted, as I have done in
person. It involves reminding our employees of something that I
often say to them: No one ever died of humility. Use the
mistakes you make so you can learn from them and get better.
Of course, that only works if you actually use what you
learn and you do get better. I appreciate that's where both of
you are pushing, quite rightly. That involves two things: It
involves strategy, and it involves culture.
So, from a strategic perspective, we did start last
November to apply the lessons we were learning already from
Storm-0558. That's why we launched the Secure Future
Initiative.
But I think, here, what's most important is the CSRB's
recommendations. There are 25 of them. Sixteen are really
applicable to us--4 only to us, 12 to all cloud services and
other technology providers. So we have mapped all 16 of those
recommendations onto our plan for our Secure Future Initiative
so that we will do each and every one of them, and we're making
progress.
But we're not stopping there. There's 18 other concrete
recommendations that we have incorporated as part of this plan.
We have measurable milestones. In fact, we now have the
equivalent, full-time, of 34,000 engineers working on this
project. This is the largest engineering project focused on
cybersecurity in the history of digital technology.
But I think you asked a second question as well: Is that
enough? I think, if we did that alone, it would not be. That's
what you're saying, and those are words I heed as well. That is
why we're focused on changing, strengthening, and building a
world-class security culture. I look forward to talking about
that.
It starts with the tone at the top. It needs to reach all
of our employees. Just yesterday, our board of directors
approved two new steps. One will change the compensation of our
most senior people so that annual bonuses are tied in part to
cybersecurity with an exclusive focus on it. But, second, I
think, even more that that, that this will become part of the
biannual review for every employee at Microsoft, what they're
doing on cybersecurity.
Then I would conclude by saying that I think the two of you
captured so well everything else we need to think about here.
Because if we improve Microsoft alone, that won't be enough.
We're dealing with four formidable foes in China, Russia, North
Korea, Iran. They're getting better; they're getting more
aggressive. We should all expect them to work together. They're
waging attacks at an extraordinary rate.
So I welcome the opportunity to ask ourselves to learn
together, what can we do in that space as well? You frame some
excellent ideas in your two openings. I look forward to talking
about them.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Smith follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brad Smith
June 11, 2024
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear to discuss
Microsoft's commitment and on-going work to strengthen cybersecurity
protection. As you know, this work comes in part in response to the
Cyber Safety Review Board's (CSRB) report on the Microsoft Exchange
Online cyber intrusion in 2023 by malicious actors referred to as
Storm-0558, affiliated with the People's Republic of China.
Let me first note my appreciation for the critical role this
committee plays in protecting the homeland security of the United
States. In the world today, America's homeland cannot be secured
without protecting the cyber domain. Cybersecurity has become a
collective duty that spans both the public and private sectors. Given
this committee's responsibilities, I appreciate the importance of your
oversight not only of the Executive branch, but of tech companies.
Before I say anything else, I think it's especially important for
me to say that Microsoft accepts responsibility for each and every one
of the issues cited in the CSRB's report. Without equivocation or
hesitation. And without any sense of defensiveness. But rather with a
complete commitment to address every recommendation and use this report
as an opportunity and foundation to strengthen our cybersecurity
protection across the board.
We are taking action to address every one of the CSRB's
recommendations applicable to Microsoft. To put this in context, the
CSRB's report provides 25 recommendations, 16 of which apply to
Microsoft. Four of these are directed to Microsoft specifically and the
remaining 12 recommendations are addressed to all cloud service
providers (CSPs). We are acting on all 16 of these recommendations.
But we are not stopping there. We have added another 18 concrete
security objectives, reflecting the work we started last summer after
we assessed the shortfalls we identified from the Storm-0558 intrusion
from China. As a result, last November we launched a company-wide
initiative, called the Secure Future Initiative (SFI), to act on this
learning. We expanded this work in January after an aggressive attack
by the Russian Foreign Intelligence Agency, or SVR, and then expanded
it again in March after the CSRB report.
We recognize that Microsoft plays a unique and critical
cybersecurity role. Not only for our customers, but for this country.
And not only for this country, but for this Nation's allies. This role
reflects the wide range of products and services Microsoft provides to
individuals and organizations, including cloud services that operate
through data centers located in 32 countries around the world. It also
reflects the broad cybersecurity work we undertake every day, including
for and in close collaboration with the United States and numerous
allied governments.
This role brings with it tremendous responsibility. Expanding and
intensifying geopolitical conflicts have created a more dangerous cyber
world. It's no accident that the first shots fired in the war against
Ukraine were malicious cyber attacks by the Russian military. And it's
no coincidence that the first people to detect these attacks were
located not in Ukraine, but near Seattle working in Microsoft's Threat
Intelligence Center.
In the 28 months since that war began and as tensions have grown
elsewhere, we have seen more prolific, well-resourced, and
sophisticated cyber attacks by 4 countries--Russia, China, Iran, and
North Korea. By any measure, lawless and aggressive cyber activity has
reached an extraordinary level. During the past year, Microsoft
detected 47 million phishing attacks against our network and employees.
But this is modest compared to the 345 million cyber attacks we detect
against our customers every day. Too often these actions take place
without effective reprisals or deterrence, reflecting in part the
degree to which international law and norms of conduct are incomplete
or lack meaningful enforcement.
For those of us who work at Microsoft, the implications could not
be clearer. At one level, the CSRB's recommendations speak to everyone
who works at any company providing cloud services and in technology
positions more broadly. But more than anything, they are a clarion call
for stronger action for every employee who works at Microsoft.
As a company, we need to strive for perfection in protecting this
Nation's cybersecurity. Any day we fall short is a bad day for
cybersecurity and a terrible moment at Microsoft. While perfection in
the face of aggressive nation-state cyber attacks is difficult to
achieve, we always must be the first not only to recognize but to
accept responsibility and apologize when attacks penetrate our network
like the 2 from China and Russia did this past year, especially when,
as the CSRB noted, stronger steps would have prevented them.
That is what we are doing here. We acknowledge that we can and must
do better, and we apologize and express our deepest regrets to those
who have been impacted. This is the message I have conveyed personally
when talking with individuals impacted in our Government, as well as
elsewhere. It's something for all our employees to embrace. As I often
say inside Microsoft, ``no one ever died of humility.'' To the
contrary, a willingness to acknowledge our shortcomings and address
problems head-on inspires us to learn from our mistakes and to apply
the lessons we learn so we constantly can get better.
In sum, we accept responsibility for the past and are applying what
we've learned to help build a more secure future. We are pursuing new
strategies, investing more resources, and fostering a stronger
cybersecurity culture. We have reallocated resources and have assigned
technical and engineering employees across the company to this
endeavor, dedicating the equivalent of 34,000 full-time engineers to
what has become the single largest cybersecurity engineering project in
the history of digital technology. And we are identifying new
opportunities not just for ourselves, but for all our customers and for
greater collaboration across the private and public sectors.
Let me share some of the details.
microsoft's secure future initiative
As I described above, we launched our Secure Future Initiative as a
multi-year endeavor to evolve the way we design, build, test, and
operate our products and services. It is focused on achieving the
highest possible standards for security and is grounded in three core
cybersecurity tenets that apply across Microsoft:

Secure by Design.--Make security the first priority when
designing any product or service.

Secure by Default.--Ensure that security protections are
enabled and enforced by default, require no extra effort, and
are not optional.

Secure Operations.--Ensure that security controls and
monitoring will continuously be improved to meet current and
future threats.
This approach will enable us to establish stronger multi-layered
defenses to counter the most sophisticated and well-resourced nation-
state actors. To implement these tenets, Microsoft has defined specific
engineering goals and key performance indicators divided into the
following 6 pillars:

Protect Identities and Secrets.--Reduce the risk of
unauthorized access to any data by implementing and enforcing
best-in-class standards across our infrastructure that manages
identities and sensitive information such as passwords
(``secrets''), to ensure that only the right people and
applications access the right resources.

Protect Tenants and Isolate Production Systems.--Use
consistent, best-in-class security practices and continuously
validate isolation of production systems--including those upon
which we operate the Microsoft Cloud.

Protect Networks.--Continuously improve and implement best-
in-class practices to protect Microsoft production networks.

Protect Engineering Systems.--Continuously improve our
software supply chain and the systems that enable Microsoft
engineers to develop, build, test, and release software,
thereby protecting software assets and improving code security.

Monitor and Detect Threats.--Continuously improve coverage
and automatic detection of ever-evolving threats to Microsoft
production infrastructure and services, accelerating actioning
against those threats.

Accelerate Response and Remediation.--Enhance our response
and remediation practices when we learn of vulnerabilities in
our offerings or our infrastructure, to be even more
comprehensive and timely and better prevent exploitation of
those vulnerabilities.
Perhaps most importantly for purposes of this hearing, we worked
this spring to map all 16 of the CSRB's recommendations applicable to
Microsoft to ensure that we are addressing them as part of the Secure
Future Initiative. For example, we are actively in the process of
transitioning both our consumer and enterprise identity systems to a
new hardened key management system that leverages hardware security
modules for the storage and generation of keys. We are rolling out
proprietary data and corresponding detection signals at all places
where tokens are validated. And we have made significant progress on
Automated and Frequent Key Rotation, Common Auth Libraries, and
Proprietary Data used in our token generation algorithm.
We have invited the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA), on behalf of the CSRB, to Microsoft's headquarters for a
detailed technical briefing on these and all our other engineering
objectives, including the specific ways we are implementing the CSRB's
recommendations. We also will keep the committee fully informed on our
progress in addressing all 16 recommendations, plus our other steps.
It is important to note that we do not see the CSRB's
recommendations nor our additional 18 SFI objectives as a ``to do''
list that we tick off, so that we can declare eventually that our job
is complete. Security does not work that way. Threat actors will always
attack with the full breadth of human ingenuity. Our cybersecurity will
never be complete. Rather, these steps are emblematic of a corporate-
wide and permanent shift to ensure that we place security above all
else in a world in which there is constant combat in cyber space.
the importance of culture
There is a well-known business adage that ``culture eats strategy
for breakfast.'' Business history unfortunately is littered with
companies that had a brilliant strategy but a weak culture. From the
moment we learned that the CSRB urged Microsoft to address our
cybersecurity culture, we concluded almost instinctively that this is a
critical facet that we need to embrace rather than resist.
Culture of course starts with the ``tone from the top'' and
ultimately needs to be lived by every employee. When I first discussed
the CSRB's focus on our security culture with Satya Nadella,
Microsoft's chairman and CEO, he embraced the culture point
immediately. As he said, we each needed to make this the most important
thing we do as leaders of the company. It is more important even than
the company's work on artificial intelligence. And we needed to sit
down with Microsoft's Senior Leadership Team \1\ to work on this
together.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Microsoft's Senior Leadership Team or SLT is comprised of 16
executives with the following titles: chairman and chief executive
officer; vice chair and president; executive vice president and chief
financial officer; executive vice president and chief technology
officer; executive vice president and chief human resources officer;
executive vice president, Cloud & AI; executive vice president and
chief executive officer, Microsoft AI; executive vice president,
Experiences & Devices; executive vice president, Microsoft Security;
executive vice president and chief commercial officer; executive vice
president and chief marketing officer; chief executive officer,
LinkedIn; chief executive officer, Microsoft Gaming; executive vice
president, Strategic Missions + Technologies; executive vice president,
Business Development, Strategy and Ventures; executive vice president
and consumer chief marketing officer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Both as a Senior Leadership Team and with Microsoft's Board of
Directors, we have spent considerable time the past 2 months focused on
reviewing the security culture we have and re-defining the world-class
security culture we want to foster. As with anything this important,
this has required a lot of discussion and careful thought. Culture
change always requires multiple facets, and the difficulty of achieving
real and lasting success should not be underestimated.
The good news is that we have substantial experience in this area.
Few companies in the past decade have done as much work as Microsoft to
reinvent themselves by redefining their culture. In 2014, when Satya
became Microsoft's CEO, he led the company through a cultural
transformation based on a north star focused on developing a ``growth
mindset,'' unleashing curiosity and innovation at every level by
encouraging employees to become ``learn-it-alls'' instead of ``know-it-
alls.''
We are calling on our capabilities for cultural change to
strengthen our security culture, starting with a north star that we've
communicated across the company to make security the top priority at
Microsoft, above all else. To help make this concrete, Satya wrote to
every employee:

``If you're faced with the tradeoff between security and another
priority, your answer is clear: Do security. In some cases, this will
mean prioritizing security above other things we do, such as releasing
new features or providing ongoing support for legacy systems.''\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See Prioritizing security above all else--The Official
Microsoft Blog.

While this clarity is critical, it's only the start of what is
needed for a broad-based and effective security culture. As our Senior
Leadership Team discussed this cultural evolution, we concluded that it
makes sense to treat security as the most important attribute of
product quality. And in so doing, there is a lot we can apply from
business learning both across Microsoft and around the world in
building high-quality products.
Some of the most creative and effective work in this regard brought
together post-World War II American business thinking with new
innovations in the 1980's that enabled Toyota and other Japanese auto
companies to build a global reputation for reliable, high-quality cars.
The resulting Total Quality Management (TQM) system has continued to
evolve in ensuing decades, and many of the most successful American
companies apply a form of it today.
A TQM system focuses on customer needs and continuous improvement,
recognizing that there is always room for improvement, no matter how
small. Critically, it involves total participation across a company,
with every employee participating in the process of quality
improvement.
At the heart of these various approaches is something we believe
will become a vital part of Microsoft's security culture--empowering
and rewarding every employee to find security issues, report them, help
fix them, and encourage broader learning from the process and the
results. This requires that we incorporate this security work as an
indispensable and integrated element in every aspect of the company's
engineering processes, as you can see reflected in the 3 core tenets of
the Secure Future Initiative.
An added aspect we've learned from our prior work is that culture
change requires constant practice and role modeling. This is one of the
many reasons that our Senior Leadership Team has been devoting part of
its weekly meeting for a standing deep dive into 1 of the 6 SFI
pillars, as well as a discussion of other specific security issues and
an assessment of how we are doing overall. We're replicating this focus
across the company, while making a point of talking explicitly about
the role of our SFI tenets in both internal and external product
discussions--as we did last Friday when we announced a feature change
to our upcoming Copilot+ PCs.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See ``Update on the Recall preview feature for Copilot+ PCs,''
Microsoft Windows Blog, June 7, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Effective culture change also requires the resources needed for
success. This is why we have added 1,600 more security engineers this
fiscal year, and we will add another 800 new security positions in our
next fiscal year.
We've coupled this expansion of resources with important changes in
the company's security governance. In addition to the critical long-
standing role of the company's chief information security officer, or
CISO, we have created the Office of the CISO with senior-level deputy
CISOs to expand oversight of the various engineering teams to assess
and ensure that security is ``baked into'' engineering decision making
and processes.
Ultimately, culture change requires accountability. This is
something all our senior leaders understand, starting with Satya as the
company's CEO. Rather than delegate overall security responsibility to
someone else, he has taken on the responsibility personally to serve as
the senior executive with overall accountability for Microsoft's
security.
This is also why we announced on May 3 that part of the
compensation of the company's Senior Leadership Team will be based on
our progress in meeting our security plans and milestones. Since that
time, we've worked to refine these compensation and other
accountability steps for the next fiscal year, which begins on July 1.
Tomorrow, Microsoft's board of directors will review and finalize this
program, and I look forward to reporting on the board's decisions and
discussing them with you at the hearing on Thursday.
a more dangerous threat landscape
We also recognize that we must continue to adapt to a dynamic and
intensifying threat landscape. Today, Microsoft tracks more than 300
nation-state actors. We report what we see through frequent
cybersecurity technical blogs, podcasts, and other resources,\4\ and we
summarize all that we track across the company annually in our
Microsoft Digital Defense Reports.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, e.g., Threat Intelligence Thought Leadership/Security
Insider (microsoft.com); Microsoft Security Response Center; Microsoft
Security Blog/Digital Security Tips and Solutions.
\5\ Intelligence Reports (microsoft.com).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Recent years have brought sobering cybersecurity developments that,
if anything, get less public attention and discussion than they
deserve. Unlike attacks from tanks, planes, or ground troops, cyber
attacks are invisible to the naked eye. But they move across the
internet at the speed of light, crossing borders and attacking domestic
infrastructure on American soil, too often destroying property and
putting American citizens' lives at risk.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See, e.g., DEFENDING-OT-OPERATIONS-AGAINST-ONGOING-PRO-RUSSIA-
HACKTI- VIST-ACTIVITY.PDF (defense.gov), May 1, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Geopolitical tensions since Russia invaded Ukraine have led to more
dangerous conflict in cyber space. The 2 successful attacks by Russian
and Chinese actors against Microsoft in fact reflect broader changes
that are sweeping in their reach. As we take stock not only of these
recent attacks but of all the data we see, a few key conclusions
emerge.
First, the pace of attacks has increased to the point where there
is now constant combat in cyber space. Not just every day, but
literally every second. Microsoft alone detects almost 4,000 password-
based attacks against our customers every second of every day.
We're also seeing a steady increase in attacks by state-based cyber
actors in Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea. These have increased
steadily not only against Microsoft but against individuals and
organizations around the world.
Second, nation-state adversaries are becoming more aggressive. We
are seeing a higher level of technical sophistication that almost
certainly reflects the investment of more resources and expanded work
to strengthen technical know-how. But more disconcerting still is the
more aggressive nature of nation-state attacks. To take two examples:

One year ago, Microsoft detected a Chinese nation-state
actor compromising and pre-positioning ``web-shell'' back doors
in the networks of a wide range of critical infrastructure in
the United States and Guam using very sophisticated techniques.
This included routing their attacks through compromised home
routers. We disclosed this to the U.S. Government and the
public and worked with Government agencies to continue to
investigate these attacks. This activity put civilians and
civilian infrastructure at risk, including our electricity and
water supplies and air traffic control systems.

The Russian Foreign Intelligence Agency, or SVR, continues
to be one of the best-resourced and most sophisticated cyber
agencies in the world. This past year, we have seen it become
more aggressive as well. For example, in the past the SVR's
hackers typically would withdraw from a computer environment
once their intrusion was discovered. The past 6 months, we have
seen them pour more resources once discovered into what in
effect is hand-to-hand combat to control a computer
environment.
Third, we're seeing a more direct relationship between nation-state
activity and cyber crime, especially in Russia and North Korea. While
the latter's government ministries have long self-funded parts of their
budgets through cyber-based financial theft, the Russian activity has
taken a new turn. We believe the SVR in part is retaining its top
engineers by enabling them to take what they learn during the day and
use the same tools to work with impunity in criminal ransomware
operations at night and on the weekends. This is creating a vicious
cycle reinforcing nation-state and ransomware activity.
Ransomware has become a particularly heinous form of cyber crime,
as it threatens the destruction of computers and disruption of critical
services to increase the prospects of recovering the ransom they
demand. Perhaps most sobering, ransomware has become a plague on the
health care sector, including in the United States. The FBI estimated
in its 2023 Internet Crime Report that health care has become the
sector most frequently targeted by ransomware. The number of such
attacks last year against U.S. health care providers increased by 128
percent, claiming 389 health care organizations as victims.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Ransomware_Attacks_Surge_in_2023.pdf (dni.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The impacts of these attacks are real and frightening. For example,
last Thanksgiving, a cyber attack on Ardent Health Services, a
Tennessee-based company owning more than 2 dozen hospitals across at
least 5 States, caused ambulances to be diverted from hospitals in East
Texas and forced hospitals in New Jersey, New Mexico, and Oklahoma to
reroute ambulances. During such attacks, hospitals lose access to
electronic medical records, medical imaging systems fail, and some
patients must be transported to other facilities. Experts from the
University of Minnesota School of Public Health have linked cyber
attacks between 2017 and 2021 to the deaths of 67 Medicare patients in
the United States, a number they believe is likely underestimated.
On February 21, 2024, United Health Group was targeted by the
Russian-speaking BlackCat (ALPHV) ransomware group. The attack shut
down the largest health care payment system in the United States, which
processes nearly 40 percent of all medical claims. This created a
backlog of unpaid claims, causing serious cash-flow problems for
doctors' offices and hospitals and threatening patients' access to
care. The United Health CEO estimated one-third of Americans could be
impacted to some extent by the attack.
Fourth and finally, we must prepare for the likelihood that
America's nation-state adversaries will collaborate more closely in
cyber space. Russia and China are already working together when it
comes to other forms of military and intelligence activity, and they
are more closely connected with North Korea and Iran as well. We must
work on the assumption that the geopolitical trends we see in the
physical world will manifest themselves in cyber space as well.
This is grave at multiple levels. It's one thing to engage in cyber
combat with 4 separate nation-state adversaries, but quite another
scenario if 2 or all 4 of these countries work in tandem.
This mounting danger is qualitative as well as quantitative. This
is because each of the four countries--and especially Russia and
China--are well-resourced and highly capable on their own. But they
have capabilities in different areas, from software engineering to
machine learning to computational resources to social science. The
greater danger for the United States and our allies is that these
countries will not just combine forces but build up each other's cyber-
attack capabilities as they do so.
Unfortunately, this is where the future is likely going.
This makes all the CSRB's 25 recommendations more important. Not
just the 16 that speak to Microsoft or the 12 directed at other cloud
service providers. But also, the other 9 addressed to the Government
and to public-private collaboration.
we all live in the same connected world
Make no mistake, we are all in this together. The CSRB report was
sparked by a successful Chinese attack on Microsoft, and we understand
every day that we have by far the first and greatest responsibility to
heed its words. We're committed to doing so and to playing an
indispensable leadership role in defending not just our customers, but
this country and its allies. But no single company can protect a
country and other nations from what is emerging as a cyber war waged by
4 aggressive governments. Cybersecurity protection requires a whole-of-
industry and whole-of-society mission across multiple countries. Each
of us can and must learn from each other and work together to protect
cybersecurity for our Nation and the world.
A huge part of the problem today is that our adversaries are
operating on an uneven playing field, benefiting from at least 2
attributes:

Nation-state attackers too often attack without meaningful
reprisal, consequence, or deterrence. International law or
norms of conduct are incomplete and lack meaningful
enforcement.

Like all threat actors, nation-state attackers have the
first mover advantage. Private-sector parties like Microsoft
can only play defense. This is a huge advantage to the
attacker. During the past 18 months, when the 2 attacks from
China and Russia occurred, resources on our network were,
conservatively, targeted more than 80 million times. By this
measure, our defense is both successful and yet not good
enough.
I want to express enormous gratitude to all those who are fighting
to defend our country in this war in cyber space. This includes our
customer organizations, including their CISOs. This also includes our
competitors and their CISOs. Yes, our companies compete fiercely, and
we negotiate for our respective interests fiercely. But we also
recognize that there is a higher calling, a common bond that knits us
all together, and that is to keep our organizations, our people, our
country, and our allies safe and secure.
The Federal Government in the United States has made many important
strides in recent years in strengthening cybersecurity protection. But
as with everyone else, we will need the Government to do even more. For
your consideration, we include some ideas below of how the Government--
and this committee--can do more in support of cyber defense.

Enhance effective deterrence and heighten accountability by
attributing malicious cyber activity. Today, public attribution
remains inconsistent and much of the malicious cyber activity
remains in the shadows. Deter nation-state threat actors by
imposing appropriate punishment so that the actions of nation-
state actors are not without a cost. To accomplish this,
Congress should assess whether additional steps are needed to
strengthen countermeasures against nation-state threat actors.

Embrace the CSRB report's Government-focused recommendations
and move quickly to implement them just as the private sector
should adopt the set of 12 recommendations directed to it. The
overarching recommendation is for the U.S. Government to
``updat[e] both the FedRAMP program itself as well as the
supporting frameworks that implement the Federal Information
Security Modernization Act (FISMA) such as the NIST RMF.''
Recommendations 21 through 25 provide greater specifics. Other
recommendations, such as Recommendation 18 which calls for a
cyber threat notification system such as an ``Amber Alert'',
will require Government and private-sector partnership and
Microsoft stands ready to contribute.

Reduce the overall attack surface through deterrence by
denial, i.e., improving the defensive cybersecurity of our
critical infrastructure through new funding or critical
programs.
We have an enormous amount to accomplish in 2024, starting with
Microsoft itself. But even more than this, one of the most important
lessons from the past 2 years and the 2 successful Chinese and Russian
attacks is that everything we do this year, no matter how successful,
will not likely be sufficient for the dangers we will face a year or 2
from now. The cyber domain is becoming more lawless, dangerous, and
hostile. And we need to plan and adapt accordingly.
We are grateful for the opportunity to speak with the committee and
to communicate our commitment to you, our customers, and the country
that we will continue to strengthen our security practices. Not just to
implement the CSRB's recommendations. But more broadly and beyond.
Thank you.
ADDENDUM TO WRITTEN TESTIMONY
To: Members, Homeland Security Committee
Re: Full Committee Hearing at 1:15pm on Thursday, June 13, 2024
microsoft board of directors compensation announcement/details
As I stated in the written testimony I submitted yesterday,
Microsoft's board of directors was scheduled to meet today. I'm
submitting this addendum to provide you with an update on the changes
the board discussed and approved today relating to security
accountability and compensation for the company's next fiscal year,
which begins on July 1. These changes were made to ensure that all
Microsoft employees, and particularly our senior leaders, are held even
more accountable for the company's security commitments as part of our
review and compensation processes.
At today's meeting, the board approved a recommendation from the
compensation committee to change the criteria that will be used for the
award of annual individual bonuses for the top Microsoft executives on
our Senior Leadership Team (SLT). Beginning with the start of the
company's new fiscal year on July 1, one-third of the individual
performance element for each SLT member's bonus will be based
exclusively on the committee's assessment of the executive's individual
performance relating to cybersecurity.
This assessment will be based on quantitative metrics and
qualitative assessments relating to the implementation of the CSRB's
recommendations, additional objectives in the company's Secure Future
Initiative, and other aspects of the executive's cybersecurity work and
performance. Microsoft CEO Satya Nadella and the board committee will
receive input directly from a third party that will provide an
additional and independent assessment of the company's progress in
these areas.
The board also decided that for the current fiscal year, which ends
on June 30, the compensation committee will consider explicitly each
SLT member's cybersecurity performance when it makes its annual
assessment of the executive's performance. Beyond the design changes to
our executive pay program to include a greater accountability for
cybersecurity, the board also has the ability to exercise downward
discretion on compensation outcomes as it deems appropriate.
In addition, the company will make security a mandatory part of the
bi-annual reviews for all Microsoft employees. These involve what the
company internally refers to as ``Connect'' meetings and reviews that
all employees have with their manager. Beginning with the new fiscal
year, these assessments will include a new ``core priority'' relating
to cybersecurity, so that all employees will identify and discuss the
work they do relating to cybersecurity with their manager. With this
change, cybersecurity will be considered in every employee's annual
bonus and compensation.
These changes are being made in addition to the company's updating
of the on-going mandatory security training that is in place for all
Microsoft employees to reflect recent lessons learned and the steps
being taken as part of the Secure Future Initiative.
I will be happy to answer any questions about any of this when the
hearing takes place tomorrow.
Brad Smith

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. I want to remind everyone to please
keep their questioning to 5 minutes. An additional round of
questioning may be called after all Members have been
recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I was intrigued from your statement and your written
statement about the--you know, let me start by saying this. We,
as human beings, respond to initiatives--or incentives--I'm
sorry--incentives. Economics is about the study of incentives.
You mentioned the recent payroll changes for your senior
executives. I wonder if you're at liberty to discuss how deep
that goes, you know, what level of leadership. I think that's a
novel approach, and I'd love to hear more about that.
Mr. Smith. Sure. Let me say two things.
First, the board of directors took the first step
yesterday, and it acted a bit ahead of schedule. We ordinarily
make these decisions in July, August. But for the 16 most
senior people in the company, including our CEO, including me
and others, with the new fiscal year, which starts July 1, one-
third of the individual performance element of our bonus will
be about one thing and one thing only: cybersecurity. So that's
the first thing.
Second, the board did note that, when it awards bonuses for
the fiscal year that ends at the end of this month, it will
take cybersecurity performance of the individual executive into
account.
But the thing we probably spent the most time as a senior
leadership team talking about the last month or so is how to
create incentives for everybody. Of course, it's based on the
culture of the company and our processes.
So, twice a year, every employee has a forum and a
conversation with their manager; we call it a ``connect
forum.'' They first reflect and show what they've done, and
then the manager comments, and they talk about it. So what we
have created is a new piece of this that everyone will have to
address on cybersecurity.
The thing I like about it most, to be honest, is it gives
every employee at Microsoft the opportunity to think, what have
I done, what could I do, how am I doing, and then be rewarded
at the end of the year based on that.
Chairman Green. That sounds--that's encouraging. Having run
a company myself, I think how you tie the incentives drives
performance and what people make the priority. So I appreciate
that.
Let me ask a little bit about your involvement in China.
I'd love to get a little bit more detail of granularity on
where you are right now, you know, what's your current posture
and, you know, what are you sharing with the Chinese people--or
to the Chinese Government, I mean--are you having to give up
code, and what the involvement there is.
If you don't mind elaborating on that a little bit.
Mr. Smith. Sure. It's a broad topic.
We have a few different activities in China. It's not a
major source of revenue for Microsoft globally. It accounts for
about 1.4 or 1.5 percent of our revenue.
We do have an engineering team that we have been reducing.
We announced most recently that we were offering about 800
people, 700 or 800 people, the opportunity to move out of
China, and they were going to need to move out of China in
order to keep the job they have. So we've been reducing our
engineering presence.
There are two things that we do that we believe are very
important.
First, we do run some data centers, cloud services,
principally, I would say, for the benefit of multinational
companies who do business in China. We're not alone. Others in
our industry do the same thing.
But the reason I think this is so important is, if you're
an American automobile company, an aircraft company, a
pharmaceutical company, a coffee company, you need to use the
cloud when you're in China. We want their American trade
secrets to be stored in an American data center in China----
Chairman Green. Let me, if I could, jump in. What access
does the Chinese government have to that?
Mr. Smith. None.
Chairman Green. OK.
Mr. Smith. Believe me, every time there is anything
remotely close to a request, I always ensure we say no.
Chairman Green. OK.
Very specifically on this hack--because it did come from
China--can you talk how you are, with your presence in China,
ensuring that that source isn't going to use your location in
China as a vector? I mean, what other--if you can, what are you
doing there to prevent that?
Mr. Smith. I think it involves having a very direct
understanding yourself of what your guardrails are, what your
limits are, what you can do, and what you won't do. You have to
know your own mind. We do.
Second, you've got to be prepared to look people in the eye
and say ``no'' to them.
That's something I do myself. I was in Beijing in December.
I got pushed because there was unhappiness about reports that
we've made publicly about attacks from China, about U.S.
critical infrastructure, and about, you know, influence
operations. I said, there are lines that we don't believe
government should cross. We're going to be principled, and
we're going to be public.
Chairman Green. Huh.
Mr. Smith. There are many things we're not going to do in
China, and there will be things we're not allowed to do in
China, but I think, at the end of the day, we have to know our
principles.
Chairman Green. Thank you.
My time has expired, and I now recognize the Ranking Member
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to enter into the record a ProPublica article
entitled, ``Microsoft Chose Profit Over Security and Left U.S.
Government Vulnerable to Russian Hack, Whistleblower Says.''
Chairman Green. So ordered.
[The information referred to follows:]
Article Submitted by Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Thompson. I'm sure you are somewhat familiar with that
article and the fact that we were left vulnerable with that
situation.
Can you say to us or commit to us that you have established
a process for an ombudsman to ensure that employee concerns
about security at Microsoft or their products are prioritized
and addressed?
Mr. Smith. Well, one of the changes we've just made as part
of the Secure Future Initiative is a new governance structure.
It takes our chief information security officer, or CISO, as
it's called in the industry, creates an office, and then puts
deputy CISOs in every part of the company. The job of these
individuals is to constantly monitor and assess and pick up
feedback and apply a principled approach to address these
things. So I would hope that that would address part of what
you're referring to.
I would say one other thing, though. The fundamental
cultural change that we are seeking to make is to integrate
security into every process. We've really thought a lot over
the last couple months, what's the key to getting better when
your adversary is investing and constantly changing?
The thing that we have really concluded is, there's a lot
that we can learn from what's called ``total quality
management.'' This really came out of American business
thinking, and then Toyota really innovated it in the 1980's.
The basic process was to empower every employee to focus on
continuous employment--sorry--continuous improvement and speak
up.
That's what we're trying to do: empower every employee to
be able to speak up--and there's going to be debates; I mean, I
don't think one can say that debates will end--but to ensure
that those voices are heard and heeded.
Mr. Thompson. Well--and I trust, based on what you've said,
that that will be--that, going forward, that anybody who comes
forward with something, they will be at least heard and
responded to.
With respect to that, we are here because of Storm-0558, as
it's commonly referred to. The real concern is, Microsoft
didn't find the problem; it was the State Department.
Help us out.
Mr. Smith. That's a great question. The one thing I'd ask
all of us to think about is: That's the way it should work. No
one entity in the ecosystem can see everything. So we all need
to work together. The way networks are constructed, people will
see specific endpoints.
In this case, as you know, it was the individuals at the
State Department who saw the intrusion into the State
Department email system. First of all, you ought to give those
folks a medal, in all seriousness. That is fantastic. That is
real innovation and great professionalism at work. So they let
us know.
By the way, we're the ones, interestingly enough, at the
same time, who identified the Chinese intrusions into
electricity companies, water companies, air traffic control
systems.
We're all going to see different things. So, when somebody
else sees it, we should applaud and say, ``Thank you,'' not
say, ``Oh, I wish I had found it instead.''
Mr. Thompson. Well, I wish it were that simple. But we have
a real challenge. Because you are such a big customer of
Government, we rely heavily on your product. It's not our job
to find the culprits. That's what we're paying you for. So I
want you to--don't switch the roles----
Mr. Smith. I'm not switching it at all. I----
Mr. Thompson. OK.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. Appreciate what you're saying for
sure.
Mr. Thompson. Great.
So I--maybe we'll have another round, Mr. Chairman, but----
Chairman Green. You can ask your question.
Mr. Thompson. OK. Well, thank you.
So the Federal Government is one of your largest customers,
as I said. How can you earn back the trust that this situation
has caused?
Mr. Smith. I think it's just critical that we acknowledge
shortcomings, accept responsibility, devise a strategy to
address them, change the culture, be transparent about what
we're doing, and always listen to feedback.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, congratulations on your company's success. In
fact, it's the very success of Microsoft that makes you such a
big target, isn't it?
Mr. Smith. That's certainly a part of it.
Mr. Higgins. Would you generally agree that Microsoft has
grown so massive because of your own technological advancements
that you have driven from within your company and because of
the trust that has been extended to Microsoft products through
the decades?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I think that's fair. I think success comes
from many things, but, of all of the factors that we place the
most importance on, I would say earning and retaining the trust
of our customers----
Mr. Higgins. OK. So we're in agreement, you and I.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. Microsoft's a great company. Everybody in here
has some kind of interaction with Microsoft. We really don't
have much choice. So it's critical that this committee gets
this right.
Quite frankly, the American people, myself included, we
have some issues with what has happened and how it happened and
what has transpired since. Yet there's no plan B, really. We
have to address with you, is what that means. Sometimes life
comes down to--my dad used to say, there's always one guy. It's
always one guy. Today, congratulations----
Mr. Smith. I'm the guy.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. You're the one guy.
Mr. Smith. I get it.
Mr. Higgins. So I have a couple of difficult questions, and
I apologize for any discomfort, because I am a gentleman----
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. But, again, you're the guy.
Why did Microsoft not update its blog post after the hack--
they call it--it's very fancy here, America calling it an
``intrusion.'' But after the hack, the 2023 Microsoft Online
Exchange intrusion, why did it take 6 months for Microsoft to
update the means by which most Americans would sort-of be made
aware of such a hack?
Mr. Smith. Well, first of all, I appreciate the question.
It's one that I asked our team when I read the CSRB report.
It's the part of the report that surprised me the most.
Yes, we had 5 versions of that blog, the original and then
4 updates. We do a lot of updates of these reports. When I
asked the team--you know--they said the specific thing that had
changed--namely, a theory, a hypothesis, about the cause of the
intrusion--you know, changed over time, but it didn't change in
a way that would give anyone useful or actionable information
that they could apply----
Mr. Higgins. OK. So you see, Mr. Smith, respectfully, that
answer does not encourage trust. Regular Americans listening
are going to have to--are going to have to move the tape back
on a Microsoft instrument and listen to what you said again.
Mr. Smith. But----
Mr. Higgins. But you didn't do it. I mean, you're
Microsoft, you had a major thing happen, and the means by which
you communicate with your customers was not updated for 6
months. So I'm just going to say, I don't really accept that
answer----
Mr. Smith. Could I just add----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. As thoroughly honest, but I need
to move on----
Mr. Smith. No, could I--then could I just say----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. To another question.
Mr. Smith [continuing]. I said the same thing, and we had
the same conversation inside the company.
Mr. Higgins. OK. I accept that, that you did.
So, bigger question: China. I mean, you go to China. You
meet with--you, like, went to China. I guess you've made many
trips there. You're doing business there. That's fine. But you
meet with Chinese Communist Party officials, and you reiterated
Microsoft's support for helping the CCP achieve technological
advancements. I believe this is your quote--I'm asking you--to
``actively participate in the digital transformation of China's
economy.'' I believe that was your statement.
My question is, does it strike you as contradictory that
you would make that statement just months after China sponsored
the attack that we're discussing?
I yield for your answer, sir.
Mr. Smith. The reality is, that was not my statement. I
chose my words more carefully. That was the statement made by
an official of the Chinese Government, attributing it to me.
Mr. Higgins. So that was not your quote?
Mr. Smith. I was--let me just say, I was more careful and
precise in what I said, and that was not my quote.
Mr. Higgins. So you find it as contradictory or----
Mr. Smith. Sorry?
Mr. Higgins. You say that's not your quote, but----
Mr. Smith. No, I mean, it----
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. Was that the position of
Microsoft?
Mr. Smith. It--what I----
Mr. Higgins. My time has expired. I'm just trying to
complete this answer.
Mr. Smith. I'll just--I'll just--yes, I thank you for
giving me the opportunity.
I explained in a meeting that there were areas where we
thought it was appropriate and even important for us to be
present and participate. But I did not choose or use the
words----
Mr. Higgins. OK.
Mr. Smith. When I saw that quote appear, I was like, ``Hmm,
interesting.''
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir.
My time has far expired. I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Swalwell for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman.
I wanted to echo the Ranking Member's sentiment, that I
don't view this hearing as a shaming of any particular company
but, rather, an opportunity to learn from mistakes in the past
so that we can better secure the digital ecosystem, especially
with, you know, a company that has such a large footprint in
that ecosystem.
So, first, Mr. Smith, I was hoping we could go back to the
ProPublica story where an employee alleges that a vulnerability
was discussed and it was at the same time you were seeking
Government business.
Knowing that you do have so many Government clients today,
as we sit here today, are there any vulnerabilities within your
operating system that have been expressed to you, similar to
what was alleged in the past, that would affect any Government
system that you're aware of?
Mr. Smith. What I would say is that everything that we're
doing is focused on identifying every vulnerability that we can
find, every vulnerability our employees can find, so we can go
address them.
Given the diversity of digital technology, given the
complexity, I'm not sitting here today aware of anything that
fits your description, but I am constantly hoping that every
day we'll have people who find something and raise it so we can
fix it. That's the culture we need, I think.
Mr. Swalwell. ``So we can fix it,'' which I think is the
theme----
Mr. Smith. Exactly.
Mr. Swalwell [continuing]. Here today.
In that spirit of what can we fix, what did you learn from
the internal decision-making process on updating the blog post
on the root cause of how the Chinese threat actor got the key?
Like, what would you do differently in an existing attack?
Mr. Smith. You know, we get--a lot of times, people say,
``Why do you update things so often?'' You know, ``You lose
people's attention.'' I think the answer is: Because we need
to. We updated that particular blog 4 times. It was at least
one time too few. We should've updated it again.
So I just think that the lesson learned is: You know, maybe
it's something you see a lot in life; it's hard to
overcommunicate. Let's work even harder to overcommunicate.
Mr. Swalwell. You discuss in your written testimony the
growing connection between nation-state activity and
ransomware.
A city in my Congressional district, Hayward----
Mr. Smith. Yep.
Mr. Swalwell [continuing]. Was hit very hard and
experienced a ransomware attack last year, where the city's on-
line operations were crippled and a state of emergency was
declared.
Where do you see these ransomware attacks happening? What
types of targets in the United States do you see as most at
risk?
Mr. Smith. Well, this is a critical issue. I hope this
committee and we all can find new ways to work on it. Because
it was last July in Hayward where, as you know, systems went
off-line for 2 weeks. In Hinds County, you know, in the Second
District of Mississippi, they had a similar problem. They had
to write a check for $600,000--I suspect it had to be converted
to cryptocurrency--and it was probably mailed to Moscow, even
if it was over the internet.
This is a scourge and the No. 1 vulnerability right now.
It's just, I think, so disconcerting that ransomware operators
are focused on hospitals, rural hospitals. There were 389
health care institutions last year that were victimized.
So some of the suggestions that the Chairman and Ranking
Member Thompson alluded to at the beginning, I think, require
that we all come together to help these institutions. We
launched an initiative just, you know, 3 days ago. We weren't
alone; the White House did it, Google did it. We all need to do
this together.
But I also think we need to send a message. I think that
message has to be sent to Moscow. We need to remind them that
when we fought with them 80 years ago it was to protect people,
and it was reflected 4 years later in the Geneva Convention
that said, even in times of war, governments have to protect
civilians.
This is supposed to be a time of peace, at least between
our two countries. What are they doing? They are enabling their
employees to use the tools they get at work and go home and run
these ransomware operations and target hospitals or cities and
counties, schools--the Jackson School District, the Vicksburg
Warren School District. This is unconscionable.
I think we have to find our voice, not only for ourselves
but with our allies, and not only as governments but with the
tech sector, with the business community, and we have to find a
way, as a country, to create a deterrent reaction. Because,
right now, this is just open season. It's open season on the
most vulnerable people in our country, and we have to find a
way to change that.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Gimenez for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I know a lot of other committee Members are going to home
in on the security breach. I'm more interested in Microsoft's
presence in China, which I consider to be the greatest
existential threat to our security here in the United States.
Your presence in China, is that a joint venture or is that
fully owned by Microsoft? What's the nature of that
relationship?
Mr. Smith. I don't recall all of the precise corporate
structures. We do operate as a subsidiary. We also do have a
joint--we have at least one joint venture for certain
activities.
Mr. Gimenez. Are you aware of 2017 National Intelligence
Law in China?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I am.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you know what that law states?
Mr. Smith. If I remember correctly, one of the things it
states is that, when an organization finds a vulnerability, it
has to report----
Mr. Gimenez. No, sir, that's not the one I'm talking--
that's not where I'm going, OK?
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Gimenez. So, here, I just happen to have AI myself.
Mr. Smith. Hopefully it's ours.
Mr. Gimenez. Oh, yes. I don't know. If it is, it's pretty
bad for you, because it says this----
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Gimenez [continuing]. OK?
``Yep, in China, there is a law called the National
Intelligence Law that was implemented in 2017. This law
requires all organizations and citizens to cooperate with
China's intelligence agencies, including the People's
Liberation Army, in matters of national security. While the law
does not specifically mention companies working in China, it
does apply to all organizations operating within the country,
including foreign companies.''
Do you operate in China?
Mr. Smith. Yes, we do.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you comply with this law?
Mr. Smith. No, we do not.
Mr. Gimenez. How is it you got away with not complying with
the law? Do you have a waiver from the Chinese government
saying that you don't have to comply with this law?
Mr. Smith. No, we do not, but there are----
Mr. Gimenez. You do not?
Mr. Smith [continuing]. But there are many laws--there are
two types of countries in the world: those that apply every law
they enact and those who enact certain laws but don't always
apply them. In this context, China, for that law, is in the
second category.
Mr. Gimenez. Do you really believe that? Because, look, I
sit on the Select Committee on China, and that's not the
information that we get, is that all companies in China have to
cooperate with the intelligence agencies of China and the
People's Liberation Army.
You operate in China, and you're sitting there telling me
that you don't have to comply with the laws of China?
Mr. Smith. I will tell you that there are days when
questions are put to Microsoft and they come across my desk and
I say, no, we will not do certain things.
Mr. Gimenez. But you're complied by Chinese law to do it.
The people in China that work for Microsoft are violating
Chinese law when they don't do it.
Mr. Smith. I always make sure that it's clear to the
Chinese government that if the Chinese government wants to sue
somebody they need to sue me. I have----
Mr. Gimenez. It's not about suing. In China, they don't sue
you, man. They arrest you, OK? Do you understand that?
Mr. Smith. Clearly. We make clear that there's no point in
arresting people who have no authority to do these things.
Mr. Gimenez. They have the authority to do those things
because it's their law.
Mr. Smith. No----
Mr. Gimenez. You're in China.
Mr. Smith. No. I'm talking about our employees.
Mr. Gimenez. OK, yes. Your employees in China are subject
to Chinese law.
Mr. Smith. But they----
Mr. Gimenez. Are they not?
Mr. Smith. But they don't have the ability to make these
decisions. We've taken that out of their hands.
Mr. Gimenez. I'm sorry, I just--for some reason, I just
don't trust what you're saying to me, OK?
You're operating in China. You have a cozy relationship in
China. You're there. They allow you to be there. I can't
believe that they're going to say, ``Yes, OK, no problem. You
don't have to comply with our law that everybody else does.
Every other foreign company has to, but not Microsoft.''
I--I'll take you at your word----
Mr. Smith. I can----
Mr. Gimenez [continuing]. But--but----
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez [continuing]. I'm just demonstrating to you the
problems that we have with American companies working in China
and that, for 1 percent of your resources, or of your income,
is it really worth it to be in Communist China, especially when
you have such a law that says you have to comply with their
intelligence agencies and the PLA?
Mr. Smith. The thing I would ask all of us to think about--
and I--look, I appreciate your questions and the seriousness of
them. We think constantly about these things.
I do think that there's two valuable reasons for us to be
in China, and I think they both serve the interests of the
United States. The first is to protect American information,
American trade secrets of American companies who are doing
business in China. The second is to ensure that we're always
learning from what's going on in the rest of the world----
Mr. Gimenez. That--could I--I only have 13 seconds. Could I
say this? Those American companies and all these American
secrets that are working in China, they have to comply with the
same law. Do you think they all do?
Thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Correa for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd just welcome you, Mr. Smith. Also, as the Ranking
Member said, this is not a shaming situation. But yet, you
know, reading on this issue--I've been on Homeland for 8
years--this is very disturbing. That statement is an
understatement as to how I'm feeling right now.
What do I tell my constituents back home that actually pay
you for your services, that an unsophisticated password spray,
password key, well-known vulnerabilities, enabled this to
happen?
Mr. Smith. I think--I would hope you would tell them----
Mr. Correa. I'm asking you.
Mr. Smith. Oh. What should I tell them?
Mr. Correa. What should I tell them?
Mr. Smith. I would hope that you would share with them that
we acknowledge these issues----
Mr. Correa. They are paying you for your service. It's not
a freebie. They're paying you. I pay you. I run your service up
here and at home; I also pay you for service.
Mr. Smith. I would--I want people to know, on the one
hand----
Mr. Correa. Not one hand or the other. Just tell me
straight-up----
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Correa [continuing]. What's the message?
Mr. Smith. The message has two parts. First, we see our
customers attacked more than 300 million times every day, and
we have people who work 24/7----
Mr. Correa. Are we doing our job as the Federal Government
in helping you, or is there something else we can do to help
you do your job better?
Mr. Smith. I think that there are things that we could do
more together, and I would love to see the Federal Government
focus on a few key things.
I think that the investment in cybersecurity training that
the Chairman mentioned at the outset is an imperative. I think
we have done a lot. We have trained, as a company, 203,000
people in this Nation in the last 4 years on cybersecurity. But
we need the Federal Government to do more.
I think we need Federal assistance to help our critical
infrastructure providers upgrade their technology. I think we
need the kind of----
Mr. Correa. Do you, Microsoft, need to invest more in this
area?
Mr. Smith. We are investing more. We've increased our
investment. But, more that that, I think it's----
Mr. Correa. Do you believe that Microsoft responded in a
timely basis to these known breaches?
Mr. Smith. We both responded immediately with people who
work 24/7, pretty much around-the-clock----
Mr. Correa. As soon as you found out this stuff was
happening, you responded?
Mr. Smith. I'm sorry?
Mr. Correa. As soon as you found out or you would find out
these breaches are occurring, you respond?
Mr. Smith. Oh, absolutely.
One thing I would love for you all just to know is that,
despite these tens of millions of attacks every year----
Mr. Correa. Do you respond to known vulnerabilities
immediately?
Mr. Smith. Yes. We respond to every intrusion. We address
vulnerabilities.
Mr. Correa. We know the challenges that our competitors
around the world pose to us, friendly and unfriendly. I would
love to talk to you sometime in the SCIF to tell us exactly
what it is that we need to do to make sure this doesn't happen
again, as I am beyond shocked to read about this situation.
You have our trust, our business, both at the public and
the private sector. To hear about what's going on here is very
disturbing at best. I hear you saying, ``You know what? We're
here to cooperate fully.'' The damage, though. I've got
constituents back home that have been--lost money because of
malware, so on and so forth. It's painful.
The private sector, they run on your platforms. They trust
on you being on top of your game. Any thoughts?
Mr. Smith. We are determined. We start by acknowledging
where we fell short. We are focused. I had a--the last comment
made with our board of directors yesterday was by the senior
engineer leading what we call the Secure Future Initiative, and
her last words to our board were, ``We want you to know, our
engineers are energized by this.'' And----
Mr. Correa. In my last 9 seconds, I would ask you: You
know, we often say here that the chain is only as strong as its
weakest link. Are you going to strengthen up? Are you going to
do a better job over there?
Mr. Smith. Absolutely.
Let me just say this in closing: I would hope that you
would share with your constituents, we never take their trust
for granted.
Mr. Correa. Chair, I'm out of time.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
A point of clarification for the record, it was 300 million
attacks a day? Did I hear that correctly?
Mr. Smith. Yes, that is correct, against our customers that
we observe. We detect more than 300 million such attacks every
day.
Chairman Green. Just clarifying for the record.
I now recognize Mr. Pfluger for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, thanks for being here. I want to talk about the
collaboration. In many committees on Capitol Hill, we're
talking about this balance and tension between safety and
security and liberty and, you know, private enterprises.
So what I really want to hear from you is talk to us about
the relationship with CISA. I know you've mentioned this in
testimony written and also today, but just talk to us about how
that relationship is, what can be better from your side, what
can be better, what you expect from the Government.
Is it a mandate for reporting from the Government? Is it,
you know, voluntary roundtables in a Classified setting? I'd
like to hear a little bit about that, and I have some follow-up
questions.
Mr. Smith. Yes. I think CISA is a critical agency. It's
been moving in a positive direction overall. I think the CSRB
plays an important part of this.
I think that ultimately we would benefit from finding more
ways to keep working together across the tech sector and then
with the CISA and other agencies in the U.S. Government and,
frankly, with our allies, because it's an entire ecosystem that
we're seeking to defend, and nobody can do it by themselves.
I think fundamentally, just as--the CSRB's words were well
taken by us. We needed to focus on our culture. I think we have
a collective culture, and it's a collective culture that we
need to work on by inspiring more collaboration not just with
the Government but, frankly, across our industry.
So that, you know, people compete. Somebody said, there's
no plan B. I think about two-thirds of the folks who are
sitting behind me in this room are trying to sell plan B to you
in one way or another, and that's OK.
But there's a higher calling here as well. I like to say,
you know, the truth is when shots are being fired, people end
up being hit, and they take their turn being the patient in the
back of the ambulance. Everybody else, you're either going to
be an ambulance driver or you're going to be an ambulance
chaser. Let's be ambulance drivers together.
Mr. Pfluger. Let's drill down to that and the relationship
that you have with the U.S. intelligence community, with DOD.
The thing that's unique about Microsoft is you pretty much
cover every sector, every industry, every--you know,
households, businesses.
But when you look at the relationship with the national
security entities, tell us what the biggest gaps are right now
to making sure that they can stay secure in their operations.
Mr. Smith. The thing to think about is that defenders too
often work in silos. Every company thinks about their products.
Every agency thinks about what they have. Attackers look for
the seams between the silos. The more silos you have, the more
seams you have.
Just as there are seams in different technology products,
because most customers deploy them together, there are seams
across the Government. So a lot of times one of the challenges
for us is that the parts of the Government, when this
information is coming in about, say, an active cyber attack
from a place like China, that information doesn't necessarily
flow from one part of the Federal Government to another.
There's a lot of work being done to address this, but I think
that needs to be advanced more quickly as a matter of priority.
Mr. Pfluger. Three hundred million attacks a day, that's
incredible.
Finally, let me just talk about--I think--this is the
Committee on Homeland Security. We're very worried about what
nation-state actors and non-nation-state actors are doing and
how that affects our homeland. Obviously, the PRC and the CCP's
attempts to undermine this country, our Government, industries,
intellectual property, all of it is a massive concern.
So I know you've mentioned this before here today, but just
talk to us a little bit about the relationship with the PRC.
How does that affect intellectual property, things that you
have that could be either exploited for their benefit to
undermine the United States of America?
Mr. Smith. I would say two things: I mean, first, any
company that has valuable intellectual property has to be very
careful to protect it from theft, unless it's IP that they're
publishing, and a lot of code is published in open-source form.
But you have to think about how to protect it so it doesn't
go where it should not. There are certain intrusions,
especially from, say, a place like the PRC, you know, that are
focused on discovering trade secrets.
Mr. Pfluger. Knowing that, is Microsoft taking steps to
improve what you're protecting?
Mr. Smith. Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, it's--the other
thing just to know is that the adversaries are constantly
changing their tactics. If this were a case of just saying,
gee, this is what was done in like 2022, let's all go fix what
was done in 2022, then you'd feel good.
But I guarantee that what is done in 2025 is going to be
different from what is being done in 2024. You constantly have
to learn, adapt, and change, which is what we're doing.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you. My time is expired. I have more
questions. We'll submit them for the record.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Carter for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Mr. Smith, thank you for being here. Mr. Smith, it's no
secret that our critical infrastructure is being targeted. I'm
particularly worried about rural hospitals and how they
continue to be targeted and attacked by nation-state threat
actors.
Just this week, Microsoft announced a new rural hospital
cybersecurity program. One of the hospitals in my district,
Saint James Parish Hospital, is a participant.
Would you describe this program and how it will help the
Nation's rural hospitals defend against attacks?
Mr. Smith. Yes. Thank you. We talked a little bit about
this before, obviously. I just think it's a critical priority
for the whole country, because people's lives literally are at
stake. What we have launched this week is, first, a program to
provide technology assistance to hospitals, especially rural
hospitals, giving them security tools--you know--at the lowest
possible price. In some cases, it's a 75 percent discount. In
some cases, it's free of charge for a year.
The second thing we're doing is then going in and helping
with all that know-how, advisers, technology assessments, so we
can work with people.
The third thing we're focused on is then trying to help
them use technology so that they can be more effective. As I'm
sure you're seeing, right now there are a lot of rural
hospitals in this country that are barely afloat.
When a rural hospital closes, not only do people lose
access to local health care, but some of the good jobs in the
community are destroyed at the same time. There's a shortage of
people to work in these hospitals.
So one of the things we're trying to focus on is how can we
use digital technology, especially AI, you know, to improve the
quality of rural health care, reduce the cost, not just for the
patients but for the operators of these especially small
hospitals with, say, 25 or fewer beds.
So we're trying to put together a holistic approach that we
think could make a difference.
Mr. Carter. What about HBCUs and other small organizations
that could likewise use technical assistance and the help that
might be in a similar situation financially as a rural
hospital?
Mr. Smith. Well, we have educational pricing in general,
but I would say there's two categories in the educational
community that deserve special priority, and we're trying to
give them special priority.
One is HBCUs and, therefore, we've created a special
program to invest in them, to provide scholarships, to work on
cybersecurity training and the like.
The second is the Nation's community colleges. I feel that
this is the great resource, the 1,000-plus community colleges
in this country. We need to equip them and send them into this
battle.
That requires 3 things: One is equipping them with the
curriculum, which we can do, and other tech companies have done
a good job as well. I want to spread credit where it's due.
Mr. Carter. I don't want to interrupt you, but I have got a
few more questions and a little bit of time.
Mr. Smith. OK. I'll let you go. I'd be happy to talk to you
any time.
Mr. Carter. Was that a yes?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Carter. That is a yes----
Mr. Smith. That is absolutely a yes.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. That you are prepared to and have
programs to work with other disadvantaged organizations,
particularly HBCUs.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Carter. OK, great. The increasing frequency and
sophistication of nation-state cyber attacks in the United
States, do you agree that the country is currently lacking in
having successful deterrent strategy? If so, what steps are
needed to enhance deterrents, and what can we do in addition to
partnering with you to do that?
Mr. Smith. This is a critical and hard problem we need to
solve as a Nation, and it requires we do 3 things: First, we've
got to draw the red lines so it's clear to the world what they
cannot do without accountability.
Second, we need transparency. We need collective action
with the private and public sector and with allied governments
so that when those red lines are crossed, there is a public
response and people know what has happened.
Third, we need to start defining some consequences, because
right now these threat actors are living in a world where they
are not facing consequences.
Mr. Carter. Real quickly, I've got 30 seconds and I've got
a real important question. I'm going to read this, because I
want to make sure I get it right.
Earlier this year, I was briefed by members of the Cyber
Safety Review Board about its review of last summer's incident,
and I wanted to raise an issue we discussed there on value
logging.
Members of this committee have for years raised concerns
that Microsoft was charging extra money for customers to gain
access to basic logging data, and customers need to identify
and investigate cyber incidents.
When you or one of your representatives testified before
the committee in the aftermath of the SolarWinds breach, they
explained that everything that we do is designed to generate a
return, other than philanthropic work.
The State Department paid for extra logging, generating a
profit for Microsoft and ultimately using these logs to detect
this attack, but not every customer had that logging capability
enabled. Last summer, Microsoft finally announced that it would
provide free logging to customers, and in February made those
logs available for all Federal customers.
Why did it take so long to make this decision, and what was
the--went into your changing your mind?
Mr. Smith. Well, in fact, we've even gone a little bit
farther than----
Mr. Carter. That's fine, but can you just answer the
question I asked?
Mr. Smith. I wish we had moved faster and had gone farther.
I think there was a focus on the real cost associated with
keeping and retaining logs, but we should have recognized
sooner, especially as the threat landscape changed, that we
would be best served, I think as we are now, by not just
retaining but providing these logs for free.
Mr. Carter. So what's the status on providing free logs to
all customers and not just Federal agencies?
Mr. Smith. Basically, what we've decided is for all of our
so-called enterprise offerings, there's 3 layers and for all of
them we retain the logs for 6 months, which is what the CSRB
recommended.
We will provide those logs, say, these are individual
customer logs. We will provide them to those customers. They
get access to them when they need them at no additional cost.
Mr. Carter. Would you agree that it's as important for
Microsoft, the company, to have this level of security for its
customers as it is for customers to, in fact, have the
security?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. My time is expired.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize Ms. Greene for 5 minutes.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, this has been a very engaging, intriguing
conversation. I'm a business owner, so I've been listening to
this and, you know, taking it in and thinking about it through
that lens.
You started with something that I find impressive. You said
you accept responsibility, and I just want to commend you for
that. I appreciate it. We don't hear that very often here, but
I think it's valuable and I think it's right. So I just wanted
to say thank you.
I understand that Microsoft has a unique role to play in
our cybersecurity landscape, as it's responsible for nearly 85
percent of the productivity software, such as Word, Excel, and
PowerPoint used by the U.S. Government.
Given the company's presence, Microsoft is, of course, at
significant risk of cyber attacks. Over 300 million a day. Is
that true, 300 million a day?
Mr. Smith. We detect 300 million a day against our
customers. So that's what we get to see, given all of the
telemetry we have. Last year, if you look at, you know,
phishing attacks, we had 47 million against ourselves over the
year.
Ms. Greene. Wow. That's far more than I----
Mr. Smith. It's a lot.
Ms. Greene [continuing]. Could have even comprehended. Of
course, these are serious. We're all--everyone here on the
committee is recognizing that.
As you stated in your testimony, cyber attacks have become
more prolific, just as you stated. As a result of the attack
that your company went under, in May 2021 the Biden
administration released an Executive Order on improving the
Nation's cybersecurity which required the establishment of the
Cyber Safety Review Board under DHS.
I want to talk to you a little bit about the board. I
think, of course, oversight is important, but I think there
should be more action taken by our Government to prevent cyber
attacks.
So could we talk a little bit about the board? My
understanding is the Cyber Safety Review Board is a mix of
Government and industry representatives.
Is it true that Microsoft is not represented on the board?
Mr. Smith. That is correct.
Ms. Greene. Is any of your competitors on the board?
Mr. Smith. Yes, they are.
Ms. Greene. So, essentially, the--so how did this work?
When this attack happened, the board--can you talk a little bit
about that process?
Mr. Smith. Yes. You're getting at such a critical question,
because I will say, first, I think we benefit from having this
kind of organized effort. I think it's probably a mistake to
put on the board people who work for competitors of, say, a
company that is the subject of a review.
The spirit of this when it was created was to create a
community of people who could learn together, but I just
don't--I'm less concerned about the way the process worked. I
just worry that where people want to take it in the future and
just make hay out of others' mistakes, and I'm just not sure
that's going to do us that much good.
Ms. Greene. Right. So did CSRB, did it share with Microsoft
what your competitors said about their own security practices?
Mr. Smith. I don't believe so. I don't know--I don't
believe so. I could be wrong, but I don't believe so.
Ms. Greene. OK. With your competitors on the board helping
produce the report, was this used in any other way in the
marketplace?
Mr. Smith. Yes. I just--I want to say two things because,
first, I think the most important thing for me to do and for
Microsoft to do is what you said at the outset. I just want to
be here and accept responsibility. I don't want to deflect any
of that responsibility, because we have the highest
responsibility.
But, second, the words that I would offer--and I'll offer
it to the folks in the back who work for our competitors,
because there's a bunch of them here--it's fine. Go tell people
that you have something better, but we have to have a higher
cause here. We are not the adversaries with each other even
though we may compete with each other. The adversaries are our
foreign foes.
So let's try to exercise a little self-restraint about how
we work in these processes, because I don't think that the next
company that gets an invitation from the CSRB is likely to be
necessarily as willing as we were to share everything, which we
did.
Ms. Greene. Well, I agree, I think competition is healthy--
--
Mr. Smith. I do too.
Ms. Greene [continuing]. In the business world. I think
it's great, actually. I enjoyed it for years and years. But I
think oversight is also extremely important. Of course, I think
everyone in this room agrees that we do not want any foreign
country gathering any of our information, whether it's from an
American citizen to our Government, of course.
CISA also has been--has a bad reputation, especially among
Republicans. They colluded with big tech and social media
companies, stripped many Americans of their First Amendment
rights. So that was another reason why I wanted to ask you a
little bit about the board and how that worked.
But furthermore, I have more questions, but I'm out of
time. I think it would be extremely important for there to be
assistance from the Federal Government in protecting not only
companies like yours but mom-and-pop companies, I mean, across
the board to regular citizens from cyber attacks. It's a
serious problem and it will continue. I'm out of time. Thank
you.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Thanedar for his--or Dr. Thanedar for
his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Mr. Smith, for being here.
I owned a small technology company before I came into
public service, a much smaller technology company. I was
involved with some--8 different acquisitions.
Now, the CSRB raised questions about Microsoft's mergers
and acquisitions compromise assessment program after it failed
to detect that a laptop belonging to an employee of an acquired
company had been compromised.
The board went on to recommend that large enterprises
develop a robust M&A compromise assessment program, recognizing
adversaries might view the acquiree as an entry point to the
parent company.
How is Microsoft improving its M&A compromise assessment
programs? Is there additional support or guidance the Federal
Government should be providing the private sector regarding M&A
compromise assessments?
Mr. Smith. I'm not sure of the answer to your last part,
but I do know that it's critical that we do more. We've been
focused on this for a long time, and it's sort-of an, I'll even
say, obvious thing that when you acquire a company you have to
take a close look at its cybersecurity controls, which we long
have and do.
Yet, as the CSRB report found, we had an inadequacy. So, in
part, to address this, part of the governance change we're
implementing is to have a new deputy chief information security
officer focused solely on the integration of companies that are
acquired, because we clearly need to step it up and will.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Mr. Smith, as you state in your
testimony, nation-states adversaries are becoming more
aggressive. Countries like China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea
present grave threats to our national security, and defending
against them would require public-private cooperation that
prioritizes strengthening cybersecurity across government
networks and critical infrastructure.
Considering our reliance on large IT vendors like
Microsoft, our defenses will only be as strong as our
technology providers are. That is why it was so disappointing
to see the CSRB report that Microsoft had failed to properly
secure its products.
Microsoft must do better, and I expect that Microsoft will
continue to update the committee on its progress. Congress must
also do more to ensure the Federal Government has the resources
to meet the goals of President Biden's ambitious national
cybersecurity strategy.
Mr. Smith, how is Microsoft improving its security to
protect itself and its customers to address these increased
foreign threats?
Mr. Smith. It's a multifaceted effort. As I said in my
written testimony, it really starts with what is today the
largest engineering project focused on cybersecurity in the
history of digital technology, you know, with detailed
milestones, 34 different categories. I think that's critical.
But it really is I think a new approach to cybersecurity
culture. It's a new approach for Microsoft. The more time I
spend with it with my colleagues, the more encouraged I am,
because fundamentally, it's about taking security and making it
part of the engineering process and every process. Treat it
like quality.
The cultural change--and several of you have commented
about this--I just think it's so important. We want a culture
that encourages every employee to look for problems, find
problems, report problems, help fix problems, and then learn
from the problems.
That's what we need to do. We need to do this in a way that
doesn't put security in its own silo, although there are
special security teams, but make security part of everyone's
job. I think that is one of the indispensable steps we are
taking and really need to take.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. With my last 30 seconds, what
investments should Congress prioritize to improve our national
defenses against nation-state cyber threats?
Mr. Smith. Invest in the American people. Invest in the
training of the American people. Provide more scholarship
assistance so that Americans can go to a community college, go
to an Historically Black College or University, get a course,
get a certificate, get a degree in cybersecurity. There are
400,000 open jobs in the United States today in cybersecurity.
Help us fill those jobs.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Gonzales for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, is Microsoft Teams a secure platform?
Mr. Smith. I believe it is. I use it every day for lots of
sensitive conversations.
Mr. Gonzales. I would say I'm concerned. I'm concerned with
the trust level that Americans have with Microsoft for a
variety of different reasons. I believe Microsoft has been a
trusted agent for a long time, and let me give an example.
If you work for the Department of Defense and let's say you
want to communicate with others in an unclassified environment,
but let's say it's in an official capacity, right? Oftentimes
the conversation is, don't use Zoom or others like that,
because that's an unsecure platform. Let's use Microsoft Teams.
What I'm seeing, what I'm starting to hear is more and more
Government officials, Government agencies, DOD-affiliated folks
not trust that. So if Microsoft--if they don't trust that, what
options do you have?
Once again, I understand if it's a Classified setting, but
I'm talking about how do you reach people without a CAC card,
without having to go down the CAC card route? Is there anything
that is in the works in order to regain some of that--whether
it's warranted or not, there is an eroding amount of trust
within Microsoft.
Is there anything in the pipeline that will regain that
trust among DOD-affiliated organizations?
Mr. Smith. Well, first of all, I appreciate the fundamental
gravity of the question. I would say that we are continually
and constantly focused as part of this work that we're doing in
increasing the security for every aspect of what we do,
including Teams and every aspect of it.
I feel comfortable talking with the DOD or others on Teams.
I want them to feel comfortable, and I want them to know that
we are not stopping where we are, because our adversaries are
not stopping where they are. We are going to continue and are
continuing to invest in hardening the security of Teams even
more than it has today.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you for that. A large part of what we
do on this committee is try to get everyone out of silos,
right? All these agencies are in silos. Every time there's a
national security threat, you look back at these reports and
it's always somebody knew something but, you know, when did
they know it?
Part of that is the ability to communicate in a, you know,
FOUO setting that where you feel as if maybe it's not quite the
Classified level but you feel, you know, not everyone is
listening on it. I just would reiterate how important that is
from a national security standpoint to ensure that the
Government has at least some platforms like Microsoft Teams.
My final question is this: How is Microsoft planning to
combine your SFI while ensuring tools and software remain user-
friendly and accessible?
Mr. Smith. Great--first of all, I want to just thank you
for your first set of questions, and I will quote you back in
the company's headquarters.
Second, the point that you make is also so critical,
because we have to make security first a top priority, but we
have to make it easy for people to use. So we do need to
synthesize these things.
I think one of the virtues of what we're doing is not just
calling on deeply technical engineers, but also people say in
the field of software design and elsewhere.
I think part of our quest--I think it's a great quest for
all of us, not just at Microsoft but across the industry--is to
continue to have what we call security by default. So that when
people get a new computer, a new software program, all of the
security settings are on by default. They have what we call
Security by Design, so that it is designed so that it's not
only effective but easy for people to use and easy for people
to know what is happening.
So we're focused on all of those things. I'll just say
there's I think a lot more coming.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you for that response. Trust is the
name of the game, and we have to make sure that Americans
continue to trust these different platforms that are out there.
So thank you once again for testifying before the committee.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Magaziner for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman.
One of the joys of speaking in the order after our
colleague from Georgia is that I'm often handed notes to
correct incorrect statements that she made. So I just want to
enter into the record that Microsoft's competitors were recused
from the findings, the final report, and the recommendations of
the CSRB-Microsoft investigation, just so that's in the record.
Now, Mr. Smith, the article that Mr. Thompson, Ranking
Member Thompson referenced earlier had to do with the so-called
SolarWinds breach, in which Russian hackers infiltrated
Microsoft's cloud service and was able to gain access to some
of our country's most sensitive secrets, including information
from the National Nuclear Security Administration, which
oversee our nuclear stockpiles, and the National Institutes of
Health.
You provided testimony to the Senate Intelligence Committee
in which you stated that the flaw that allowed that breach to
occur only became known to cybersecurity professionals at
Microsoft when it was published in a public paper in 2017.
It has now been widely reported that former employee Andrew
Harris discovered the flaw a year earlier, alerted his
superiors and other company executives, proposed a series of
solutions that were rejected.
So can you now agree that the testimony that you offered to
the Senate Intelligence Committee about what Microsoft knew
about that flaw and when Microsoft knew it was incorrect?
Mr. Smith. Well, look, the first thing I would say is I
know that came out in an article this morning. I haven't had a
chance to read the article yet. I was at the White House this
morning.
Mr. Magaziner. OK. So if you can't say, all right. I'll
just note that the article cited numerous sources inside the
company, not just that one individual. But if you're not
prepared to say that then we can move on.
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Magaziner. I agree with what Chairman Green said
earlier about the importance of incentives. So I welcome the
news that came out I believe yesterday that one-third of the
individual performance element of bonuses for senior executives
will be tied to cybersecurity performance.
How much of the total compensation package for senior
executives is the individual performance element?
Mr. Smith. It depends on the individual. It depends on the
year.
Mr. Magaziner. Roughly.
Mr. Smith. I'll say more than enough to get people's
attention for sure.
Mr. Magaziner. But roughly, like ballpark?
Mr. Smith. Of the cash portion? It's probably--I don't
know. I will say about 15, 20 percent of. If you add stock,
it's much lower.
Mr. Magaziner. All right. Well, if you could follow up on
that, that would be helpful. Because, just to be clear, you
know, a third of the individual performance element sounds
good, but it depends on how big the individual performance is
as a part of the whole. If it's 10 percent of the total
compensation package, then the cybersecurity incentive would
only be 3 percent of the total package and would potentially
count less toward the total than revenue targets or
profitability targets or other things.
On the other hand, if it was 60 percent of the whole, then
that would be a much more meaningful incentive. So having some
understanding of how large a percentage of the whole that
individual performance element is would be instructive.
Mr. Smith. Yes. You're making a good point. The one thing I
would just add is, if there's one thing that's true at
Microsoft and across the tech sector, people like to get good
grades. This is one----
Mr. Magaziner. I'm sorry, I have limited time.
Mr. Smith. Let me just say this is one part of their total
grade.
Mr. Magaziner. I asked the question. If you don't have the
information now, that's fine. I have a few more questions.
On that individual performance incentive, that portion of
the compensation, is it restricted stock? Is it something that
can be clawed back and, if so, do you know how far back the
clawback can be exercised?
Mr. Smith. Some of these details are still to be refined,
but this is the bonus, the cash bonus that people get each
year.
Mr. Magaziner. I would just suggest, you know, since it's
still being refined, if it's a cash bonus then that suggests it
would be difficult to claw back. A cybersecurity lapse may not
become known until years after the fact. So I would suggest
that perhaps some sort of a clawback mechanism could make the
incentive more powerful.
Finally, piggybacking on the Chairman's question, the
article that was published today stated, ``Product managers at
Microsoft''--product managers, not senior executives--``had
little motivation to act fast, if at all, to address these
security flaws since compensation was tied to the release of a
new revenue-generating product and features,'' with one former
employee stating, ``You will get a promotion because you
released the new shiny thing. You are not going to get a
promotion because you fixed a bunch of security bugs.''
So, given the importance of people at the product manager
level, is there any plan for their compensation to be tied, at
least in part, to meeting cybersecurity goals?
Mr. Smith. One of the--the answer is yes. One of the
decisions that was announced yesterday that I provided in my
addendum is every single Microsoft employee as we get to the
new fiscal year will have as part of their biannual review a
mandatory part to talk about cybersecurity to do precisely what
you just described.
Mr. Magaziner. If you'll indulge me for a second. So part
of their review, but is there sort-of a portion of their
compensation that's directly tied to the cyber portion, to the
cyber factor, as will be the case with senior executives to
some extent?
Mr. Smith. It won't be as formulaic, but everybody knows
that the bonuses, the compensation--we call them rewards--that
you get at the end of the year are based on those reviews and
how people do over the year.
Mr. Magaziner. I know I'm over, but I'll just say I want to
state I do believe it is a positive and I think a good example
that we are integrating cyber into compensation packages. I
just want to make sure that we're doing it in a way that is
really going to be impactful.
So I'll yield back.
Mr. Smith. Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Garbarino for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good to see you, Mr. Smith.
In its report, CSRB's overarching conclusion is that
Microsoft security culture requires an overhaul, given its
centrality in the technology ecosystem. I believe a lot of the
recommendations that they've--they recommended you're already
putting into place.
But the series of the findings of the CSRB report and the
recommendations provided and now--and how the report was
written, and now that we're all here having a hearing on it,
how do you anticipate future voluntary cooperation with the
board's request for information?
Because the CSRB, it's not in statute. They really have--
they have--they have to go--they can only get the information
that is provided to them by people who complied like your
company.
What do you anticipate happening now in the future with
other requests?
Mr. Smith. Well, I guess the short answer is I don't know,
but I hope 3 things will ensue: No. 1 is that people will
remember that we collaborated and provided everything that the
CSRB asked for; No. 2, that I came here today and we acted as a
company with a real spirit I hope you'll see of humility, of
accepting responsibility, of avoiding being defensive or
defiant; and No. 3, and I hope that people will look back 6 and
12 months from now and say--and that you all hope others will
do the same.
Because I think if you all can help us encourage that kind
of spirit of responsibility, that's how we'll get better,
because our--we know our adversaries are going to get better,
so we have to find ways to get better too.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that and I do appreciate your
being here and all the meetings that we've had and discussions.
I know you've been working with CISA as well and the CSRB
board.
You brought up Secure by Design in one of your last
questions, and I've had a lot of conversations about that. I
think my committee is actually going to have a hearing on
Secure by Design.
Can you talk about what Microsoft is doing? Can you go into
a little further about the Secure by Design?
Mr. Smith. Yes. There's--Secure by Design actually connects
with, you know, I would say several of the pillars of what we
call our Secure Future Initiative. You know, we're focused on
our engineering systems and our production systems.
Those really come together, in my view, to encourage our
software developers to integrate security into the design of
new products so that, as we say, it's baked in.
I think one of the key things that we've really sought to
internalize is, as I've said here, to make security part of
everybody's job and not just part of the work of the security
team.
In hindsight, I think that's one of the mistakes, that we I
think relied almost too much on the security experts and didn't
do enough to ask everybody to make security part of their job.
So, you know, some of you have asked about this Recall
feature. I think it's a great lesson. I mean, we're trying to
apply it as a lesson learned. So if somebody is creating the
Recall feature, they need to think about the security aspects
of the Recall feature. It hasn't even been launched yet, so
we've had the time to do this right, but it's--we're trying to
focus on culture change.
Culture change requires constant role modelling and
practice. So each time we go through this, we're talking very
publicly so that everybody can see inside and outside Microsoft
quite tangibly how people can weave this into the design
decisions they're making.
Mr. Garbarino. Well, I think Secure by Design is very
important. You know, as we all know with cybersecurity, a lot
of the intrusions come from end-user error, and you're only as
strong as your weakest link.
So I think having more Secure by Design in these products
is--having Secure by Design implemented would be great for
everybody, every user of a Microsoft product or any product.
Just finally, you mentioned to--you know, you had the
question, what should we invest in? You said, America, the
people, you know, scholarships. You know, I think that's true.
I know the Chairman is working on a piece of legislation that
would do just that.
What is Microsoft doing on that end? I know we can do
stuff. What is Microsoft doing to help with work force?
Mr. Smith. Well, we've provided free curriculum, but more
than that. We've provided free training to 203,000 Americans on
cybersecurity over the last 4 years. We've provided 21,000
scholarships.
The thing I would leave with you all is, as you all may
know if you work with community colleges, the students in these
colleges are not well-to-do. They're usually trying to earn a
living and go to college at the same time. If something goes
wrong in their life, it can just throw them out of the ability
to go to community college.
These don't have to be hugely expensive scholarships, but
they are so impactful. I would really hope and ask and
encourage you all. I know Mr. Magaziner is a sponsor on one of
these bills. The Chairman, you're crafting these things. If you
can make it a priority, it will help everybody.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much.
I know I'm a little over. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Ivey for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
Mr. Smith, thank you for being here today. We appreciate
your presence.
I wanted to ask, this might be a little off the beaten path
here, but about AI. The Representative from New York, Ms.
Clarke, allowed me to join onto a bill of hers that goes into
AI deepfakes and the like.
You know, we've got legislative efforts to fix these
issues. Part of it might entail litigation and the like. But my
sense of this is that, as a remedy, it just takes too long to
implement it in a way to address one of these--on the radio the
other day they were talking about middle school bullying is now
using sexual deepfakes. Guys are putting up pictures of preteen
girls in some instances with, you know--that are deeply
psychologically damaging to them.
So since litigation and legislation, we have to make those
adjustments to address the problem, but I mean, I think a
bigger part of it is going to have to be technological. To
address the AI aspect of it, it seems to me that we need an AI
counter to that. I don't know what's coming along those lines,
but I'd like to know if Microsoft or any--if you're aware of
anything that's being developed that could help with that to
address that issue in the very near future.
Mr. Smith. Yes. I mean, first of all, I appreciate your
focus on this. I was watching the hearing you all had a couple
weeks ago on AI and you were raising it there, and I think
that's a good thing.
First, I think we need to understand the problem. I think
you've captured it well. We are seeing the creation of AI-based
deepfakes in a way that can threaten candidates, all of you, to
be honest, this year.
Mr. Ivey. We'll come to elections in a minute.
Mr. Smith. OK. But as well as teenage girls, women, many
others. So the solution is threefold: One, put in place more
guardrails around our legitimate products so it's harder for
people to use it for abusive purposes.
The second is use AI to----
Mr. Ivey. Give me an example of the guardrails.
Mr. Smith. Basically, when we have products, we have some
ourselves, Microsoft Designer. You build in an architecture. It
has classifiers so that if someone is going to do something,
you detect what they're doing and in certain cases you stop
them from doing it.
So if they feed up--they try to take a photo of someone and
remove their clothes, you say, no, that's not allowed. I mean,
things about as straightforward as that. But, you know, there's
a complex and I think very sophisticated architecture involved.
Second, AI is very good at detecting the use of AI to
create images. It's always going to be a cat-and-mouse game,
and you get debates among the technology experts. But I have a
level of optimism myself about what I see our people in our AI
for Good Lab doing to detect these problems.
Third, you've got to be able to respond. You've got to be
able to use AI then to stop it or to take it off a platform. We
do need good old-fashioned education so that people are aware,
so that parents are aware of what their kids might be doing or
the problems, the abuses their kids may be facing. Those--it's
really multifaceted.
Mr. Ivey. Well, let's back up to No. 2, and that's
detection, which I take it would be not so much you have to
rely on the parents or even the individuals, the target,
because it might be a while before they even become aware of
the issue.
What sorts of detection mechanisms are on the near horizon
that could be implemented?
Mr. Smith. Well, we have detection mechanisms that we have
in place today, and we're focused on specific problems in
particular. If I could, one of them is elections.
Mr. Ivey. How widely available are they?
Mr. Smith. Well, we are offering free training for every
candidate for office in the United States. We've done this in
20 other countries. We have a website.
Mr. Ivey. Let me back up. I want to go back.
Mr. Smith. OK.
Mr. Ivey. Because we're going to look out for ourselves at
some point, because we have the ability to do that. I'm more
worried about the deepfakes for especially, you know, teenage
girls and the like. What's available for them?
Mr. Smith. Probably not as much as we need is what I would
say.
Mr. Ivey. OK. What steps can we take? How can we move that
forward?
Mr. Smith. I think we put in place guardrails. You're
asking a good question. Let me take it back and let me ask our
folks what could we create for more people that would empower
them to do what every candidate can now do, namely report a
deepfake about themselves.
Mr. Ivey. I appreciate that very, very much.
Last question: With respect to elections and
misinformation, disinformation, especially the stuff that's
coming out maybe even on election day or during that time
period when elections have begun, is there a sufficient process
in place that coordinates the private sector, the public
sector, and potentially voters to address this concern?
I apologize to the Chair for running over.
Mr. Smith. I'll just say I think a lot of progress has been
made. As we get into the summer months in the two conventions,
it's a really important question for all of us to have together
in a way that is genuinely bipartisan.
You know, we're working with--there's a national
association of State election directors. You know, we're
working with them. We're working with them so that they can
protect their infrastructure, that there are means to educate
people about deepfakes and the like.
Frankly, what we're hoping can happen at both of the
political conventions is some conversations about how we can
enter the election season, say, that starts on Labor Day, you
know, with all the protections that we're going to need.
We're basing that on a lot of work. We were in Taiwan for
that election. We've been in Europe for the spring. We'll be in
the United Kingdom, in France. We're trying to take everything
we learn each step of the way and apply it.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you for your answer. I look forward to
hearing back from you.
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate your indulgence.
Chairman Green. Absolutely. The gentleman yields, and I now
recognize the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Ezell.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Smith,
for being here. Thank you for holding this hearing today.
The Federal Government and many Americans trust Microsoft
to protect our critical cybersecurity infrastructure.
Unfortunately, we're here today because Microsoft has fallen
short in some of these areas. I'm especially worried about our
national security.
A recent report to Congress from the U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission linked multiple cyber attacks to
the CCP. Your report directly calls out breaches of Microsoft's
email servers at the U.S. Department of State and the
Department of Commerce.
Of course, the CSRB report in greater detail describes
Microsoft's cultural issues related to security, which we have
highlighted.
Mr. Smith, with the CCP and the Russian Federation backing
state-sponsored cyber attackers, all organizations face this
threat, regardless of their resources or reputation.
Breaches are inevitable, and I acknowledge the Federal
Government has a role that we've got to play here. However,
despite being known as a leader in defending against attacks,
it appears that Microsoft has had some failures which could
have been avoidable, and I know you've addressed this. But I
want to discuss the company's other investments, specifically
its AI offerings and how it can relate to your plan to improve
its cyber capabilities.
I'll start by asking you, do you believe that as AI becomes
integrated into more products and services, the potential for
attacks increases?
Mr. Smith. I think we'll see two things almost inevitably,
and perhaps we soon or already are. One is our adversaries will
use AI to try to pursue more sophisticated attacks; but,
second, we are already using AI to strengthen security
defenses.
I have to say I'm very optimistic about what AI can and
already is being used to do to strengthen cybersecurity
protection in two ways: No. 1, AI is especially good at
detecting anomalies in data, looking for patterns. We have
threat-hunting teams at Microsoft. We probably have more
threat-hunting teams than anybody else. But seeing what people
can do when they have AI to help them detect these patterns,
that is key, and that's going to be important across the
industry.
The second is to help the chief information security
officers, the CISOs, the cybersecurity professionals across the
country. So, you know, we've got a product, a cybersecurity
Copilot. Others will have similar things. It basically takes a
lot of work that these folks have to do, and it helps them do
it faster. It helps them do it better. I think that that's
going to be a good step as well.
Go back to this gap, the 400,000 open jobs. Hopefully, what
AI will do is, in effect, lower the barrier to entry, because
an individual who wants to join this profession--and I hope
more people will--they'll say, hey, I don't have to learn
everything I might have had to learn 5 years ago, because now I
have an AI tool that will help me as well. I think we're
going--we're seeing that now. We're going to see it accelerate
in the next couple years.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you. What specific cybersecurity measures
is Microsoft implementing to protect the additional surface for
attacks? What are you doing additionally to protect?
Mr. Smith. Your question goes to detection.
Mr. Ezell. Yes.
Mr. Smith. That's a critical piece, and it's 1 of the 6
pillars that we have in the Secure Future Initiative that I
mentioned.
I will tell you, we have--I'm very proud of the teams we
have, great people who are just so committed to the mission.
But it sort-of goes back to then using more technology and more
AI so we can make them more effective. We get so much data that
we've got to be--basically integrate all of the data that we
have so it's more usable by our threat hunters, and then we
need to use AI to make it easier for our threat hunters to find
things faster.
So I think this cutting of silos, you know, connecting what
we call data graphs using AI, I think it's going to make our
people--I think every company that does this, you know, will
find that it can get better with these approaches.
Mr. Ezell. Quickly, one of the things I'd like to follow up
with what Mr. Ivey was saying. He was talking about some of
these generated photographs. As a local county sheriff, many
times we had parents that would come in, and their teenage
daughter had been victimized. We basically had nowhere to go to
investigate, to follow up, to catch some of these bad actors
that are doing this thing.
I would ask you, as part of your training, to infiltrate
these local sheriffs and police officers, especially in the
rural areas that have limited opportunities to have the use of
some of the things that we've described, we talked about today,
because it breaks my heart to see a child go through that when
it's been a totally false accusation and then for them to go
back to school.
So I would really encourage you to put that on the front
burner so that we could help our local law enforcement to try
to stop some of this.
Mr. Smith. I would just say--and I know our time is out--
but yes, we will. You're right in two fundamental ways. First,
I appreciate it. I mean, some of the most moving things that
I've seen over the years have been information from police
officers, local law enforcement who are working to protect kids
who are being victimized in the way you just described.
Second, the other group I should have mentioned when Mr.
Ivey asked is the National Center for Missing and Exploited
Children, NCMEC. These are, in my view, real heroes for all of
us. We all work together and support them and rely on them.
I think this is this--this great alliance we have in this
country between law enforcement, NCMEC, and then tech
companies, and it's--and our competitors are part of this. This
is one area where I think the industry is pretty united, and
the world is better for it.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mrs. Ramirez for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman.
Good afternoon, Mr. Smith. I'm freezing here, but I think
you might be a little warmer. You've been a little more active.
So--and I've been hearing our conversation today in the
hearing. For us, it's pretty clear we have two Homeland
Security threats that this hearing is really trying to take up.
One of those is cybersecurity attacks, and the other is
concerning tech monopolies and monocultures driven by profit,
sometimes supremacy and secrecy, and I feel like both are
existential threats to the health and well-being of our
democracy.
When incidents like the 2023 Microsoft Exchange breach
happened and the bombshell damning reports like what was
published by ProPublica today, they bring us to this reckoning
moment, and it's not just for Microsoft.
But that we've been entrusting with our Nation's most
sensitive information, and also for this committee this
desperate need for the pursuit of accountability when our
Nation's homeland security has been compromised.
The Ranking Member mentioned that the ProPublica article
published earlier today described how Microsoft had dismissed
an employee's concerns about a vulnerability in Active
Directory that was eventually leveraged by the Russians during
SolarWinds. Then Microsoft denied that any vulnerabilities in
its systems had contributed to the attack.
So when my colleague Congressman Correa asked you earlier
how quickly you address vulnerabilities, you said immediately.
But ProPublica reported today that an employee alerted
Microsoft to the Golden SAML, the SAML vulnerability years
before the SolarWinds.
So I guess my question to you, Mr. Smith, is, what is your
definition of immediately?
Mr. Smith. It's right away. Let me just say--and look, this
is the classic let's have an article published the morning of a
hearing so we can spend the hearing talking about it, and then
by a week from now I'll actually have a chance to go back and
learn about everything in it.
I am generally familiar with that situation. Let's remember
a couple of things. One, that SolarWinds intrusion was by the
Russian government into a SolarWinds Orion product, not a
Microsoft product.
That Orion product was distributed to more than 30,000
customers. Microsoft was one. Because of what the Russians had
done to change the software code of the Orion product, the
Russians immediately had an entry point into all of these
networks.
Let's also remember that when FireEye brought us in, that
was the beginning. This was I think in November 2020. We worked
with FireEye, and we came up with a technology tool that in
effect blasted that entry point, if you will----
Mrs. Ramirez. Mr. Smith, I have a short time. So actually,
you might have a little opportunity to talk more about that
here. Because yes, Microsoft expanded the Secure Future
Initiative and has said that security teams will have an
elevated role in the product development.
Maybe, tell me how the employees' concerns that were
expressed about a vulnerability in Active Directory would have
been handled differently today.
Mr. Smith. Well, I would say 2 things. First, I would hope
that if there is an issue that needs to be addressed, it will
be woven into our engineering processes. It will be escalated.
It will be decided. People will be evaluated based on how they
did.
Second, though, I would like to go back for 1 second on
this so-called Active Directory. What we're really talking
about here is what was called SAML. It was an industry
standard, and it was a security vulnerability in the entire
industry standard. What ensued was a conversation across the
industry about the best way to address it.
I think this is where, like I said, a week from now I'll
bet we can pull together information and have a much more
informed conversation about this, and I would welcome that
opportunity.
But I think what's most important for today is simply to
note how we are changing our engineering processes, how we are
integrating Security by Design, how we are changing the way
employees review themselves, how we elevate these issues and
reward people for finding, reporting, and helping to fix
problems.
Mrs. Ramirez. Good, good. So I have a few seconds, and so a
few sentences. I'm going to shift gears for a second.
How do you ensure that your bundling practices do not limit
the ability of customers to prioritize security in their
purchasing decisions?
Mr. Smith. I'm sorry, I couldn't hear that.
Mrs. Ramirez. Let me do that again if I can get a few
seconds more, Chairman.
How do you ensure that your bundling practices, when--in
your bundling practice that you don't limit the ability of your
customers to be able to prioritize security in their purchasing
decisions? So when they're purchasing that you're not--that
they're able to prioritize their security when you're providing
these bundling practices.
Mr. Smith. Let me just say I don't--I'm not aware of any
so-called bundling practices that limit what our customers can
do in terms of cybersecurity protection.
If you look at the market for cybersecurity protection,
frankly, a very robust part of it is about providing tools and
services to enable customers to manage the security of their
networks when they have solutions that come from so many
different vendors.
Microsoft accounts for about 3 percent of the Federal IT
budget. What that tells you is that there's 97 percent that's
being spent elsewhere. That's pretty typical when you look at
it.
So a lot of what we're doing across the industry, I think,
especially with industry standards and the like, is to enable I
think the kinds of customer choices that I think you quite
rightly are encouraging.
Mrs. Ramirez. Well, thank you, Mr. Smith. I ran out of
time. If we get another round, I'll ask you a follow-up. Thank
you.
Chairman Green. That would be best. One quick note: If
you're like 2 seconds from your time limit, guys, that's not
the time to start a new question, right? So you know I give a
lot of grace. I give a lot of grace. But if you're, you know,
in a process and all that, we're going to let that question
continue on and we'll give you a little extra time for that.
So--and you are--Mrs. Ramirez, Mr. Ezell was just as bad.
He literally had 2 seconds left when he started that new--so I
now recognize Mr. D'Esposito for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, the CSRB report stated that Storm-0558 had
access to some of these cloud-based mailboxes for at least 6
weeks. Can you tell us who discovered that the system had been
compromised and how they did so?
Mr. Smith. Well, I think Ranking Member Thompson identified
this early on in the hearing that, in fact, I think we got a
notification from the State Department that they had seen an
anomaly in their email system. So they informed us of this last
June. Our initial reaction was that this was something that was
a token that was being generated through a stolen key at the
State Department or in the Government. I remember 7:30 in the
morning I was notified about this on a Saturday morning. I was
on the phone with Satya Nadella, our CEO, probably within 30 to
60 minutes, but we thought it was confined to that. It took
somewhere between a few days to a week or more for us to come
to the conclusion that it was broader than that.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. I obviously--do you believe that
Microsoft should have been able to realize that you were
compromised before the State Department?
Mr. Smith. You always want to be the first in life in
everything.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, that depends.
Mr. Smith. Well, yes, that's true. That's a very good
qualification. You always want to be the first to do everything
good in life. So I have to, on the one hand, say yes. But on
the other hand, I have to say especially given the nature of
networks and how they are distributed and different people see
different things. Mostly I just want to celebrate the fact that
people are finding different things and we're sharing them with
each other.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. So putting the celebration aside, are
you confident that moving forward Microsoft has the ability to
quickly detect and react to an intrusion like this?
Mr. Smith. Well, I will tell you, I feel very confident
that we have the strongest threat detection system that you're
going to find in quite possibly any organization, private or
public, on the planet. Will that always mean that we will be
the first to find everything? Well, no, that doesn't work that
way. But I feel very good about what we have and I feel very
confident about what we're building.
Mr. D'Esposito. Now obviously Microsoft is seeing a lot of
what these cyber criminals and nation-state actors are doing to
the ecosphere. How do you go about sharing information that you
collect or identify with law enforcement?
Mr. Smith. We have a variety of different steps we take,
some of which are probably not best talked about in a public
hearing that, as the Chairman said, is probably being watched
in Beijing and Moscow. But we collaborate with the FBI, we
collaborate with local law enforcement all the time. We
collaborate, both with the different agencies of the U.S.
Government and other governments that are allies of the United
States.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. I know that many of our staffs use
Microsoft for their email amongst many other applications. Can
you give us an idea as to the size of the share of Government
contracts for networking, cybersecurity, and other matters in
this space that Microsoft has?
Mr. Smith. I don't know the precise number for that precise
definition. I know, as I was mentioning, that we account for
about 3 percent of the Federal IT budget. I know that the U.S.
Government has many choices when it comes to cybersecurity
services and I think it takes advantages of them and we're one
of them. I don't frankly know how we compare to some of the
others.
Mr. D'Esposito. Obviously like you said, the Government has
many choices. So with that said, why should they continue to
use Microsoft?
Mr. Smith. Because we are going to work harder than anybody
else to earn the trust of our Government and other allied
governments every day. We're making the changes that we need to
make. We are learning the lessons that need to be learned. We
are holding ourselves accountable. We will be transparent. I
hope the people will then look at what we've done and say, This
is something that they want to do with us. But I know we have
to earn their trust every day.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Chairman, I'm following the rules, with
that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Menendez for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Smith,
for appearing here today.
In 2002, Bill Gates issued a memo to Microsoft employees
which stated, and I quote, flaws in a single Microsoft product
service or policy not only affect the quality of our platform
and services overall, but also our customers' view of us as a
company. So now, when we face a choice between adding features
or resolving security issues, we need to choose security.
Two-thousand-two, last month Microsoft's chairman and CEO
in a blog post to Microsoft employees stated that if you're
faced with a trade-off between security and another priority,
your answer is clear, do security.
Two-thousand-twenty-four, does last month's directive
indicate that Microsoft had drifted from the security first
culture set forth in Mr. Gates 2002 memo?
Mr. Smith. You know, I was there in 2002 when Bill Gates
was the CEO of the company and have been there every year
since. You know, this is, you know, something I think one just
has to be introspective about, because I've been in so many
meetings every year where we've done so much to talk about
where we are when it comes to security. I think that the
biggest mistake we made was not the one that is being described
that way. I think the biggest mistake we made----
Mr. Menendez. What do you mean, described that way?
Mr. Smith. Of drifting away from a security-first culture.
I think the biggest mistake----
Mr. Menendez. I'm not asking if there is a biggest mistake,
I am just asking if you do believe if there was a style drift
at Microsoft between 2002 to 2024?
Mr. Smith. No, but let me say what I think, perhaps,
happened. As we hired so many cybersecurity experts, it became
possible for people who were not in the cybersecurity teams to
think that they could rely on those people alone to do a job
that we all needed to do together. See, in 2002, we didn't have
all these large security teams. Cybersecurity didn't exist at
that time the way it does today. So I think there's a profound
lesson.
Mr. Menendez. I understand, I understand that the makeup of
Microsoft and the different departments may have changed, but
this was a statement in 2002 about choosing security first.
Then, more or less, the same statement made in 2024. That to me
would at least indicate that perhaps there was a sign that
security first had maybe taken a backseat potentially.
It would be helpful if you could just describe to me and
the committee the Microsoft Security Response Center and how it
sits within Microsoft's corporate structure.
Mr. Smith. The Microsoft Security Response Center, or MSRC
as we call it, reports up to, as I recall, our executive vice
president for security, a fellow named Charlie Bell who is on
our senior leadership team and it is part of a very large, and,
I think, robust security organization.
Mr. Menendez. Who makes determinations when something is
raised to the Security Response Center as to whether they
elevate it up to folks?
Mr. Smith. I would have to go get the precise answer to
that precise question. I will say this: We do try to, and
frankly, we need to create an environment where bad news
travels fast. That's what we aspire to do. I can definitely
tell you, I can tell you in the case of Storm-558 or this
Midnight Blizzard we're talking minutes to hours gets to me.
I'm usually the last stop before it gets to our CEO, Satya
Nadella, and the time from me to him is in minutes, and it's
not a large number of minutes.
Mr. Menendez. Great, appreciate that.
The CSRB described various approaches, cloud service
providers used to manage and secure identity and authentication
systems. There were particular changes they made following
Operation Aurora in 2010, I'm glad that Microsoft agreed to
transform how it manages and secures its identity systems.
I would like to unpack that a little. Does Microsoft plan
to make significant changes to the architecture of its core
digital identity systems?
Mr. Smith. I think the answer is yes.
Mr. Menendez. I'll be quick with this, Chairman. As part of
a review, the CSRB issued numerous recommendations for cloud
service providers generally in certain Federal agencies. The
CSRB also issued 4 recommendations specific to Microsoft.
Microsoft updated its secure future initiatives subsequent to
the CSRB's report. I would like to discuss how Microsoft plans
to implement a couple of those Microsoft specific
recommendations.
The CSRB recommended that Microsoft share publicly a plan
with specific deadlines for security-based reforms. Does
Microsoft plan to implement the CSRB's recommendation and
publicly release deadlines for implementation?
Mr. Smith. The answer is yes. In fact, of the one things
that I mentioned in my written testimony is we have invited
CISA to send a team out to our headquarters outside of Seattle
in Redmond. Go through all the details of everything that we're
doing. We want to show them all of the details. Then, I think,
one of the things we'll need to, you know, frankly assess
together with CISA is how much or what altitude we should be
publishing things, because if we publish them the good news is
every American can read them, the bad news is everyone in
Moscow can as well. Then I'll just say we recognize the
oversight role that you and this committee plays, so, you know,
we're interested, happy to share more with you than, of course,
we would share with the general public. We just need to do it
in a secure way.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate it. Thank you so much for
appearing here today. I look forward to working with you.
Chairman Green. We'll have staff look at your microphone.
We don't want that to happen to you again.
You get another 5 minutes? Good try.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from Florida, Ms.
Lee, for 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Lee. Good afternoon, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Smith. Good afternoon.
Ms. Lee. I'd like to follow up on one of the lines of
questions from Mr. Menendez. You've testified today that in the
wake of the CSRB report that Microsoft is committed to
prioritizing security first over product and feature
development. That is something that is easy to say and no doubt
very difficult to do with far-reaching implications for your
company. So, I'd like to hear a little bit more about the
specifics, whether you are standing down on product development
while you refactor code base, or what other specific ways in
which you are throttling or pausing feature release or product
release to ensure a focus on the security first as you
described.
Mr. Smith. It's a really good question. I would answer it
in 2 parts. First, in the short term, yes, we have reallocated
resources. We've moved people, we've told them to reprioritize.
By definition, that means that other things may have slowed
down or stopped so this can speed up, and that's the right
thing to do. I think the real challenge is how you achieve
effective, lasting culture change. You know, this is true in
any organization, and especially when you have a company like
ours. We have 225,924 employees. This has to be real and reach
every one of them.
We're calling on a lot of what we learned as a company over
the last decade. We have gone through a lot of culture change.
I think people feel it has benefited us well. I think you
define a North Star which is this notion of ``do security
first.'' You then have to change your accountability
mechanisms, and that's why compensation is so important. But
fundamentally, what we're really gravitating toward is to treat
security as the highest priority and quality.
Ms. Lee. So would it be correct to say then that you have
reallocated people and resources in furtherance of that
objective?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Ms. Lee. Has it also affected your revenue projections, I
would think?
Mr. Smith. I would say so far, I'm not aware of it changing
any of our revenue projections. Let me just put it this way: I
was in Stockholm last Monday, you know, this is a country that
as you know has just joined NATO. I met with about 25
customers, Government customers, corporate customers. What I
found was really interesting. They asked a lot of tough
questions, as you all are, bad news for the folks who want to
sell plan B; they don't want to switch, they want us to get it
right. We have to get it right to deserve their business. But I
think they see that we really are committed to doing that.
Ms. Lee. I know it's come up a couple of times today, but I
would like to return to a discussion of the recently-released
Recall feature. You mentioned security by default, but that
endeavor is something that, if I understand correctly,
presented a security exposure of users who might not have
understood the nature of how it operated.
So I'd like to hear more about how the status of that
product roll-out, and how it is consistent with the security-
first approach, and what's being done to make sure users are
aware of the potential exposures or risks from using it.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I think I would start with, this product
hasn't yet been launched. The feature hasn't yet been finished.
We have had a process to share information and take lots of
feedback. We've defined--we have designed it so it's off by
default, so that people have to choose to turn it on and we can
share information with them before they make that decision.
We've designed the feature so that the information always stays
on one's own PC. It doesn't go to Microsoft, it doesn't go
anywhere else.
We've combined it with a hardening of the security in
Windows for every part of the computer, and not just this
feature alone. Then, we have added additional features that
encrypt data, and decrypt it just in time. So we are trying to
take a very comprehensive approach to addressing all of the
security and privacy issues as well. We're trying to do it in a
dialog, because when you do create technology. I think one of
the mistakes you can make is to think that you have all the
answers. You only get to the best answers when you have these
kinds of collective and public conversations.
Ms. Lee. So in an attempt to comply with the Chairman's
guidance, I will touch on my last question, which is a bit of a
shift in gears, and that is, I would like to hear more about
one of the things that I was identified in the report is an
area in need of improvement was victim notifications. So, I
would like for you to elaborate a little bit more on your
thoughts and going-forward plan on how to improve victim
notification.
Mr. Smith. Let me try briefly to address this, because this
is a really important topic, and it's a hard one for us and
everybody. When we find that someone has been a victim of an
attack, it doesn't mean that the fault was ours, it is just
that our threat detection system may have found it. We need to
let them know. Well, how do you let somebody know? If it is an
enterprise, we probably have a connection. There's probably
somebody there we can call. But if it's a consumer, like a
consumer-based email system, we don't necessarily know who the
human is, we just have an email address. So we send an email.
There was a Member of Congress we sent an email to last year, a
Member of Congress did what you sort-of expect, he said, Well,
that's not really Microsoft is it? It's spam. Then we called
somebody. Believe me, we have called people and they say, Oh,
give me a break, you're not Microsoft, you're just one more
fraud enterprise.
That is the world in which we live. So the CSRB report has
a great recommendation on this, it's to create the equivalent
of the Amber Alert, but it will require support from Congress
that to see that CISA lead this, that the tech sector, and
probably the telecommunications companies and the phone makers
and the phone operating system makers all come together. This
will be a huge step forward.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Suozzi for his 5 minutes of testimony.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank you
and the Ranking Member for holding this hearing. Holding
Microsoft accountable is a good idea. I think that Mr. Smith
has demonstrated he's taken his father's advice. I think you
said it was your father who said no one ever died by using
humility.
Mr. Smith. I don't know if he said it, but he definitely--
he's still alive today. He is probably watching this, for
gosh's sakes. It was definitely something he taught me.
Mr. Suozzi. He would've definitely taken accountability
here today and we appreciate that. Let me just ask what
percentage of Microsoft's business comes from governments?
Mr. Smith. If I had to guess, it's less than 10 percent
globally.
Mr. Suozzi. So what percent of it is just from the Federal
Government itself?
Mr. Smith. Not that much. We love the Federal Government.
It is a big customer, it is one of our biggest and it is the
one that we are the most devoted to, but it is not the biggest
source of our revenue----
Mr. Suozzi. So you mentioned earlier that there are 300
million cyber attacks a day. Are the sources from state-
sponsored adversaries of ours like China, Russia, Iran, and
Korea, is it from organized crime or is it from individuals who
are doing this?
Mr. Smith. I would say most of it comes either from those 4
nation-states, or ransomware operators. We track over 300
organizations, and, you know, those 300 account for by far the
highest percentage.
Mr. Suozzi. Can you give a percentage for how much is from
state actors versus the ransomware people? Are the state actors
sometimes ransomware activists also?
Mr. Smith. I can't, I'm forgetting off the top of my head,
but we can easily get that to you. I will say, in addition to
being a substantial percentage they are, by far, the most
sophisticated and serious.
Mr. Suozzi. So my big concern for our country is how
divided we are. Our country is divided because of our Members
of Congress, there are 435 us, 380 of us are in safe seats so
they don't have to worry about the people per se, they only
have to worry about the people in primaries, so they pander to
their base, and that divides us. Then social media, the people
who get the most attention on social media are the people who
say the most extreme things. Then cable news, you know, Tucker
Carlson was the most-followed person on FOX before he left;
Rachel Maddow. They've got 4 million viewers, 3 million
viewers. They are kind-of playing to the extremes. But our
foreign adversaries, Chinese Communist Party, Russia, Iran, and
North Korea, are taking disinformation and trying to divide us
every day by taking messages that we're fighting about already,
and blowing them up bigger than ever.
We need the great corporate citizen, Microsoft, and other
great corporate citizens, to team up with the people of the
United States of America and their governments to figure out
how we're going to stop this attack, because they are trying to
destroy us from within by dividing us using technology and
disinformation and cybersecurity attacks on a regular basis to
destroy us.
So what can we do to team up more effectively? What other
partners, other than the U.S. Government and Microsoft, should
we try and bring into this partnership to try and save our
country from this division that is being exacerbated by our
foreign adversaries?
Mr. Smith. Well, there's lots of great companies in our
industry that are doing great things in all areas of the
industry. The good news is especially there is this
extraordinary CISO, chief information security officer
community where people work together across industry
boundaries.
Mr. Suozzi. Well, we need to advise the public about what's
happening.
Mr. Smith. Exactly. I think we need processes to do that. I
would say at the end of the day, look, I think the point you
just made is maybe the most important point that could be made
at this hearing, because the greatest threat to this country in
this space comes if our adversaries coordinate and unite and we
should assume that they not only can, but they will.
Mr. Suozzi. They are.
Mr. Smith. The greatest weakness of this country is that
we're divided. Not just politically, but in the industry as
well. We just always have to remember that if we can find a way
to summon the ability to work together you all, if you can work
together across the aisle, and we in our industry can work
across the industry and then we unite together with new
processes that are probably Government-sponsored, and some of
them exist, including through CISA, so we can do what you just
described and among other things help people learn. Also, take
the steps to hold these adversaries accountable so we can start
to change what they are doing.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to participate in an effort by
this committee, bipartisan in some way, working with industry
to come together as a team to figure out what we can do as a
country to identify these threats, notify the public as to
what's happening to them on a regular basis, and how we as a
country, corporate public partnership, can unite to fight
against our foreign adversaries that are trying to destroy our
country.
Thank you, Mr. Smith.
Ms. Lee [presiding]. The gentleman yields back. Thank you,
Mr. Suozzi.
The gentleman from Texas is recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Madam Chairman.
Good afternoon, Mr. Smith. Let's just chat a bit 5, 10
years downstream. Microsoft secures the network from nefarious
to bad actors globally. What is the--and I won't say end game,
because I don't ever think there is going to be a finish line
when it comes to artificial intelligence and machine learning
or the cyber space. What is Microsoft doing, you know, in kill
chain results from this little guy right here, but--maybe
there's nothing we can do to stop the amount of actors that
attack us every single day. But we may not be able to talk
about it in open setting, but is there an end game? Is there a
way to secure the network where bad actors cannot have these
breaches?
Mr. Smith. I would say two things: First, if you look at
the current course and speed, this is probably, for the time
being, and until the geopolitical environment in the world
changes, a bit of a forever war in cyber space with constant
combat. I would hope that that would change, but we can't
assume that it will. So what can we collectively change? Well,
first at Microsoft, I would not just hope, but fundamentally
believe, that, say, 5 years from now, we're going to have
production systems, engineering systems, networking, identity
systems that make it extraordinarily difficult and just beyond
the economic reach of our most sophisticated and well-resourced
adversaries to attack and breach.
Mr. Luttrell. Is that moving the infrastructure completely
to a cloud-based system?
Mr. Smith. I do believe it is. I do think that the cloud is
part of the answer, just not only for us, but for the other
companies who are in the cloud services business. I think that,
you know, in addition to what we do as a company, I would hope,
just as we learned from our competitors and that's a good
thing, that we'll share what we're learning, and our
competitors will adapt as well.
I think the thing we're going to go have to do the most to
internalize is just recognize that we'll do a lot of good
things. Let's say we do every single thing that the CSRB has
recommended because that's what we are going to do, it won't be
enough, because 2 years from now, our adversaries will have
done more. So what we need to create is a process where we
collectively always learn from what is happening. We do a
better job of anticipating and predicting. I do think that AI
will be one of the great game-changers and we need to ensure
that AI benefits the United States and our allies and the
defense of people at a faster rate than it could be used by our
foes to attack them.
Mr. Luttrell. Inevitably, that is going to be the human
variable that is removed from the cybersecurity space, and that
will be completely AI-based. Is that a fair statement?
Mr. Smith. I'm very----
Mr. Luttrell. There is a word out there I'm looking for,
but I don't have it. Computation-based, I'm sorry, no, the
computer systems are going to be the ones that are going to be
running forward with this, which they already do.
Mr. Smith. Let me just say that I am optimistic about what
AI can do to strengthen cybersecurity defenses. But I think
sometimes people in the world of technology actually run the
risk of underestimating the power of people. What we should
really bet on----
Mr. Luttrell. Let me say as a Congressional Member, I would
never do that. I want everybody to know that.
Mr. Smith. What we should bet on and what we should pursue
as a country, and as an industry, is the opportunity to enable
people to stand on the shoulders of better technology. If we
can do that with AI, if that's the stronger foundation, we will
enable our people, especially in this profession, to achieve so
much more. We know that in Moscow and other places, they'll be
trying to do the same thing. We've just got to do it better,
and we've got to do it faster and we can never take a day off,
because that's the reality.
Mr. Luttrell. OK, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green [presiding]. The gentleman yields. I now
recognize Mr. Garcia for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank everybody, sir, I had a chance to be here
for the first half of this hearing, and I rushed to the floor
and rushed back. So thank you for answering all of our
questions.
I want to just take one step back and kind-of absorb some
of what I heard in first half as well. I mean, I clearly--think
you understand I appreciate you taking responsibility for the
security failures and concerns I think all of us have. I think
that's important. I also want to broadly think Microsoft and so
many other companies have done incredible work to change the
lives of Americans.
Obviously, as someone that really believed in the power of
technology, an incredible economic driver that you are to my
State in California and other places, I don't want to sweep
that part under the rug as well. So I thank you for continuing
to work. This is an important serious topic that we're
discussing today.
Every company, every government faces serious threats from
hackers, from foreign intelligence services. We all know that,
that's been established. Russia and China and other countries
are trying to steal secrets, steal technology, steal patents,
and it's not just within your company, but some companies, of
course, across all of our Nation. It is important that we are
here on a bipartisan basis. I also want to note that this--the
report that we are reviewing today is a report from CISA.
I want to encourage us to support CISA as an organization.
There have been some of my colleagues have wanted to abolish
CISA, they wanted to reduce support for strengthening
cybersecurity in our country. I think that would be a huge
mistake. So, I would encourage us to continue to work with CISA
and other agencies to make our systems more secure.
I also want to just note, that I believe--is that we need
more Federal intervention and partnerships, not less or with
Microsoft and other technology companies. It's important that
we continue to work. Before I got here, I was the mayor of Long
Beach, California and I--for 8 years and I consistently
remember the numerous attacks that we got, the cyber attacks we
would receive from a city perspective. The challenges for
municipalities and governments and smaller governments that are
not the Federal Government to deal with those effectively.
So, I encourage you to continue to work not just at the
Federal level, but there are so many small cities and towns
that don't have the capacity to actually deal with some of
these cyber threats that we have.
I also just want to have an initial question, you answered
it probably earlier. We know there are an extraordinary number
of cyber attacks from nation-state actors, we talked about
those today. You want to boil that down? What do you attribute
these direct attacks? Why are they attacking Microsoft systems?
Mr. Smith. Let me just first thank you for your comments. I
do want to underscore so it's clear if there's any doubt, we
support CISA as well, I support CISA. There's always debates
about exactly one piece or another, but it is really doing
important and good work for the country.
I think it's really important to look at the motivations of
nation-state actors as well as criminal enterprises and just
understand what they are doing. I would say over the last year
we've seen on the nation-state side, broadly speaking, three
kinds of motivations: One is access to information,
surveillance, including of other governments, but not
governments alone. So, of course, they go to where the
information is located which does include our cloud services.
The second, and I think this is extraordinarily
disconcerting, is we've seen, from China in particular, this
prepositioning of so-called web shells, think of it as tunnels
into our water system, our electrical grid, into the air
traffic control system. The kind of thing that you look at and
you say this is only useful for one thing, and they have it in
place of a war or hostilities.
The third thing that you see from nation-states is
something that is very unique to North Korea, they have a very
different approach to budgeting, they let ministries employ
hackers and the ministries work to steal money and then the
ministries get to keep the money that they get. It is an
oddity, that's the nation-state side. Think about----
Mr. Garcia. Briefly sir, because I want to ask one more
question with my remaining time, but continue.
Mr. Smith. On ransomware, it is all about making money
unfortunately.
Mr. Garcia. No, I appreciate that. I just want to take a
moment to also commend the State Department security
operations, they have been involved with you and a lot of other
organizations. Their infrastructure, which needs to be
strengthened, does a lot of this work, and so, I want to uplift
them as well.
Last, I wanted to mention in the CSRB report there was a
recommendation to create some type of Amber Alert system, some
kind of notification system. We're all concerned about the
cybersecurity threats. Does Microsoft support this
recommendation? Can you expand a little bit on that?
Mr. Smith. Yes, and I was talking about this a little bit
when you had to leave. I think it could be extraordinarily
helpful for our entire industry, for everybody who uses
technology, for consumers in particular. I hope that we will
find a way to work together to make it a reality.
Mr. Garcia. Well, thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Strong for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Strong. Mr. Smith, I appreciate you being here today.
Most of all, I appreciate your humbleness. We've had people sit
right before this committee, Cabinet members tell us that the
Southern Border, they've got it under control and 3 years
later, 3\1/2\ years later they sit right there and tell us more
than 10 million people have illegally crossed that Southern
Border, so you've served Microsoft well today and I appreciate
how you've presented yourself.
As you may know, I also serve on the House Armed Services
Committee, and specifically the Cyber, Information
Technologies, and Innovation Subcommittee. I'm aware of the
DOD's cyber challenges and needs.
The recent cyber attacks impacting Microsoft demonstrate
how vulnerabilities within a single vendor can be exploited to
gain access to sensitive information and systems, potentially
compromising national security. Can you please explain, from
your perspective, the risk posed by the DOD's reliance on a
single-source vendor?
Mr. Smith. Well, I guess the first thing I would say is I
don't see the DOD moving to rely on anybody as a single source
in the technology space. There's a lot of competition that's
alive and well at the DOD. I think that's a good thing. Then
the other thing I would say is just as there is risk on--in
relying on one vendor, there's risks in relying on multiple
vendors. I would still rely on multiple. So I don't want
anybody to be thinking I'm saying something I'm not. But when
you have--what we call a heterogeneous environment, meaning
technology from lots of different suppliers, you create a lot
of different seams. So then you need to have technology and
people who can knit it all together. Then the thing we should
remember is that a lot of what, say, the SVR, the Russian
foreign intelligence agency does, or the GRU, they are
military, they look for the seams, because those are the places
that are easiest for them to get in. So fundamentally, whether
you have one vendor or several, the challenge is similar. We
all need to work together and just keep making progress.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Would you agree that the vendor
responsible for developing and running hardware and software
programs for the DOD should not be the same vendor responsible
for testing security, conducting security audits, or reporting
on security?
Mr. Smith. I'd want to think a little bit about the precise
formulation of your question, it's a very good one. Mostly what
I would say is, I think it's well-thought out to focus on
testing of solutions and how you have--it's almost a first
principle in governance I would say as somebody who is
responsible for a lot of governance at Microsoft. You want
checks and balances. If one group is performing, you want a
separate group to be auditing and assessing. I think that's
true in a company, it is maybe even more necessary in a
government.
Mr. Strong. I agree. My friend from New York briefly
touched on this, specifically what are the security
implications of China and other potential threat actors having
access into your network for so long? What is the threat of
that? You know, thank goodness it was discovered, but what is
the threat do you see for them being in your system for so long
without being noticed?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I would just like to qualify a little bit
of premise, because I noticed in some of the questions that
were floating around this week, that people suggested that
because the Chinese had acquired this key in 2021 and we didn't
find it until 2023, that they must have had access for 2 years.
I think that, in fact, they kept it in storage until they were
ready to use it, knowing that once they did, it would likely be
discovered quickly.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. That leads to my next question. Are
the Chinese still able to access Microsoft's corporate network
today?
Mr. Smith. No, not with anything they did before, and we
will do everything we can to ensure that they don't get in any
other way.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Again, I thank you for the way that
you have represented yourself and your company today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's yields.
I now recognize Mr. Crane for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, thank you for preparing and coming before the
Homeland Security Committee today.
Mr. Smith, you're the president of Microsoft. Is that
correct?
Mr. Smith. That's correct.
Mr. Crane. You're here today to discuss some leaks and
vulnerabilities that Microsoft has had in the past and what you
guys are going to do to fix them in the future? Is that
correct?
Mr. Smith. Yes, that's right.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Smith, you said earlier in the hearing that
some of your competitors are in this very hearing room. Is that
correct?
Mr. Smith. So I've been told. They could raise their hands
if you ask them. It's probably not the best use of time.
Mr. Crane. OK. So would it be fair to say, Mr. Smith, that
you understand the importance of being strong and formidable
today with some of your opponents, or competitors in the room?
Mr. Smith. I'm sorry, I didn't hear.
Mr. Crane. Do you understand the importance of appearing
strong and formidable today because some of your, you know,
opponents and competitors are in the room?
Mr. Smith. I think the reason that--I don't know if I would
use the word ``strong'' or ``formidable.'' I think the reason
we need to be responsible and resolute is because of our
adversaries abroad, not so much the competition in the
industry----
Mr. Crane. OK. How about this, Mr. Smith, have you ever
heard the saying that weakness is provocative?
Mr. Smith. I've heard similar things. I don't know if I've
heard that one in particular, but I understand it.
Mr. Crane. Well, you're running one of the most powerful
corporations in the world, so I'm sure that that's something
that's not completely alien to you, right?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I--it's--those--you know, let me put it
this way: Size brings power, but mostly what it brings is
responsibility. I would much rather focus on the need to be
responsible than anything else.
Mr. Crane. OK, fair enough. Mr. Smith, would you say that
attacks against the United States in the cyber field have
increased in the last couple of years?
Mr. Smith. Absolutely.
Mr. Crane. Didn't you say in your testimony earlier, sir,
that it felt like it was open season?
Mr. Smith. Yes, or yes, I did say that. I think that's
right. It is an open season on U.S. targets by certain foreign
adversaries.
Mr. Crane. How many attacks are you guys seeing a day, Mr.
Smith?
Mr. Smith. I had the precise number in my written
testimony, what I've been saying here which is reflective there
is more than 300 million per day.
Mr. Crane. Three hundred million per day?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Crane. Wow. Mr. Smith, you're aware you're in the
Homeland Security Committee. Is that----
Mr. Smith. Yes, absolutely.
Mr. Crane. So you understand that the scope of the Homeland
Security Committee is much larger than just cyber attacks. Is
that correct?
Mr. Smith. Absolutely.
Mr. Crane. Good. Are you aware, Mr. Smith, that there was a
reporting just this last week that 8 individuals with ties to
ISIS were arrested this week in multiple U.S. cities? Did you
hear that story?
Mr. Smith. Actually, I was not until you just told me.
Mr. Crane. OK. Well, that happened this week. How about
this one, Mr. Smith: Are you aware of the reporting that
Russian ships were 30 miles off the coast of Florida just this
week as well?
Mr. Smith. I did hear that or read about it.
Mr. Crane. Yes. One of my colleagues asked you, sir, he
said, what can we do to help you? Nobody really wants to say it
in this room, but I'm just going to say it, one of the things
that we can do to help you is actually get stronger leadership
that's respected around the world. That's actually one of the
big problems here. I think everybody in this room actually
knows that.
So, that is one of the things that I think that we're doing
to be doing. But the other thing I wanted to point out, Mr.
Smith, is this isn't an isolated incident, right, all these
increased cyber attacks that we're seeing, right? We're seeing
attacks across the board and everybody in this room knows it.
We're seeing it at the border, we are seeing Russian ships off
the coast of Florida. Just this week, 8 individuals with
affiliation to ISIS were captured in multiple U.S. cities.
That's why I started my questioning, sir, with weakness is
provocative, and if you knew what this meant and what it meant
to you.
Mr. Smith. Yes, I--I understand. Let me just be clear, I
have expertise in one field, not in every field. But I
understand what it means in my field.
Mr. Crane. I know you do, sir. We've said this for a long
time in this country, peace through strength. There is
something to that. When the United States senses that we're
weak or feckless and we have weak and feckless leadership,
these are the types of things that we see. So, I'm hoping that
not only this body, but the American people can work together
to get better leadership for this country because I know it's
going to impact your business. I want to say one more time, I
appreciate you actually coming here today, taking ownership and
responsibility, because as some of my colleagues have said,
it's not something that we see every day, so thank you, sir.
Appreciate it.
Mr. Smith. Well, thank you. Then let me just conclude
because I think this gets us through the entire committee, I
would just underscore what I've tried to say throughout, we do
understand the importance of what you all do on this committee,
what the CSRB and what CISA do, the importance of this report,
and we are committed to addressing every part of it.
Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member for his
5-minute closing statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Smith, you've done a creditable job in representing
your company. You do understand that there are some challenges
with running a company like that. It's only one thing can
create a real problem, and I think you have addressed it thus
far. So let me thank you for that testimony and committing to
participating in the committee's on-going oversight.
Microsoft has an enormous footprint in both Government and
critical infrastructure networks. It is our shared interest
that the security issues raised by the CSRB are addressed
quickly. You've said that the main things you've already done,
we appreciate it.
This hearing was important to understand last summer's
cyber incident and Microsoft's approach to security. In my
view, it is just the beginning of an on-going oversight to
ensure that the technology products used by the Federal
Government are secure, and that Federal vendors take the
security obligation seriously. We've had that discussion in my
office, and I'm sure you've talked with other Members about
that. So in that spirit, I've got a couple of final questions,
I told you there's no ``gotcha'' kind of thing. If you can say
yes or no, that's good. But if you need a little time, I'll
understand that too.
Will Microsoft commit to being transparent with its
customers, particularly the Government, about vulnerabilities
in its products, including cloud products.
Mr. Smith. The answer is yes. The only qualification I
would offer is we need to do it in a way where we share
information with the right people and the right governments and
do it in a way that doesn't make that same sensitive
information available to our adversaries.
Mr. Thompson. Sure.
Mr. Smith. I'm sure we can do that.
Mr. Thompson. If it's a Classified setting, as the Chairman
said, we're fine with it.
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. OK, thank you. Will Microsoft commit to being
transparent with its customers about its investigation into
cyber incidents, including related to root cause, the scope of
impact, and any political on-going associated threat?
Mr. Smith. Yes, and obviously the same qualification as
before. Then I would just add--and we are working to do that. A
lot of what we're doing by adding to our chief information
security officer infrastructure, Government structure is an
ability, and really a desire to get out and share more
information with customers the way you described.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. So will Microsoft commit to
establishing benchmarks and time frames for implementation of
the CSRB recommendations, and the Secure Future Initiative and
commit to proactively keeping this committee informed of its
progress?
Mr. Smith. Yes.
Mr. Thompson. Will Microsoft commit to performing an on-
going and transparent evaluation of risk associated with
business ventures and adversarial nations?
Mr. Smith. Yes, I think we need to.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I look forward to the committee's on-
going oversight and continued engagement with Microsoft. One of
the things that we are tasked with is looking at keeping
America safe, both from foreign and domestic adversaries, and
obviously cyber is, in everybody's opinion, a major threat, and
so--but you have to talk to us.
Mr. Smith. Believe me, I will. You have just defined not
just the mission, but the cause.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Smith. I think it unites all of us.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. I yield back, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
Thank you, Mr. Smith, for coming today. I'll talk a little
bit more about that. I also want to thank our Members for what
I think was very collaborative and cooperative, good tones of
questions. We had, you know, some important things to do here,
ask questions of accountability to determine the responsiveness
of the company to the report. But we also had to protect
because the bad guys are watching, so we had to be careful.
I want to thank you too for the time you've spent in our
office just going over this stuff as well. I know you've made
yourself available, both to the Ranking Member and myself, and
we really appreciate that.
He asked actually most of my questions about transparency
and things like that. So, I just will say this, you know,
sometimes Government in this public-private partnership that we
talked about a couple times, several Members brought it up,
sometimes the Government can kind-of get in the way, too, and I
want to ask that you, you know, educate us as much as possible.
I'll give you an example of the SEC ruling on a 4-day report
for a breach and those kinds of things. I'm on--some of the big
cybersecurity companies, I mean the biggest in the Nation have
told me it is a 7- or 8-day to fix a breach before announcing
to the world that at 4 days, we've got a hole in the wall, and
it takes 7 days to close the hole. We are inviting, this
Government forcing companies across the country to invite the
enemy to come in, right? So that's a stupid regulation. So, we
need help on understanding where the Government also creates
problems. So I'd appreciate anything that comes to mind over
it, you pick up the phone and call us, OK?
In one of the initiatives here, we talked about cyber work
force. One of the other initiatives is the synchronization of
the regulations that are out there, and to make sure that we're
not duplicitous, and that we're not contradictory. As I
understand it, there are some regulations that are. So again,
we would ask your company to help us, and the competitors who
are in the room, to understand where Government kind-of gets in
the way of actual cybersecurity. Because if we're causing you
to have duplicitous effort, that's money that can be spent on
real cybersecurity. So in this partnership, we need
communication, not just on the issues that are brought up here
with this breach that was identified but, you know, how we make
things better, and work better on how we regulate and create
compliance requirements, things like that.
Thank you, again, for your time. I thank the witness for
his valuable testimony and the Members for their questions. The
Members of the committee may have some additional questions. By
the way, I did already get one that will probably require a
Classified mechanism. We can discuss with you and the staff on
how we best do that. We would ask that the witness respond to
these questions in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D),
the hearing record will be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, the committee stands in adjournment.
Mr. Smith. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[Whereupon, at 4:06 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
