- THE BROKEN PATH: HOW TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS PROFIT FROM HUMAN TRAFFICKING AT THE SOUTHWEST BORDER

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE BROKEN PATH: HOW TRANSNATIONAL CRIMINAL
ORGANIZATIONS PROFIT FROM HUMAN
TRAFFICKING AT THE SOUTHWEST BORDER

=======================================================================

JOINT HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
BORDER SECURITY AND ENFORCEMENT

and the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND
TECHNOLOGY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

NOVEMBER 14, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-37
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-370 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON BORDER SECURITY AND ENFORCEMENT

Clay Higgins, Louisiana, Chairman
Michael Guest, Mississippi           J. Luis Correa, California,
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia        Ranking Member
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Garcia, California
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
officio)                           (ex officio)
Natasha Eby, Subcommittee Staff Director
Brieana Marticorena, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Daniel S. Goldman, New York
officio)                           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Clay Higgins, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Louisiana, and Chairman, Subcommittee on Border
Security and Enforcement:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
The Honorable J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Border Security and Enforcement:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     9

Witnesses

Honorable John Cotton Richmond, Former U.S. Ambassador to Monitor
and Combat Human Trafficking; Chief Impact Officer, Atlas Free:
Oral Statement.................................................    12
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Mr. Pablo Villeda, Regional President of Latin America,
International Justice Mission:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Terrence FitzPatrick, Director, Alliance to End Slavery and
Trafficking:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    23
Mr. Jarrod Sadulski, Ph.D., Associate Professor, American
Military University:
Oral Statement.................................................    24
Prepared Statement.............................................    26

For the Record

The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Article, Forbes, October 16, 2023..............................    38

THE BROKEN PATH: HOW TRANSNATIONAL
CRIMINAL ORGANIZATIONS PROFIT FROM
HUMAN TRAFFICKING AT THE SOUTHWEST
BORDER

----------

Tuesday, November 14, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Border Security
and Enforcement, and the
Subcommittee on Emergency
Management and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittees met, pursuant to notice, at 2:06 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Clay Higgins
[Chairman of the Subcommittee on Border Security and
Enforcement] presiding.
Present: Representatives Higgins, D'Esposito, Guest,
Strong, Brecheen, Correa, Jackson Lee, Payne, Thanedar,
Goldman, Garcia, and Ramirez.
Mr. Higgins. The Subcommittee on Border Security and
Enforcement and the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare the
committee in recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the ways
transnational criminal organizations engage in human
trafficking solely for profit, disregarding the dignity of
human life. To protect the most vulnerable, we must work
together to develop a better understanding of how current
border policies have enabled transnational criminal
organizations to conduct large-scale human trafficking at the
southwest borders, and how can we develop effective solutions
to this tragedy that unfolds at our Southern Border?
I now recognize the Ranking Member for the Subcommittee on
Border Security and Enforcement, the gentleman from California,
Mr. Correa, my friend and colleague, for his opening statement.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Higgins and Chairman D'Esposito, thank you for
this most important hearing on human trafficking and human
smuggling. I'll start out by summarizing the difference between
human smuggling and human trafficking.
Human smuggling is a crime against the United States and
occurs when a person pays for service, like transportation or
fraudulent documents, in order to enter a country illegally,
versus human trafficking, which is a crime of exploitation that
occurs when someone uses force, fraud, or coercion to compel
another person to work or engage in the sex or trade of forced
labor. Human trafficking can happen in any industry, any age,
date, gender, and nationality. The Department of State
estimates there are almost 28 million people that are victims
of human trafficking at any given time world-wide. Sadly, many
of those individuals are hidden right in front of us.
Unfortunately, we do not realize the full magnitude of this
problem due to its hidden nature with a crime. For decades this
country has been unable to gather the statistics needed to
understand the scale of this problem.
Human trafficking is multibillion-dollar industry.
Transnational criminal organizations, or TCOs, are preying on
vulnerable individuals to make a dollar. Not only do TCOs
traffic vulnerable people, but family members, strangers, and
friends are also engaged in this business, all to make a buck.
The separate issue of human smuggling, we know that TCOs
prey on vulnerable migrants coming into this country who are
seeking protection, freedom, and hope of a better life for
themselves and/or their families.
We have all read about the reports, briefings, and I
visited Latin America, and we know why migrants are fleeing
their country. They're being forced by violence, prosecution,
effectively starvation. Many parents are forced to choose
whether their children will join a local criminal gang or make
the tough decision to send them northward through the jungles
of Central America and through the treacherous parts of Mexico,
all to reach the border. All of us have seen the Facebook
posts, TikTok, YouTube, videos showing human smugglers
deceiving people into thinking that freedom and safety is just
a few payments away when we know that's not true. That's why
it's imperative to fight against the disinformation campaigns
of these traffickers.
In the fight against TCOs, human trafficking, and human
smuggling, we must engage in comprehensive solutions. I commend
the Biden administration, Secretary Mayorkas, and DHS for
building one of the strongest anti-human trafficking responses
in the world that focuses on prevention, consequences, and
international cooperation. That is why I am concerned that my
colleagues at a recent press release claimed that President
Biden, Secretary Mayorkas had been working in partnership with
cartels. I got to say that we may disagree on how to get the
job done, but I think we all kind-of agree on the objective,
which is stop these criminal organizations and to stop these
individuals from being victimized.
Now let's say instead of using rhetoric, we Members of
Congress should be working together to create comprehensive
solutions to combat these crimes, these huge crimes and their
magnitude. Comprehensive solutions mean developing strong
legislation in a bipartisan manner to combat these criminals.
It means investing in working with our Federal, State, and
local levels, police agencies to support anti-trafficking
organizations. It means also strengthening our partnerships
with our international partners who will support us in fighting
TCOs.
A good example is Chairman Higgins, Mr. Higgins, and myself
working on legislation called The Cooperation on Combating
Human Smuggling and Trafficking Act. One step in the right
direction.
This is not a U.S. problem. This is a global problem. TCOs,
or transnational criminal organizations, can see the
desperation of people fleeing war, corruption, and economic
conditions that are dire as a way to get rich. We need to
partner with our neighbors to the south, north, and across the
globe to end these heinous trafficking crimes.
Today I want to thank our witness for joining us today. I
look forward to hearing their recommendations on how we in
Congress can help end these trafficking crimes and protect the
vulnerable populations who prey in these individuals here and
abroad.
With that, I yield, Mr. Chairman.
[The statement of Ranking Member Correa follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member J. Luis Correa
November 14, 2023
First, it is important to note the difference between human
smuggling and human trafficking. Human smuggling is a crime against the
United States and occurs when a person pays for a service--like
transportation or fraudulent documents, in order illegally enter the
country.
Human trafficking, on the other hand, is a crime of exploitation.
It occurs when someone uses force, fraud, or coercion to compel another
person to work or engage in the sex trade or forced labor. This most
commonly happens after someone is already in the United States. Human
trafficking can happen in any industry and to people of any age,
gender, and nationality. These crimes occur around the world, and they
happen far too frequently in the United States.
The Department of State estimates that 27.6 million people are
victims of trafficking at any given time, world-wide. Sadly, many of
these individuals are often hidden right in plain sight. U.S. citizens
may not even realize they are working alongside someone who is being
trafficked. And unfortunately, we do not realize the full magnitude of
this problem due to the hidden nature of these crimes. For decades,
this country has been unable to gather the statistics needed to
understand the scale of this problem.
Human trafficking is a multi-billion-dollar industry and
Transnational Criminal Organizations, or TCOs, are preying on
vulnerable individuals to make a dime. Not only do TCOs traffick
vulnerable people, but family members, strangers, friends, and even
businesses looking to take advantage of individuals in need of work to
increase their profits can be traffickers. On the separate issue of
human smuggling, we know that TCOs prey on vulnerable migrants coming
to this country who are seeking protection, freedom, and the hope of a
better life for themselves and their families.
You see, we've all read the reporting, attended the briefings, and
some of us have visited Latin America. We know why migrants are fleeing
their homes. They're being forced out by violence and persecution.
Parents are forced to choose whether their child will be coerced
into joining a gang or make the tough decision to send them through a
jungle to reach the border. The many Facebook posts, TikToks, and
YouTube videos from human smugglers deceive them into thinking that
freedom and safety are just a few payments away. We know that's not
true and why it's imperative to fight against the disinformation
campaigns of these traffickers.
To fight against TCOs, human trafficking, and human smuggling
crimes of this magnitude, we must engage in comprehensive solutions. I
commend the Biden administration, Secretary Mayorkas, and DHS for
building one of the strongest anti-human trafficking responses in the
world which focuses on prevention, consequences, and international
cooperation.
That's why I was deeply disturbed by my colleagues' recent press
release that would claim that President Biden and Secretary Mayorkas
would work ``in partnership'' with cartels.
Instead of using this rhetoric, we as Members of Congress should be
working together to create comprehensive solutions to combat crimes of
this magnitude. We are doing more than we ever have to combat this
issue, but more needs to be done.
Comprehensive solutions mean developing strong legislation in a
bipartisan manner to combat these criminals. It means investing in
programs at the Federal, State, and local levels to support anti-
trafficking organizations that are on the front lines helping the
victims of these crimes. And it means strengthening our partnerships
with our international partners who will support us in combating TCOs.
I believe bipartisan solutions can address these heinous crimes. For
example, Chairman Higgins and I put forth bipartisan legislation, ``The
Cooperation on Combating Human Smuggling and Trafficking Act,'' to
expand transnational criminal investigative units that dismantle human
smuggling and human trafficking operations in Latin America.
Finally, as I've said before, we can better solve our problems with
effective foreign partnerships. We are in the midst of a global
movement and displacement of people that we have never seen in our
hemisphere. This is just not a U.S. problem; it is a global problem.
Transnational Criminal Organizations and others see the desperation of
people fleeing war, corruption, and dire economic conditions as an
opportunity to make money. We need to partner with our neighbors to the
south, north, and across the globe to end these heinous trafficking
crimes.
I want to thank our witnesses for joining us today and I look
forward to hearing their recommendations on how we in Congress can help
to end these trafficking crimes and protect the vulnerable populations
who fall prey to these criminals both here at home and abroad.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Ranking Member Correa.
I now recognize the Chairman for the Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology, the gentleman from New
York, Mr. D'Esposito, for his opening statement.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you and Ranking Member Correa for so kindly allowing this
hearing to be a joint hearing with the Emergency Management and
Technology Subcommittee. I would also like to thank our
esteemed panel of witnesses for joining us today. I'm looked
forward to having a meaningful discussion about how the
Department of Homeland Security and the U.S. Government can
fight against transnational criminal organizations booming the
human trafficking business both here and the United States and
along smuggling routes in Latin America.
As I am sure we would all agree, human trafficking is an
evil which should be eradicated. It is the use of force, fraud,
or coercion to exploit someone else for personal gain. It is in
its very nature dehumanizing, selfish, and cruel. Put simply,
traffickers prey on vulnerability, and they profit from pain.
To some Americans, the reality and dangers of human
trafficking may only seem like a plot for a good movie or some
faraway and miniscule reality. However, that is simply not the
case. While human trafficking is a hidden crime, it is
estimated that 27.6 million men, women, and children are
currently victims of human trafficking, whether by powerful
criminal organizations or by individuals who simply take
advantage of others' misfortune.
With this in mind, it is important that we explore the
reality between the Biden administration's failure to secure
the Southern Border and how TCOs take advantage of migrants on
their journey to the United States of America and after they
arrive.
Transnational criminal organizations make billions of
dollars each year off human trafficking alone. While human
smuggling does not cause human trafficking, the two are
correlated. A recent ABC article demonstrated that the surge of
migration is directly tied to the TCO's recruitment of migrants
for their, ``big business of human smuggling.''
While migrants pay cartels thousands of dollars to be
smuggled into the United States of America, these TCOs often
exploit, sexually abuse, and traffick the same migrants who
paid them. Tragically, women, and children, including
unaccompanied minors, bear the brunt of this abuse.
The truth is that open borders empower TCOs to take
advantage of migrants' vulnerability. Once across the border,
many migrants continue to be at risk of being trafficked. With
the growing number of migrants overwhelming cities in the
United States, the current humanitarian crisis is only putting
more individuals at risk of being trafficked. Housing
instability, a lack of support system, and financial pressure
all make migrants vulnerable to trafficking. While States like
Texas and Arizona have had to manage the border crisis for
years, every State under the failed policies of Biden and
Mayorkas are now becoming a border State. My home State of New
York is no exception.
Since the spring of 2022, more than 100,000 migrants have
passed through New York City, and it is estimated that more
than 58,000 individuals still remain in the city's care. The
mayor of the city of New York, Eric Adams, has previously
stated that the city has already spent more than $1.45 billion
to address the migrant crisis, and that New York City could
potentially spend $12 billion to address the migrant crisis
over the next 3 fiscal years.
It is glaringly apparent that the city is inadequately
prepared to house or provide services to the growing number of
migrants. The mayor's response has been to put migrants in
already overcrowded homeless shelters and hospitals, JFK
Airport, and a tent city at Randall's Island, just to name a
few locations. The lack of planning when it comes to migrant
housing is extremely concerning given that we know about the
human trafficking risk factors.
In 2021, Polaris, the operator of the National Human
Trafficking Hotline, published a report that found that
migration or relocation and unstable housing are both major
risk factors that can make an individual more vulnerable to
human trafficking. New York City and the Long Island area have
one of the highest rates of human trafficking in the country.
According to the New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services, between 2008 and 2021, local authorities have
made 58 human trafficking arrests, 24 in my home county of
Nassau and 34 in the bordering county, and the home to
Congressman Nick LaLota, in Suffolk County.
Given the fact that the current administration continues to
do nothing to address the migrant crisis, I am deeply concerned
that this lack of resources and planning will lead to an
increase in the number of individuals being trafficked.
Furthermore, the Long Island area gang activity can also
contribute to the risk of individuals being trafficked. As
highlighted in a Washington Post article from last year, the
gang MS-13 has ``increasingly turned to sex trafficking over
the past decade to generate income alongside drug
trafficking.'' MS-13, which has operated on Long Island since
2003, have many who have been convicted of dozens of murders in
the region and is considered one of the most violent criminal
organizations on Long Island.
I hope for the sake of all those being impacted by this
crisis that we are able to come together to find meaningful
solutions.
Again, I thank you all for being here today, I thank the
Chairman, and the Ranking Member.
With that, I yield back.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]
Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito
I first want to begin by thanking Chairman Higgins and Ranking
Member Correa for so kindly allowing today's hearing to be a joint
hearing with the Emergency Management and Technology Subcommittee.
I would also like to thank our esteemed panel of witnesses for
joining us today. I'm looking forward to having a meaningful discussion
about how the Department of Homeland Security and U.S. Government can
fight against Transnational Criminal Organizations' (TCOs) booming
human trafficking business, both here in the United States and along
smuggling routes in Latin America.
As I am sure we would all agree, human trafficking is an evil which
should be eradicated. It is the use of ``force, fraud, or coercion'' to
exploit someone else for personal gain. It is in its very nature,
dehumanizing, selfish, and cruel. Put simply, traffickers prey on
vulnerability, and they profit from pain.
To some Americans, the reality and the dangers of human trafficking
may only seem like a plot for a good movie, or some faraway and
miniscule reality; however, that is simply not the case. While human
trafficking is a hidden crime, it is estimated that 27.6 million men,
women, and children are currently victims of human trafficking, whether
by powerful criminal organizations, or by individuals who simply take
advantage of others' misfortune.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.state.gov/national-human-trafficking-prevention-
month-2023/#:?:text=Human-
%20trafficking%20is%20a%20crime,right%20in%20front%20of%20us.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With this in mind, it is important that we explore the reality
between the Biden administration's failure to secure the Southern
Border and how TCOs take advantage of migrants on their journey to the
United States and even after they arrive.
Transnational criminal organizations make billions of dollars each
year off human smuggling alone. And, while human smuggling does not
cause human trafficking, the two are correlated. A recent ABC article
demonstrated that the surge of migration is directly tied to the TCOs'
recruitment of migrants for their ``big business of human
smuggling.''\2\ While migrants pay cartels thousands of dollars to be
smuggled into the United States, these TCOs often exploit, sexually
abuse, and traffic the same migrants who paid them. Tragically, women
and children, including unaccompanied minors, bear the brunt of this
abuse.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/migrant-crisis-explained-
border-surge/story?id=103364219.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The truth is that open borders empower TCOs to take advantage of
migrants' vulnerability, and, once across the border, many migrants
continue to be at risk of being trafficked. With the growing number of
migrants overhelming cities in the United States, the current
humanitarian crisis in only putting more individuals at risk of being
trafficked. Housing instability, a lack of a support system, and
financial pressure, all make migrants vulnerable to trafficking. While
States like Texas and Arizona have had to manage the border crisis for
years, every State is quickly becoming a border State. My home State of
New York is no exception.
Since the Spring of 2022, more than 100,000 migrants have passed
through New York City and it is estimated that more than 58,000
indivuals still remain in the city's care. The Mayor of New York City,
Eric Adams, has previously stated that the city has already spent more
than $1.45 billion to address the migrant crisis, and New York City
could potentially spend $12 billion to address the migrant crisis over
next 3 fiscal years.
However, it is glaringly apparent that the city is inadequately
prepared to house or provide services to the growing number of
migrants. The Mayor's response has been to put migrants in already
overcrowded homeless shelters and hospitals, the JFK airport, and a
tent city on Randall's Island, just to name a few locations.
This lack of planning when it comes to migrant housing, is
extremely concerning, given what we know about the human trafficking
risk factors. In 2021, Polaris, the operator of the National Human
Trafficking Hotline, published a report that found that migration or
relocation and unstable housing are both major risk factors that can
make an individual more vunerable to human trafficking.
New York City and the Long Island area have one of the highest
rates of human trafficking in the country. According to the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services, between 2008 and 2021,
local authorities have made 58 human trafficking arrests--24 in Nassau,
34 in Suffolk.
Given the fact that the current administration continues to do
nothing to address the migrant crisis, I am deeply concerned that this
lack of resources and planning will lead to an increase in the number
of individuals being trafficked.
Furthermore, in the Long Island area, gang activity can also
contribute to the risk of individuals being trafficked. As highlighted
in a Washington Post article from last year, the gang MS-13 has,
``increasingly turned to sex trafficking over the past decade to
generate income alongside drug trafficking.'' MS-13, which has operated
in the Long Island area since 2003, has been convicted of dozens of
murders in the region, and is considered the most violent criminal
organization on Long Island.
I hope for the sake of all those impacted by this crisis, that we
are able to come together to find some meaningful solutions.
And with that, I yield back.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito.
I now recognize myself for my opening statement. Today, we
will be examining and uncovering how transnational criminal
organizations commit heinous and incalculable horrors in their
trafficking schemes across our Southwest Border and deep into
the United States. Human traffickers are part of a large
network of vicious, evil organizations that exploit vulnerable
people for profit.
The Biden administration has unwittingly facilitated cartel
operations at the Southern Border, and, as a result, we face a
human trafficking crisis. Cartels have been emboldened, and
migrants have been victimized. The most vulnerable, including
children, have become targets for cartels and violent gangs who
prey on them for forced labor or sexual exploitation and
slavery.
It is important to recognize the key differences between
human smuggling and human trafficking. Human smuggling is a
crime of unlawful movement of human beings. On the other hand,
human trafficking is a coercive crime against a victim by force
usually through forced labor or sexual exploitation.
As criminal cartels continue to exploit our borders, human
trafficking will only worsen. Smuggling can and does lead to
trafficking. Transnational criminal organizations charge
migrants thousands or even tens of thousands of dollars to be
smuggled across the border with many being unable to pay and
subsequently forced into sex, drug, and labor trafficking
rings.
I would like to recognize that Border Security
Subcommittee's bipartisan effort to combat this evil. Earlier
this year, Ranking Member Correa introduced H.R. 4574, the
Cooperation on Combating Human Smuggling and Trafficking Act,
which seeks to enhance border security by expanding
partnerships with law enforcement entities in Mexico, Central
America, and South America to combat human smuggling and
trafficking operations.
In the last Congress, this committee introduced the
Countering Human Trafficking Act of 2022, which provided
statutory authority for the Center for Countering Human
Trafficking within the Department of Homeland Security. The
border crisis has facilitated an immigration crisis in the
United States and has allowed criminal cartels to sprout--to
prosper by exploiting the most vulnerable individuals.
Criminal cartels have expanded to operate global
enterprises where each migrant is viewed as a commodity in
which these criminal cartels are able to profit.
I look forward to working with my colleagues as we work to
fight human trafficking, strengthen our border security, and
bring these criminals at the border to justice.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses, and I yield
my own opening statement. Mr. Carter, the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology, the
gentleman from Louisiana, has not been able to join us yet
today, but he will hopefully in the--while we are still in
attendance here.
[The statement of Chairman Higgins follows:]
Statement of Chairman Clay Higgins
November 14, 2023
Good afternoon and welcome to the Subcommittee on Border Security
and Enforcement and Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology
joint hearing on how transnational criminal organizations profit from
the booming cartel business of human trafficking at the Southwest
Border.
The purpose of today's hearing is to examine how transnational
criminal organizations commit incalculable horrors and disregard for
human life in their trafficking schemes and the effects that can be
seen throughout Latin America and across our Southwest Border in the
United States. Human traffickers are part of a larger network of
vicious, evil organizations that exploit people for profit in the
Western Hemisphere.
The border crisis has resulted in record-breaking illegal
immigration to the United States, and as a result, the country is
facing an unprecedented human trafficking crisis that has both
emboldened cartels and victimized migrants. The border crisis has also
presented a historic business opportunity for the cartel since each
migrant is viewed as a commodity from which they can profit.
Even the most vulnerable of these people, including children, have
become prime targets for these cartels and violent gangs who prey on
them for forced labor or sexploitation.
Make no mistake, humans are not merchandise and never should be
sold into slavery. There is an untold number of men, women, and
children who now live in modern day enslavement and suffer abuse from
their captors when they were taken on their journey to the United
States.
Not to mention, the Darien Gap--a major path on the migrant route
in Central America--is increasingly seeing sexual violence used by
transnational criminal organizations as an instrument of terror and
coercion among travelers. Some of these migrants are forced into
trafficking. Some of them will never see freedom.
However, we must recognize the key differences between human
smuggling and human trafficking. Human smuggling is a crime of unlawful
movement. On the other hand, human trafficking does not require
movement and is a coercive crime against a victim by force, usually
through forced labor or sexual exploitation. It is important to
recognize, that human smuggling can lead to human trafficking as it
often does.
The open-border policies of the current administration have
empowered these transnational criminal organizations to control
dangerous migrant routes and hold operational control over our
Southwest Border. Unsurprisingly, cartels have expanded their empire
and now their reach has spread to every part of the globe. Sadly, these
cartels are further emboldened by the United States' failure to enforce
immigration laws and secure the Southwest Border.
As many countless victims of human trafficking make their way to or
operate in the United States, we must first ask ourselves why the
demand for this industry continues to grow at home.
These open-border policies are undoubtedly contributing to the
massive increase in the trafficking of children across the Southwest
Border, and their on-going exploitation by the cartels and evil
individuals posing as ``sponsors'' here in the United States.
Recently, an internal Health and Human Services audit found that
basic screening safeguards had been removed from the sponsor vetting
process ``in an effort to expedite children's release from care.'' They
found that these vulnerable children were often sent to the same
address, or in some cases, ``sponsors'' were receiving dozens of
minors.
We need to ensure that the most vulnerable are not falling victim
to trafficking, abuse, and neglect under the watch of the Federal
Government.
Reports have stated that the U.S. Government has been cutting
certain corners while vetting sponsors for unaccompanied children who
have crossed the border into the United States and placing emphasis on
speed rather than ensuring the sponsors are legitimate and that the
child is going to a safe situation is troubling.
As transnational criminal organizations continue to exploit our
borders, human trafficking will continue to worsen. Smuggling can and
does lead to trafficking. Transnational criminal organizations charge
migrants thousands to tens of thousands of dollars to be smuggled
across the border, with many being unable to pay and subsequently being
forced into sex, drug, and labor trafficking rings.
How could a nation so prosperous and enshrined with the notion of
freedom allow this to happen?
I would like to welcome our witnesses for being here today and I
look forward to their testimony regarding their work to combat human
trafficking of the most vulnerable from the hands of transnational
criminal organizations.
Human trafficking is evil but transnational criminal organizations
have no regard for human life, instead looking toward their profits,
where they make billions of dollars exploiting human life.
I want to recognize the Border Security Subcommittee's bipartisan
effort to combat this evil. Earlier this year, Ranking Member Correa
introduced H.R. 4574 the ``Cooperation on Combatting Human Smuggling
and Trafficking Act'' which seeks to enhance border security by
expanding partnerships with law enforcement entities in Mexico, Central
America, and South America to combat human smuggling and trafficking
operations, and I am proud to have signed onto this bill and co-lead
this effort with him.
And last Congress, this committee introduced the Countering Human
Trafficking Act of 2022, which provided statutory authority for the
Center for Countering Human Trafficking within the Department of
Homeland Security.
Congress must work to ensure that the U.S. Government has the
resources available to continue to lead in this global fight against
human trafficking.
With that, I yield back the balance of my time and look forward to
hearing from our witnesses.

Mr. Higgins. Other Members of the committee are reminded
that opening statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
November 14, 2023
Addressing human smuggling and trafficking is a critically
important challenge. Unfortunately, based on their politically-charged
rhetoric and baseless accusations about the Biden administration's
border policies, I doubt my Republican colleagues intend to use this
hearing to help find meaningful solutions.
More likely, my Republican colleagues have convened this hearing to
mislead the American public about what the administration is doing to
combat human smuggling and trafficking at the border. In fact, the
Biden administration and Secretary Mayorkas are going after the cartels
and have implemented enhanced counter-trafficking and counter-smuggling
efforts. They are not only investigating and prosecuting individuals
involved in these crimes but also investing in prevention efforts and
assisting victims.
My Republican colleagues will try to make the American people think
that shutting our borders to asylum seekers would help stop human
smuggling and trafficking. In fact, doing so would have the opposite
effect, empowering cartels to exploit migrants further. We know that
migrants are fleeing terrible conditions and will travel to the U.S.
border no matter the obstacles placed in their way. But the more
difficult the journey, and the more hurdles migrants have to overcome,
the more the cartels can charge.
The reality is that we need legal pathways for migrants who are
often fleeing conflict, persecution, or dire economic conditions in
search of a better life. They seek the safety and the American dream,
and knowingly embark on a treacherous journey to achieve it. We need to
cut smugglers out and have safe and humane pathways for migrants to
come to the United States under our laws.
It's also important to recognize how natural disasters can affect
any community, regardless of background, but particularly the most
vulnerable who have little choice but to set out in search of safety,
security, and prosperity. Unfortunately, in desperation, people are
sometimes taken advantage of.
After Hurricane Katrina, for example, many foreign workers were
hired to rebuild oil rigs and facilities damaged by Hurricane Katrina.
They were promised good jobs and permanent U.S. residency by recruiters
who required them to pay up to $10,000. Still, when they arrived at
Signal Shipyards in Pascagoula, Mississippi, they discovered they would
not receive the promised residency documents.
Instead, ``they were charged $1,050 per month to live in guarded
labor camps where up to 24 men lived in single 1,800-square-foot (167-
square-meter) units and were exploited to work.''They became victims of
human trafficking, specifically labor trafficking. Such instances are a
stark reminder that these issues have no business being tied to
partisan maneuvering, but rather we must work together to end human
trafficking and smuggling.
In the 117th Congress, then-Ranking Member John Katko of the
Homeland Security Committee and I sought to enhance and streamline
DHS's ability to combat human trafficking by introducing the Countering
Human Trafficking Act, which made the Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) Center for Countering Human Trafficking (CCHT) permanent and
increased coordination among DHS components.
I am grateful that President Biden signed the legislation into law
last December. This bipartisan, bicameral law had the support of every
CHS subcommittee Chair and Ranking Member. I hope we can get back to
working together to provide real solutions to protect the most
vulnerable and mitigate threats to our homeland.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today on how Congress
can do more to combat human trafficking and human smuggling, as well as
how we can better protect people from being exploited by bad actors.

Mr. Correa. I wanted to ask unanimous consent to include
Ranking Member Carter's opening statement for the record.
Mr. Higgins. Without objection.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Troy Carter
November 14, 2023
Let me say from the outset, that the issues of human trafficking
and smuggling are important, so I am disappointed that in announcing
this hearing, my Republican colleagues decided to make this hearing
part of a multiple phase plan to impeach or smear the President and the
Secretary of Homeland Security.
Human trafficking and smuggling are not new problems that the
country is facing, sadly, we have had these problems for decades and
the only real way to make headway is to work together. I hope that
coming away from this hearing, we do more to approach these and other
issues in a more bipartisan fashion and give a more balanced approach.
And while much of the focus of today's hearing for my Republican
colleagues is on the border, we should also note that human trafficking
can and frequently does occur without crossing any borders.
Human trafficking is an on-going challenge in my home State of
Louisiana. In 2021, Governor John Bel Edwards signed into law a bill
that established the Office of Human Trafficking Prevention. In
February, the Office of Human Trafficking Prevention released a report
for 2022 that had alarming statistics--70 percent of the reported
trafficking victims in Louisiana were under 18 years old, 88 percent
were female, 53 percent were African American, 39 percent were White,
and the majority were U.S. citizens.
At the Federal level, multiple administrations have launched
initiatives to address these issues. Congress has been active on these
issues as well. Last year, Congress passed the Countering Human
Trafficking Act of 2021, which authorized and expanded the Center for
Countering Human Trafficking. With this bill signed into law by
President Biden, Congress institutionalized the DHS counter-trafficking
mission ensuring that DHS can investigate human trafficking and disrupt
cross-border illicit networks. I look forward to hearing from our
witnesses today about how the Countering Human Trafficking Act has been
implemented.
I would like to acknowledge the Biden administration's efforts to
end human trafficking and smuggling through the 2022 launch of the
Counter Human Smuggler Campaign, which conducted over 6,700 disruptions
to the human smuggling infrastructure. These efforts included raids on
smugglers' stash houses and impounding trailers used to unlawfully
transport migrants. In May 2023, the administration launched a digital
ad campaign to combat smuggler-driven disinformation on social media
platforms. These ads included simple images and language about U.S.
immigration laws and were geotargeted for migrants along the migratory
path in Central and South America.
Human trafficking and smuggling are complex issues, which is why
Congress needs to address the root causes and eliminate a fractured
immigration system that has negatively impacted millions of migrants
and subjected them to unimaginable abuse. We need to work on a
bipartisan front to keep the Government open, enable our law
enforcement to keep going after traffickers and smugglers, and assist
the victims of these terrible crimes.
I look forward to speaking to our witnesses today about human
trafficking and smuggling and, more importantly, what Congress can do
to help victims and dismantle systems that make people more susceptible
to being victims of trafficking and smuggling.

Mr. Higgins. I thank the Ranking Member.
I am pleased to welcome our panel of witnesses. I ask that
our witnesses please rise and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Higgins. Let the record reflect that the witnesses have
answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be seated.
I would like now to formally introduce our witnesses.
Ambassador John Cotton Richmond is an attorney and diplomat
focused on ethical business, human rights, democracy, and the
rule of the law. Previously, Ambassador Richmond served as a
U.S. Ambassador to monitor and combat trafficking in persons
from 2018 to 2021. Serving in the Nation's highest-ranking
position dedicated to human trafficking, he led U.S. foreign
policy related to modern slavery and coordinated the U.S.
Government's response to these crimes.
Our next witness, Mr. Pablo Villeda, is International
Justice Mission's regional president of Latin America, and the
gentleman oversees their work to rescue children who have been
victimized by sexual violence and to secure justice against
human traffickers and those who would exploit the vulnerable
for sexual trade. Mr. Villeda joined International Justice
Mission as Guatemala's field office director where he led a
team to achieve significant convictions against perpetrators of
sexual violence, and he pioneered new ways of combating child
sexual assault by equipping officials within the Guatemala
justice system with what they needed to fight back.
I would like to recognize the gentleman from California,
Mr. Correa, to introduce a Minority witness, Mr. Terry
FitzPatrick.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman Higgins and Chairman
D'Esposito, it is my honor to introduce Mr. Terry FitzPatrick.
A journalist by training, Mr. FitzPatrick has been involved in
the fight against human trafficking for over a decade. He has
award-winning coverage on human rights and criminal justice. He
has also helped produce films about human trafficking in 14
countries around the world. He currently serves as the director
of the Alliance to End Slavery and Trafficking, also known as
ATEST, a coalition advocating for solutions and human
trafficking.
Thank you, Mr. FitzPatrick, for being here today. I look
forward to hearing your statement, sir.
Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the Ranking Member.
Our final witness, Dr. Jarrod Sadulski has over 20 years of
law enforcement experience, including counter-human
trafficking, counterterrorism, homeland security, and local law
enforcement. Dr. Sadulski has spent time in Central America and
South America researching both human trafficking and
international narcotics trafficking.
I thank the witnesses for being here today. The witnesses'
full statements will appear in the record.
I now recognize Ambassador Richmond for 5 minutes to
summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HONORABLE JOHN COTTON RICHMOND, FORMER U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO MONITOR AND COMBAT HUMAN TRAFFICKING; CHIEF
IMPACT OFFICER, ATLAS FREE

Mr. Richmond. Chairman Higgins, Ranking Member Correa,
Chairman D'Esposito, thank you for allowing us to appear here
today. I currently serve as the chief impact officer for Atlas
Free, a network of over 40 anti-trafficking organizations
working to combat trafficking around the world. I'm also the
president of the Libertas Council, a leadership community
focused on combating human trafficking, advancing democracy,
and affirming human dignity.
The Members have wisely highlighted that traffickers profit
from human trafficking. This is not the noble profits of a
market-based enterprise in a fair capitalist system. These are
the illicit economic gains from treating inherently valuable
people as disposable commodities. Whenever the issue of the
border arises in conversations about human trafficking, I think
it's wise to clarify the distinction between smuggling and
trafficking. Smuggling is a crime of transportation. It can be
voluntary or involuntary, and it violates the integrity of a
country's borders. Trafficking, however, is always involuntary.
Coercion is at the very heart of the crime, and there is no
legal requirement that a person crosses a border to be a victim
of human trafficking.
In fact, the United Nations estimates over 70 percent of
all the victims in the world, that their traffickers actually
exploit them in their own country of origin. This isn't to
suggest that borders don't matter. They do. It's just that
illegal border crossings do not cause human trafficking. They
do, however, make people much more vulnerable. Traffickers prey
on vulnerable people because traffickers believe that
vulnerable people are easier to coerce and exploit.
Many things make people vulnerable. People who are in
poverty, illiteracy, disabilities, lack of strong families. All
of these things can make individuals vulnerable to crime,
including the crime of trafficking. As Chairman D'Esposito
said, border crossings are correlated, but they're not causal
to trafficking. There's only one cause of human trafficking,
one true root cause of trafficking, and that is the
trafficker's decision to exploit another person.
When people talk about going upstream, they often focus on
just reducing vulnerabilities. While noble, these efforts have
at best an indirect impact on human trafficking because they're
focused on the correlated vulnerabilities and not the true root
cause of trafficking.
The Government's failure to enforce laws benefits
criminals. This is true not only of border laws, but it's also
true of trafficking laws.
The U.S. State Department highlighted the plummeting rate
of human trafficking law enforcement last year. According to
the State Department, the United States only initiated 162 new
Federal human trafficking prosecutions last year. New
prosecutions had not been that low since 2014. U.S. Federal
courts only convicted 256 human traffickers last year, a 48
percent decrease since 2019.
Although strong and effective criminal justice response to
trafficking alone will not solve the problem, it is a necessary
component of a holistic approach. The failure to fund and
resource the hardworking people of the Department of Justice
and Homeland Security to enforce our trafficking laws means
that human traffickers are operating with impunity. Pair the
awful reality with the dramatic increase in vulnerable,
undocumented people, and human trafficking becomes a high-
reward, low-risk, criminal enterprise.
We are not only dealing with the Government's failure to
enforce border laws concerning individuals. The United States
is also failing to stop companies from importing goods made by
forced labor victims. The teams at DHS charged with enforcing
both the Tariff Act and the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act
must be allowed to stop slave-made goods from tarnishing United
States markets.
Congress must decide if it will take a consistent approach
to human rights or only engage in soaring rhetoric when it's
convenient to other priorities.
With almost all the solar panels crossing the United States
borders having been sustained by China forcing Uyghur
minorities to work, we have to ask if America wants to go green
on the back of slave labor. We have to ask if chocolate
Halloween treats are worth traffickers forcing children from
Mali and Burkina Faso to work in fields. Forced labor
interferes with free markets, and it undermines capitalism.
For individuals to flourish, people must be free to decide
where they work and who touches their bodies. Congress should
move quickly to reauthorize the international provisions of the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act and to create vacature and
expungement pathways for trafficking survivors.
The United States should screen every undocumented persons
for indicators of trafficking as it humanely enforces its
border laws and prevents the surge of vulnerable individuals
for traffickers to target.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions in this
discussion today.
[The prepared statement of Hon. Richmond follows:]
Prepared Statement of John Cotton Richmond
November 13, 2023
Chairman Higgins, Ranking Member Correa, Chairman D'Esposito,
Ranking Member Carter, and distinguished Members of the subcommittees,
thank you for the opportunity to testify at this important hearing. I
am grateful to testify with my thoughtful colleagues on this panel.
I serve as the chief impact officer of Atlas Free, a network of
over 40 organizations fighting human trafficking around the world. I am
also the president of the Libertas Council, a leadership community
focused on combating human trafficking, advancing democracy, and
affirming human dignity. For over 20 years, my work has focused on the
global fight against human trafficking. I have worked for a number of
amazing nonprofits, served as a Federal prosecutor and founding member
of the Department of Justice's Human Trafficking Prosecution Unit,
worked in the private sector, and led U.S. foreign policy on this issue
as the U.S. Ambassador-at-Large to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in
Persons. I have met and learned from many survivors over the years. I
have also benefit from listening to traffickers--the women and men who
choose to commit this crime. Together these experiences shape my
understanding and fuel my passion to ensure all people are free.
The Members have wisely highlighted that traffickers ``profit''
from human trafficking. This is not the noble profits of market-based
enterprises in a fair capitalist system. These are illicit economic
gains from treating inherently valuable people as disposable
commodities.
Whenever issues of the border arise in conversations about human
trafficking, I think it is wise to clarify the distinction between
human smuggling and human trafficking. Smuggling is a crime of
transportation. It can be voluntary or involuntary, and it violates
border integrity. Human trafficking, however, is always involuntary.
Coercion is at the very heart of the crime and there is no legal
requirement that a person crosses a border. The United Nations
estimates that traffickers exploit 77 percent of all victims in their
country of origin without crossing a border.
This is not to suggest that borders do not matter. They do. It is
just that illegal border crossings do not cause human trafficking. They
do, however, make people more vulnerable. Traffickers prey on
vulnerable people because the traffickers believe vulnerable people are
easier to exploit--and undocumented individuals are exceptionally
vulnerable. Many things make people vulnerable to those bent on evil:
poverty, illiteracy, disabilities, lack of strong families--yet none of
these vulnerabilities cause human trafficking. They are correlated but
not causal. There is only one cause of human trafficking. The root
cause of human trafficking is traffickers. When people talk about
``going upstream'' they focus on reducing vulnerabilities. While noble,
these efforts have at best an indirect impact on human trafficking,
because they focus on correlated vulnerabilities instead of
trafficking's true root cause.
The Government's failure to enforce laws benefits criminals. This
is true of border laws and trafficking laws. The U.S. State Department
highlighted the plummeting rate of human trafficking law enforcement
last year. According to State, the United States only initiated 162 new
Federal human trafficking prosecutions last year. New prosecutions have
not been that low since 2014. U.S. Federal courts only convicted 256
human traffickers last year, a 48 percent decrease since 2019. Although
a strong and effective criminal justice response to trafficking alone
will not solve the problem, it is a necessary component of a holistic
approach. The failure to fund and resource the hard-working people at
DOJ and DHS to enforce our human trafficking laws means human
traffickers operate with impunity. Pair that awful reality with a
dramatic increase in vulnerable undocumented people, and human
trafficking becomes a high-reward/low-risk criminal undertaking.
We are not only dealing with Government's failure to enforce border
laws concerning individuals, the United States is also failing to stop
companies from importing goods made by forced labor victims. The
faithful teams at DHS charged with enforcing both the Tariff Act and
the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act must be allowed to stop slave-
made goods from tarnishing United States markets.
Congress must decide if it will take a consistent approach to human
rights or only engage in soaring rhetoric when it is convenient for
other priorities. With almost all the solar panels crossing U.S.
borders having been stained by China forcing Uyghur minorities to work,
we have to ask if America wants to ``go green'' on the backs of slave
labor. We have to ask if chocolate Halloween treats are worth
traffickers forcing children from Mali and Burkina Faso to work in
cacao fields. Forced labor interferes with free markets and undermines
capitalism. For individuals to flourish, people must be free to decide
where they work and who touches their bodies.
Congress should move quickly to reauthorize the international
provisions of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act and create vacatur
and expungement pathways for trafficking survivors. The United States
should screen every undocumented person for indicators of trafficking
as it humanely enforces its border laws and prevents the surge of
vulnerable individuals for traffickers to target.
Thank you, and I welcome your questions.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Ambassador.
I now recognize Mr. Villeda for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF PABLO VILLEDA, REGIONAL PRESIDENT OF LATIN
AMERICA, INTERNATIONAL JUSTICE MISSION

Mr. Villeda. Chairman Higgins, Ranking Member Correa,
Chairman D'Esposito, and distinguished Members of the
subcommittees, thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you today.
My name is Pablo Villeda Ortiz, and I serve as regional
president for Latin America at International Justice Mission.
In Latin America, we work in Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras,
Peru, Colombia, Bolivia, and we recently concluded a 10-year
project addressing sex trafficking of children in the Dominican
Republic.
Before joining IJM, I was a Guatemala field office director
in 2007. I practiced law inspired by my father, who dedicated
his life as a lawyer to help many people in need, but I grew up
in safety, free from fear of crime. But that--I knew that that
was not the experience of millions of others. I witnessed this
first when I worked as a law clerk in Guatemala's justice
system. I saw that those living in poverty didn't have real
access to justice. Then, in my capacity at RJM, I met many
survivors of violence who expect little protection from their
justice systems.
The title of this hearing suggests a broken path. If such a
path exists, it is indeed broken, broken from the outset.
Broken in the community of millions of people in Latin America
for whom violence is an ever-present danger; the rule of law is
only a notion, and actually impunity is the norm. So, in the
face of these challenges, we must look to the source and then
work to address factors that drive people to abandon their
communities.
IJM's experience in Latin America where we work in
partnership with justice system officials is that progress is
possible and has not been seriously undermined by leadership
transitions or corruption.
Local governments, of course, must be held responsible for
expanding the protection of the rule of law to all but
especially those living in poverty so they are safe within
their own communities. There are proven, effective ways to
achieve this end.
For example, as a result of the IJM program in the
Dominican Republic, we have seen a 78 percent reduction in a
prevalence of sex trafficking of children in the Dominican
Republic. We are convinced that when a justice system protects
its most vulnerable and treats victims with dignity, they
report crimes. Perpetrators are held accountable. Violence is
impaired, and the cycle of abuse is broken. It is then when
victims become survivors and flourish, and people can live
peacefully within their own communities without the need to
seek a life elsewhere.
The United States has a pivotal role to counter violence as
a fundamental factor that creates instability, drives
migration, and makes people vulnerable to trafficking.
Toward that end, and as I close, I would like to offer
three recommendations: First, we encourage the United States to
continue to partner with and invest in local governments in
Latin America. Continued partnership between governments can
significantly improve the performance of criminal justice
systems so that they are responsive to violence.
Second, we encourage the United States to increase the
diplomatic efforts to address violence against women and
children in partnership with the government of Honduras.
In January 2023, the United States and Honduran Government
announced their intention to sign a joint memorandum of
understanding that defined specific actions against domestic
and gender-based violence, while also increasing support to
survivors. IJM encourages the Department of State to the work
with the government of Honduras to finalize and commence such a
joint statement.
Finally, we urge Members of Congress to reauthorize the
Trafficking Victims Protection Act. September 30 marked 2 years
since the previous authorization of the international TVPA
program has expired. But, last week, the bipartisan Frederick
Douglas Trafficking Victims Prevention and Protection Act, H.R.
5856, was passed by the House Foreign Affairs Committee. If
enacted, it would reauthorize key provisions of the TVPA. We
encourage Members of this committee to cosponsor and vote in
support of that bill.
Thank you, again, for the opportunity to testify before
you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Villeda follows:]
Prepared Statement of Pablo Villeda Ortiz
November 14, 2023
Chairman Higgins, Ranking Member Correa, Chairman D'Esposito,
Ranking Member Carter, and distinguished Members of the subcommittees,
thank you for the opportunity to testify at this important hearing.
From my personal and professional experience, I hope to shed light on
the all-too-common reality of violence and human trafficking in Latin
America, as related to the situation at the Southwest Border of the
United States.
My name is Pablo Villeda Ortiz. I serve as the regional president
for Latin America at International Justice Mission (IJM). IJM is a
global, non-governmental organization (NGO) that works to protect
people in poverty from violence.\1\ We partner with government
authorities in 31 program offices in 16 countries to combat human
trafficking, police abuse of power, violence against women and children
and on-line sexual exploitation of children. Since 1997, IJM has worked
to achieve this mission through the strengthening of justice systems
and community support mechanisms that restore survivors to safety and
strength, strengthen local law enforcement, and bring criminals to
justice.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.ijm.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In Latin America, IJM currently works in Guatemala, El Salvador,
Honduras, Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia to address violence against women
and children (VAWC). Additionally, IJM recently concluded a 10-year
project to address sex trafficking of children in the Dominican
Republic.
I grew up in Guatemala City, Guatemala. Before joining IJM as
Guatemala Field Office Director in 2007, I was a lawyer. I was inspired
to enter the legal profession by my father, who was also a lawyer, and
who not only used his career for personal gain but also to help many
people in need. In my upbringing, my family was comfortable as part of
the Guatemalan upper middle class. We lived in a secure home with high
walls, free from fear of violent crime, physical or sexual assault, or
any kind of abuse. However, I knew that this was not the experience of
millions of others in Guatemala who face persistent insecurity and the
threat of violence in their daily lives. In fact, I witnessed this
reality first-hand. First, before practicing law, I worked as a law
clerk in the Guatemalan court system. I saw that those living in
poverty or those without influence, power or wealth could not afford
legal representation, and did not have access to justice. Second, in my
work at IJM, I have personally met many survivors of violence who
expect little to no protection from their law enforcement and legal
systems.
the challenges
In many parts of Latin America, including my country of origin,
Guatemala, violence is a common and ever-present danger for many women
and children, particularly those living in poverty. For instance, the
forthcoming results of IJM studies measuring the prevalence of violence
against women and children in multiple Latin American countries show
that:

In both El Salvador and Guatemala, nearly 40 percent of
women and 30 percent of adolescents have experienced physical
or sexual violence in their life.

Within the last 12 months alone, 6.2 percent of women and
6.9 percent of adolescents in El Salvador and 7.6 percent
of women and 9.8 percent of adolescents in Guatemala have
experienced this kind of violence.

In Bolivia, over 50 percent of women and nearly 40 percent
of adolescents and in the municipalities of Sucre, El Alto, and
La Paz have experienced physical or sexual violence in their
life. Nation-wide, 29.6 percent of women and 24.1 percent
percent of adolescents have experienced life-threatening
violence in their life--and a majority of these women and
adolescents are vulnerable to being victimized again.
Studies conducted by other organizations show similarly high rates
in other countries \2\ and IJM will soon develop prevalence studies for
Colombia, Peru, and Honduras.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ WHO: https://www.who.int/news/item/09-03-2021-devastatingly-
pervasive-1-in-3-women-globally experience-violence; U.N. Women:
https://caribbean.unwomen.org/en/materials/publications/2021/7/
research-brief-intimate-partner-violence-in-five-caricom-countries; The
Lancet: https://www.thelancet.com/article/S0140-6736(21)02664-7/
fulltext.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the face of such pervasive violence faced by Latin American
communities, it is also important to note that government authorities
responsible for addressing violence are often themselves a barrier to
justice for the victim of a crime. Law enforcement and justice system
officials respond slowly and with unprofessionalism that jeopardizes
the quality of cases and protection of the victim. Instead, these
officials inadvertently retraumatize the victim in their questioning
and uncareful treatment, failing to counteract the fear and shame that
the individual is experiencing. At the same time, systems for the
reception and processing of cases are outdated, susceptible to
corruption, and inefficient, creating significant backlogs that can
last years before any sense of justice can be achieved. In the mean
time, victims are left unsupported to navigate a complex and
intimidating system and perpetrators continue to commit crimes in
impunity, fearing little in the way of repercussions.
IJM studies evaluating the performance of the public justice
systems in Bolivia, Guatemala, and El Salvador demonstrate the
existence of these barriers to justice for victims. For example, a
review of criminal case files in Bolivia in 2023, revealed that only
33.3 percent of cases contained complete information to be evaluated
and only 39.6 percent allowed for the identification of the suspect and
their location, reflecting a poor handling of the case from its initial
intake and investigation. Most concerning, only 4 percent of reported
cases reached any form of sentencing. In an assessment of official
interactions with victims, only 6.55 percent of victim interviews were
conducted in Gesell Chambers (private, nonthreatening spaces for taking
victim testimony) and not a single interaction that took place within
the court (hearings and preparation for the survivor to testify) was
conducted with trauma-informed care, implying that 100 percent of these
interactions resulted in re-traumatization for victims.
In Guatemala, of all the reported cases of violence against women
and children in 2019, prosecution offices dismissed 40 percent of cases
and had taken no action in 32 percent of cases by the end of 2022. In
El Salvador, of all reported cases between 2016 and 2019, prosecution
offices dismissed 46 percent of cases.
The title of this hearing suggests ``a broken path.'' If such a
path exists, it is indeed broken and it is broken from the outset. It
is broken in the homes and communities of millions of people in Latin
America, for whom the rule of law is a notion and impunity is the norm.
Let's consider the plight of those impacted by violence and the
unbearable options before them. Where can they turn and what options do
they usually have?

One option is to suffer in silence and see their lives, the
lives of their loved ones and communities deteriorate;

A second option is to take matters into their own hands,
which is why support for extrajudicial violence against alleged
criminals by outraged mobs in poor communities is common in
Latin America;\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Cruz, J., & Kloppe-Santamaria, G. (2019). Determinants of
Support for Extralegal Violence in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Latin American Research Review, 54(1), 50-68. doi:10.25222/larr.212.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A third option, also unfortunately common in many places in
the region, either by desperation or under extortion, sees many
people resort to the ``protection'' offered by criminal gangs
and cartels;

And a fourth option is the difficult choice to leave their
community and loved ones behind, flee, and attempt to migrate
to a place of safety and opportunity.
the solutions
In recent years, a host of issues, including violence, have
contributed to an upsurge of outmigration from Central America. In the
face of these challenges, we must look to the source and then work to
address the factors that drive people to abandon their homes, their
families, and their communities. IJM's experience in Latin America,
where we work in partnership with public justice system officials, is
that progress is possible and has not been disrupted by changes in
national leadership, nor has it been severely or seriously undermined
by corruption. Local governments must be responsible for extending the
benefits of protection of the rule of law to all citizens, but
especially those in poverty, so that they are safe and secure within
their own communities--and there are proven, effective ways to achieve
this end.
For over 25 years, IJM has been countering the problem of violence
through the strengthening of justice systems and mechanisms of
community support for victims and survivors. In each context, IJM works
alongside prosecutors on actual cases of violence and human
trafficking, providing mentorship, technical resources, and training to
address weaknesses and gaps in capacity. Through first-hand insight
into these cases, IJM works to identify and address systemic issues
that prevent the identification of victims and prosecution of
perpetrators. In the process, IJM develops targeted, contextualized
interventions that address the core, systemic issues that allow for
impunity to continue unhindered, while mobilizing political will and
social demand so that local governments increase their ownership and
actions to strengthen the protection of those living in poverty from
violence.
From IJM's programmatic experience in Latin America, we have seen
the effectiveness of these interventions to address trafficking and
violence:
Dominican Republic
IJM recently concluded a project in the Dominican Republic (DR) to
combat sex trafficking of children.
Nearly a decade ago, a 2015 IJM study \4\ showed sex trafficking of
children in the Dominican Republic was a rampant crime, with children
comprising 1 in 10 people who were observed in sexual exploitation--
most as young as 13 to 15 years old. Traffickers operated with impunity
in establishments like bars, brothels, and even private businesses, but
the crime truly thrived in public settings. The prevalence of minors in
sex trafficking in public spaces like parks, beaches, and streets
surrounding private establishments was as high as 24 percent of
individuals observed in sexual exploitation. Customers would work
through either formal or opportunistic pimps--young men or women who
work as trafficking facilitators and offer to find children for sex.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ IJM (2015). Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in the
Dominican Republic.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This had been the norm for years--studies carried out during the
early 2000's consistently reported women and children as the most
vulnerable to trafficking and sexual exploitation, particularly
highlighting the number of children trafficked for the purpose of
commercial sexual exploitation.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ UNICEF: https://docplayer.es/20918363-Estudio-cualitativo-
sobre-explotacion-sexual-comercial-de-ninos-ninas-y-adolescentes-en-
republica-dominicana-resultados-preliminares.html; Sorensen, &
Claramunt, M.C. (2003). Commercial sexual exploitation of children and
adolescents in Central America, Panama and Dominican Republic:
synthesis report. ILO.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As the scale of violence and impunity became clear, the U.S.
Department of State's Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in
Persons (J/TIP) funded an anti-trafficking program led by IJM. This
strategic investment in U.S. foreign assistance leveraged IJM's years
of experience assisting local law enforcement and justice sector
authorities in the fight against sex trafficking. It helped transition
the focus of the work to sustainable, long-term protection, ultimately
strengthening the capacity of local authorities to proactively identify
this crime and enforce laws.
According to the State Department, this programming sought to
create ``a measurable deterrence and a significant reduction in the
prevalence of sex trafficking in the country'' through ``consistent
apprehension and effective prosecution of perpetrators,'' and provide
``an effective response to sex trafficking that ensures the sensitive
treatment of survivors and results in a deterrent effect that reduces
the prevalence of the crime throughout the country.''
During this project, IJM and our partners:

Developed investigation standards that ensure police respond
to victims with trauma-informed care and gather the proper
evidence to advance cases through the legal system.

Spurred a civil society movement to successfully advocate
for a ban of child marriage, which had served as legal loophole
that enabled perpetrators to act in impunity.

Worked with the Dominican National Police to co-design the
Nation's first electronic investigation system that will
safeguard the integrity and documentation of collected evidence
and enable the effective prosecution of sex trafficking cases.
As a result of these initiatives, we have seen a tremendous
improvement in the performance of the Dominican justice system \6\ and
reduction in prevalence of violence \7\ in cases of sex trafficking of
children.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ IJM (March 2023). Study of the Dominican public justice system
in response to sex trafficking and commercial sexual exploitation of
children, 2010-2022.
\7\ IJM (January 2023). Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children
in the Dominican Republic: Endline Study.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

From 2010 to 2013, the anti-human trafficking department of
the Dominican National Police did not handle any cases of sex
trafficking; while from 2014 to 2021, 130 cases were initiated.
This crime was once unrecognized and unpunished--and now it is
actively investigated and prosecuted.

Similarly, the Attorney General's Office of the Dominican
Republic only handled 8 cases from 2010 to 2013, while it
registered a total of 90 cases between 2014 and 2021.

The total prevalence of children involved in sex trafficking
was reduced from 10 percent in 2014 to 2.2 percent in 2022.
This represents a 78 percent decrease in children in sex
trafficking over the course of 8 years. In other words, in
2014, 1 in 10 individuals involved in sex trafficking was a
minor experiencing sexual exploitation. In 2022, one in 45
individuals involved in sex trafficking was a minor.
Northern Triangle
The effectiveness of this approach is not unique to the Dominican
Republic and has generated promising results in other parts of Latin
America. IJM has worked in Guatemala since 2005, beginning by
partnering with justice system actors to address sexual violence
against children. Over several years, our team in Guatemala:

Provided field mentoring to police officers and case-based
consultation to prosecutors to improve outcomes and quality of
investigations and cases;

Developed technological and data management tools to assess
the criminality of perpetrators and identify gaps in the
performance of the justice system;

Assisted in the launch, training, and capacity building of
the first-ever specialized sex crimes police units and crimes
against children prosecution offices;

Provided training on best practices in trauma-informed care
for victims so that evidence collection and victim testimonies
are non-threatening; and

Made tangible contributions to the quality and expediency of
forensic reports rendered by the National Institute of Forensic
Sciences.
As a result, according to a 2018 external impact evaluation \8\
commissioned by IJM, the Guatemalan justice system has more effectively
responded to cases of child sexual abuse, as evidenced by:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ IJM (December 2018). Final Evaluation of Program to Combat
Sexual Violence Against Children and Adolescents in Guatemala, 2005-
2017.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

357 percent more arrests--from 301 (2008-2012) to 1077
(2013-2017).

318 percent more charges brought by prosecutors--from 520 to
1,658.

335 percent more convictions--from 181 to 581.

80 percent of charges brought by prosecutors at endline
(cases sent to trial) met legal requirements--from 28 percent
at baseline.

Increased victim sensitivity by justice system officials,
including reducing the number of times victims give testimony,
increasing in the use of pre-trial testimony, and increasing
the use of victim-friendly spaces for child victims.
Based on this success, IJM expanded its program in Guatemala to the
broader issue of violence against women and children (VAWC). IJM is
making progress by:

Strengthening the capacity of the recently-launched Victim's
Institute as the primary government agency tasked with
providing free, specialized assistance and accompaniment to
victims of crime to ensure their access to justice,
restoration, and dignified treatment throughout the process.
IJM has been instrumental in assisting the Victim's Institute
by co-developing its model of attention, protocols, best
practices, case monitoring system, and victims' reparation
policy, informed by consultation with actual survivors of
violence.

Improving the application of restraining orders so that
perpetrators are kept from committing further violence, and
women and children are protected from further harm.

Piloting a Coordinated Community Response model, as a
scalable and replicable model to enhance security based on
building trust, cooperation and capacities in both State
agencies and community actors.

Organizing and equipping groups of survivors to amplify
their voice, stories, and advocacy for sustainable change.

Embedding training and best practices into justice and
citizen security agencies' official curricula and training
academies.
Additionally, in El Salvador, where IJM has worked since 2018, IJM
has already seen a 78 percent increase in the number of police
investigations that meet quality standards, including evidence
collection and analysis and application of investigative techniques.
conclusion
At IJM, we are convinced that when a justice system protects its
most vulnerable, it will deter violence and break the cycle of abuse
and crime. When a justice system protects its most vulnerable, victims
report their cases and perpetrators experience real consequences for
their crimes. When a justice system protects the most vulnerable,
victims are treated with dignity and care so that they can heal and
flourish. When a justice system protects the most vulnerable, people
can live peacefully within their own communities without the need to
seek help and opportunities elsewhere. When local governments increase
their ownership, strengthen policies, and improve their law enforcement
performance with support from effective international partners, change
is accelerated, and wins are more sustainable. Our experience is
evidence of this.
From IJM's experience, when strategic investments are made to
strengthen the capacity of the government authorities to respond to
violence and support survivors, substantial progress can be made in the
performance of public systems responsible for the protection of their
citizens. In both the 116th and 117th Congress, IJM was pleased to
support the Central American Women and Children Protection Act--
bipartisan legislation designed to strengthen public justice systems to
protect women and children, support victims of violence, and hold
perpetrators accountable. In the fiscal year 2022 appropriations bill,
Congress appropriated funding ``to support bilateral compacts with the
governments of such countries for the specific purpose of strengthening
their capacity to protect women and children from domestic violence,
sexual assault, trafficking, and child abuse or neglect, including by
holding perpetrators accountable.''
The United States has a pivotal role in this fight to counter
violence as a fundamental factor that creates instability, drives
migration and makes people vulnerable to trafficking and exploitation.
Toward that end, I offer the following recommendations:
1. Partnering with and investing in local governments in Latin
America.--Criminal justice systems can be unresponsive to
reports of crimes of physical and sexual violence against women
and children. Yet continued partnership between governments can
significantly improve the performance of criminal justice
systems for lasting change. While civil society and community
members play an important role in child protection, the goal
cannot and should not be for those actors to replace the
crucial role of government officials and those institutions
mandated to protect children in their communities. These
include law enforcement, the judiciary, social welfare
services, and local leaders; all of whom need more trauma and
technical training, and practical resourcing to be able to
build trust with those citizens and create sustainable systems
that are accessible and reliable for those in the communities
they serve. Accordingly, this requires funding for public
justice system improvements, including:
(a) Fair, transparent and efficient administration of justice.--
International NGO's such as IJM are playing a role in
improving case management in courts, court-based victim
support services and the use of technological tools to
increase efficiency in criminal hearings. There is also an
increasing need in this field to promote greater engagement
from civil society organizations to foster accountability,
integrity, and transparency in criminal processes.
(b) Community-based services for women and children.--Through
MOUs and cooperative agreements, NGOs in Latin America can
and do effectively partner with government agencies to
enhance reporting, response, and restoration services. NGOs
are part of the government's referral system for women and
child victims and often provide support services to the
most vulnerable populations, including women who had been
forcibly displaced from their communities or reside in
areas that are subject to the control of gangs.
(c) Assisting government partners.--It is essential to work
alongside government partners to ensure a coordinated
response to violence against women and children occurs,
police protocols increase the safety and stability of
victim's access to justice, and all legal processes are
trauma-informed and survivor centered.

Training and mentoring justice officials including
police, prosecutors, and social workers.

Reforms to bolster witness accompaniment, to improve the
process of ``walking alongside'' individual clients
throughout the court process. (Lacking this, witnesses fall
away, and violent criminals fail to be held accountable.)

Mentoring and equipping local leaders, including civil
society and survivor-led groups to serve as advocates for
change.
2. Increase U.S. diplomatic efforts to address violence against
women and children in partnership with the government of
Honduras.--IJM welcomed the joint statement by the governments
of the United States and Honduras \9\ at the Strategic and
Human Rights Dialogue in January 2023, in which both
governments ``reaffirmed their continued commitment to jointly
address the root causes of irregular migration and forced
displacement'' and announced ``their intention to sign a joint
memorandum of understanding that defines specific actions
against domestic and gender-based violence while also
increasing support to survivors.'' IJM encourages the
Department of State to work with the government of Honduras to
finalize and commence such a joint MOU, as soon as practicable.
IJM recommends that a joint MOU specify particular government
institutions that are responsible for implementation to
maximize fiscal accountability and outcome-based measurement.
We also recommend activities under a joint MOU be implemented
by experienced NGO's that support local authorities and provide
technical assistance, mentorship, and training to police,
prosecutors, courts, and social service agencies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Joint Statement on the U.S.-Honduras Strategic and Human Rights
Dialogues. January 10, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Prioritize the reauthorization of the Trafficking Victims
Protection Act (TVPA).--Notably, Sept. 30, 2023, marked 2 years
since the previous authorization of the international TVPA
programs expired. It is past time for this important
legislation, which guides U.S. programming and policy to combat
human trafficking globally, to be reauthorized. Survivors,
NGO's, and governments world-wide look to the United States as
a leader on this issue, and the TVPA is central to this fight.
Last week, the bipartisan Frederick Douglass Trafficking
Victims Prevention and Protection Act (H.R. 5856) was passed by
the House Foreign Affairs Committee. If enacted, it would
reauthorize key provisions of the TVPA. We encourage Members of
this committee to consider co-sponsoring H.R. 5856 and to vote
in support of the bill when it is considered on the House
floor.
4. As Congress negotiates a 2024 appropriations bill, it is
essential that funding is sustained or increased for programs
that combat trafficking and other forms of violence abroad.--We
can all agree that no child should be trafficked, exploited, or
violently abused. U.S. Government programs that support the
efforts of foreign governments to identify victims, prosecute
traffickers and violent criminals, and support survivors in
their journey of healing should continue to receive robust
funding.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Villeda.
Mr. FitzPatrick, you are recognized for 5 minutes to
summarize your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TERRENCE FITZPATRICK, DIRECTOR, ALLIANCE TO END
SLAVERY AND TRAFFICKING

Mr. FitzPatrick. Thank you, Chairmen Higgins, D'Esposito,
and Ranking Member Correa, and to all the Members of the
committee, for allowing me to speak today.
Just one thing to say about the Alliance to End Slavery and
Trafficking, just so you know who we are. We are an alliance of
organizations that conduct programs in more than 30 U.S. cities
and 100 countries. We advocate for stronger Federal laws and
increased Federal funding to prevent and combat forced labor
and human trafficking.
I think the most important thing that would be the takeaway
from my remarks today is this: Whole-of-Government solutions,
comprehensive, holistic solutions are needed to defeat
trafficking. I would like to take a few moments to explain what
we view that means at the border.
I have three issue areas and three recommendations. Issue
No. 1 is some context. The more--some statistics I have seen is
it's actually only 15 percent of trafficking victims around the
world today are actually migrants. So not all forced labor and
human tracking is related to migration. A significant number of
individuals are trapped that way. That 15 percent adds up to
about 4 million people world-wide. Not a small number, but
putting it into a larger context.
Unfortunately, there are no authoritative numbers for
inside the United States. The National Institute of Justice is
doing some research on that. But it is known that migration-
related trafficking reaches beyond undocumented individuals.
For example, the National Human Trafficking Hotline run by
Polaris has received thousands of calls for help from migrants
inside the United States legally on guest worker visas or
already in asylee protected status.
Last, for context, it is American businesses who ultimately
profit from transnational human trafficking. American farms and
factories exploit migrant children in illegal child labor, and
migrant adults trapped in illegal debt bondage are generating
profits for American corporations.
Issue No. 2, the need for prevention and protection. Law
enforcement isn't the only solution. Foreign assistance
programs can help reduce the number of individuals fleeing
their home countries, increasing the capacity to properly
process migrants and reduce trafficking vulnerability. That's
because long delays at legal points of entry can cause
desperate individuals to seek irregular pathways and become
trafficking targets.
There's an urgent need at the border for more asylum
officers, immigration judges, child welfare specialists, and
attorneys.
As well, to protect migrants already here, there is a need
for increased workplace inspections by the Labor Department and
reform of guest worker visa rules.
Issue No. 3, the protection of American values and
leadership. Migrants not only seek opportunities in the United
States; they seek safety and freedom. Our answer to those
fleeing forced labor and human trafficking abroad must not be
to go back. Congress has ensured that the United States,
perhaps more than any other country, embraces a whole-of-
Government vision for counter-trafficking programs. However, at
the border in particular, our Nation is not living up to that
holistic ideal.
Quickly, three recommendations: I will echo the
recommendation to please pass the Trafficking Victims
Protection Reauthorization Act, the TVPRA. To improve
international trafficking prevention, this bill will require
the integration of antitrafficking strategies into programs--
all programs--at the U.S. Agency for International Development
with financial earmarks for countries in Central America, where
a lot of the unaccompanied minor push factors are sending
children to our Southern Border. To protect trafficking
survivors in the United States, the bill reauthorizes programs
at the Department of Health and Human Services. There's a
companion bill in the Senate, S. 920, with additional provision
to protect migrants. When it comes over for passage, we urge
you to pass that as well.
Recommendation No. 2, enact key provisions of the fiscal
year 2024 emergency supplemental appropriations request. The
border supplemental includes additional asylum officers and
immigration judges, increased social services, and tougher
enforcement of U.S. child labor law. As well, please hold the
line on trafficking funding throughout the Federal budget. With
all the public attention with movies and news reports about
child labor in American factories, the response from Congress
cannot be ``we're going to slash funding for antitrafficking
programs.''
Last, recommendation No. 3, do not roll back protections
for unaccompanied child migrants. All children deserve
screening by specially-trained border personnel, not
streamlined screening by lesser-trained immigration
adjudicators.
I look forward to explaining a little bit more about those
recommendations and any questions you might have. Thank you
much.
[The prepared statement of Mr. FitzPatrick follows:]
Prepared Statement of Terry FitzPatrick
October 24, 2023
Thank you for the opportunity to address the committee today. My
name is Terry FitzPatrick. I direct the Alliance to End Slavery and
Trafficking (ATEST). We are a nonpartisan coalition of organizations
that conduct programs in more than 30 U.S. cities and 100 countries.
ATEST advocates for stronger Federal laws and increased Federal funding
to prevent and combat forced labor and human trafficking.
I think the most important takeaway from my comments today will be
this: whole-of-Government solutions are needed to defeat trafficking.
I'd like to articulate what that should look like regarding migration.
I have three issue areas to discuss, and three recommendations.
issue one: some context
Not all forced labor and human trafficking is related to migration.
The United Nations estimates that 15 percent of victims throughout the
world today are migrants. That's 4 million people world-wide.
Unfortunately, there are no authoritative trafficking statistics for
the United States. The National Institute of Justice is currently
conducting research.
But it is known that migration-related trafficking reaches beyond
undocumented individuals. For example, the National Human Trafficking
Hotline has received thousands of calls for help from migrants inside
the United States legally on guestworker visas or already in asylee
protected status.
Last, it's American businesses who ultimately profit from
transnational human trafficking. American farms and factories exploit
migrant children in illegal child labor. Migrant adults trapped in
illegal debt bondage are generating profits for American corporations.
issue two: the need for prevention and protection
Law enforcement isn't the only solution. Foreign assistance
programs can help reduce the number of individuals leaving their home
countries. Increasing the capacity to properly process migrants can
reduce trafficking vulnerability. That's because long delays at legal
points of entry can cause desperate individuals to become trafficking
targets. There's an urgent need at the U.S. border for more asylum
officers, immigration judges, child welfare specialists, and attorneys.
As well, to protect migrants already here, there needs to be
increased workplace inspections by the Labor Department, and reform of
guestworker visa rules.
issue three: the protection of american values and leadership
Migrants not only seek economic opportunity in the United States;
they seek safety and freedom. Our answer to those fleeing forced labor
and human trafficking abroad must not be to go back.
Congress has ensured that the United States, perhaps more than any
other country, embraces a whole-of-Government vision for counter-
trafficking programs. However, particularly along the border, our
Nation is not living up to that holistic ideal.
quickly, three recommendations:
Recommendation One.--Pass the Trafficking Victims Prevention and
Protection Reauthorization Act, the TVPRA. To improve international
trafficking prevention, H.R. 5856 will require the integration of anti-
trafficking strategies into programs at the U.S. Agency for
International Development. To protect trafficking survivors in the
United States, the bill reauthorizes programs at the Department of
Health and Human Services. We also urge passage of a companion Senate
bill, S. 920, with additional provisions to protect migrants and
reauthorization of State Department anti-trafficking programs.
Recommendation Two.--Enact key provisions of the Fiscal Year 2024
Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Request. The Border Supplemental
section includes additional asylum officers and immigration judges,
increased social services, and tougher enforcement of U.S. child labor
law. As well, hold the line on trafficking funding throughout the
Federal budget. With all the public attention this issue is receiving
at movie theatres and in the news media, the response from Congress
must not be to slash support.
Recommendation Three.--Do not roll back protections for
unaccompanied child migrants. All children deserve screening by
specially-trained border personnel. Congress has specifically required
this safeguard for children from Central America. However, H.R. 2, the
Secure the Border Act, would strip this protection in favor of
expedited review by lesser-trained staff. H.R. 2 has already passed the
House; but I urge you to oppose efforts to attach it to appropriations
bills or other legislation.
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to answering any
questions that you have now or at any time in the future.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. FitzPatrick.
Dr. Sadulski, you are recognized for 5 minutes to summarize
your opening statement. Sir.

STATEMENT OF JARROD SADULSKI, PH.D., ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR,
AMERICAN MILITARY UNIVERSITY

Mr. Sadulski. Chairman Higgins, Ranking Member Correa,
Chairman D'Esposito, thank you very much for the opportunity to
be here today and provide this testimony on human trafficking.
As a doctor of criminal justice, a professor at American
Military University, as well as a humanitarian, I had been
conducting research on human trafficking trends in Latin
America for several years.
This work has led me to in-country research in South
America, Central America, and the United States, as a guest at
INTERPOL and the National Police of Colombia. I've conducted
in-country research on human trafficking originating in
Colombia, and I've also conducted in-country research in 4
years of humanitarian work in Central America. Specifically,
the humanitarian work that I've engaged in has involved leading
teams to provide training to the staff and inmates of a prison
in Latin America, specifically in Belize. Through this
humanitarian work and working within the prison system of the
Nation's only prison, I've had the opportunity to interview and
to speak with former convicted human traffickers, as well as,
through my research, I've had the opportunity to speak to many
human trafficking victims. So today the information that I'm
presenting is a culmination of that research.
There's a dangerous nexus between human smuggling and
trafficking, though they're very distinct. People who are
initially attempting to be smuggled into the United States can
end up as trafficking victims. This occurs because of the
obstacles and delays that can occur on the smuggling route and
resulting in the migrant owing more money than that what they
have in order to pay. When that happens, they're forced into
human trafficking as a means to pay off their debt once they
arrive to the Southwest Border. This includes sex trafficking,
packaging drugs in safe houses or stash houses near the border,
and other forms of forced labor.
For groups of people that are being smuggled toward the
Southwest Border, intelligence is collected within the group.
For example, you'll have a coyote, which is a smuggler himself,
mixed within the migrant group that is there to collect
intelligence to see who actually has the money. Once it's
determined that a migrant does not have the funds to continue
the process of getting to the Southwest Border, they're often
sold to actual sex traffickers--I'm sorry, human traffickers--
for exploitation.
Stash houses have an important role in human trafficking
along the Southwest Border. They occur on both the U.S. and the
Mexican sides. TCOs use local gang members to manage the stash
houses on both sides. Safe houses could be described as a
triangle with the first house being a processing center where
those forced into human trafficking are processed by having
their photograph taken, the amount of debt owed is listed, as
well as their personal items, passports, even clothing are
taken away from them. From there, the second house that is part
of this stash house triangle is where the actual exploitation
occurs. A lot of that, although we focus on sex trafficking and
forced labor, a lot of that involves packaging narcotics that
are flowing through the Southwest Border.
Once the debt is paid, then the victim is transferred to a
third safe house. It is there that they are given back their
property as well given the opportunity to finish, to make it to
their destination.
TCOs create an illusion that no crime's being committed,
and instead they are just helping to find to have people--
attempting to find people--attempting have people find a better
life. The system is set up to detect illegal narcotics more so
the southwest border than it is human smuggling or trafficking.
Many TCOs depend on connections that aid in the facilitation of
human trafficking that provide blanket security for everyone
involved or tipping them off to law enforcements operations or
other threats to their operations.
One element of the human trafficking that is not well is
organ harvesting. Sadly, part of my humanitarian work in
Central America has revealed that there's a market for juvenile
organs.
One particular person that I had interviewed was involved
in human trafficking at several different levels and was able
to provide insight into some of these inner workings
specifically with organ trafficking.
The reason why organ harvesting has become a market is due
to buyer's personal needs. For example, if someone has a family
member that is dying and is unable to obtain that organ
legally, they will basically provide a custom order for a
specific organ. Organ traffickers view this exploitation as a
job. The former gang member who was involved in the trafficking
spoke of one organ trafficker out of Mexico, Venezuela, and the
Philippines. The organ trafficker would frequent homeless
shelters, other shelters, encampments, and drug houses where
families camped with their children. It would offer money to
the parents to take the children out of that environment, and
the children would never return. In one particular case, there
was a 12-year-old, and someone paid $15,000 for his eye. This
was several years ago. The organ trafficker explained that
moving children from one point to another is easy because the
trafficker doesn't have to show documentation, and he did not
receive the resistance from the child because the parents gave
permission for the child to be with the trafficker.
Human trafficking continues to be a global problem due to
its profitability. When a drug dealer makes a profit through
selling drugs, they have to obtain more product to make another
sale. In the case of human trafficking, the same victim is
exploited over and over, and the victim is able to transport
themselves.
Thank you for the opportunity, and I welcome your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sadulski follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jarrod Sadulski
background
As a Doctor of Criminal Justice, professor at American Military
University, and as a humanitarian I have been researching current
trends in human trafficking for several years. This work has led me to
in-country research in South America, Central America, and the United
States to gain a deeper understanding of human trafficking trends. I
have been a guest of INTERPOL and the National Police of Colombia to
conduct in-country research on human trafficking originating in
Colombia and I have provided human trafficking training to government
officials in the United States and Central America to mitigate human
trafficking. This training has included training to immigration, the
Belize Defense Force, and other law enforcement officials in Belize to
counter human trafficking. I have presented research at the
International Human Trafficking and Social Justice Conference for two
consecutive years on human trafficking trends and have peer-reviewed
research published on the topic of human trafficking. I also engage in
humanitarian work that involves leading teams to a prison in Central
America where I provide training to the prison staff on various aspects
of prison management and provide life-skills training to inmates. This
has opened the door to hear the perspectives of those who were formally
involved in human trafficking to gain unique and in-depth insight. The
information presented below is a culmination of in-country research in
Latin America involving human trafficking that leads to the Southwest
Border and humanitarian work I have conducted in Central America.
human trafficking trends
Typically, gangs focus on smuggling drugs and guns. Transnational
Criminal Organizations (TCOs) and trafficking groups aid in moving
people from around the world through Latin American attempting to come
to the United States illegally across the Southwest Border. Human
smuggling is transportation based on when someone pays to be smuggled
to the United States. Human trafficking, which is labor-based, involves
sex trafficking, domestic slavery, and forced labor. Being forced into
human trafficking can be a consequence of human smuggling.
Economic conditions in Central America and around the world is the
biggest factor that drives people to leave their homes and risk their
lives to be smuggled across the Southwest Border. People who live in
dangerous impoverished conditions spend all of the money that they have
and often end up becoming victims of human trafficking through their
attempt to come to the United States illegally. This occurs because
delays and obstacles along the human smuggling route result in the
migrant owing more money than they or their family can afford to pay.
Therefore, they are placed into human trafficking as a means to pay off
the debt once they arrive at the Southwest Border. This may include sex
trafficking, packaging drugs, or other forms of forced labor. There are
unspeakable vulnerabilities for migrant children who are forced by
armed human traffickers to pay off their debts.
the role of coyotes
When groups of people are smuggled to the United States,
intelligence is collected from within the group. For example, you'll
have a coyote [smuggler] mixed with those being transported as part of
a smuggling operation for intel purposes. The victims are not aware
that the coyote is among them and if the coyote finds that they don't
have the money to be smuggled, he will sell them to the traffickers for
sexual exploitation. TCOs exploit people who cannot pay to be
transported, and they are sold into the sex trade or forced labor.
the use of safe houses
Safe houses have an important role in human trafficking along the
Southwest Border. Safe houses are located both on the Mexican and
United States sides of the border. TCOs use local gang members to
manage safe houses in both countries. Safe houses can be described as a
triangle with three different houses involved in a specific human
trafficking ring. The first house is used as a processing center. When
a migrant is brought to the border and does not have the money to pay
for the transportation costs, the first house will act as a processing
center where the person will be stripped of their clothing or personal
items and provided different clothing by the gang members managing the
safe house. They will typically be photographed and the total payment
owed will be listed. It is during this phase that victims are likely to
be verbally or physically abused as a form of coercion or to exert
control over the victim. Passports and personal belongings are often
retained by the trafficker to maintain control over the victim. The
victim may be beaten or sexually assaulted. Victims are then moved to a
second safe house. Within the second safe house is where the actual
exploitation occurs, such as in the case of sex trafficking or drug
packaging. The victim will remain at the second house until their debt
for transportation to the United States is paid. Once that occurs, the
victim will be moved to the third safe house. It is at the third safe
house that the victim is provided any clothing and property that was
taken at the first safe house. Victims are typically fed and better
taken care of at the third safe house. Victims are permitted to remain
at the third safe house until their transportation to their final
destination can be arranged or they can leave. While being moved
between safe houses, victims are blindfolded or other measures are
taken to prevent the victim from seeing where the safe houses are
located. Safe houses may be disguised as businesses with bedrooms in
the back space. Typically at safe houses, security cameras will be used
and extend surveillance to nearby intersections so that traffickers can
see who may be approaching the safe houses. Reinforced windows are
common along with handcuffs, chains, and modifications that include
sound proofing. Traffickers may have an escape path developed at the
safe house.
TCOs create an illusion that no crime is being committed and
instead they are just helping people find a better life since the
border system is set up to detect illicit narcotics instead of
trafficked people. Many TCOs depend on outlets that aid in the
facilitation of human trafficking by providing blanket security for
everyone involved through tipping them off of law enforcement
operations or other threats to their operations. People are put into
place to monitor for threats to the trafficking operation. These
connections exist from Central America through Mexico to the United
States. Different TCOs have their own outlets that aid in the
trafficking process, which exists for both human trafficking and drug
trafficking. It is not uncommon for paperwork to be doctored to aid in
trafficking people. If given false documentation, travel agencies can
arrange travel that appears to be legitimate. For example, a husband
and wife may move children from Central America through Mexico to San
Diego under the guise that the children accompanying them are their
own. Once in the United States, the children may be sold to another
family that wants children but does not wish to go through the legal
adoption process. Traffickers with these connections easily move people
to the United States. Traffickers without these connections are more
likely to be those moving people across the desert into the United
States.
trafficking originating in central america
In Central America, smugglers will go to the immigration office and
will sit there. They can tell where people are from. They will approach
them and say, where you trying to go? Someone may say ``L.A.''
The smuggler will say, ``how much money do you have?'' The
immigrants may say that they have $2,500 and are trying to get their
visa with that money. The smuggler will tell them they can be
transported to L.A. for only $1,000 and they have connections who will
smuggle them through Mexico across the U.S. border to San Diego. Once
the victim gives the smuggler money, demands are typically made for
more money because the smuggler claims that there were unforeseen
expenses. If the immigrants don't have a way of getting extra money,
then they are sold to human traffickers. If they are women, they are
often forced into sex trafficking. If they are men, they are often
coerced into forced labor.
Human traffickers in Central America target public squares and
migrant shelters. They exploit the vulnerabilities of victims by either
promising false work opportunities or use physical force that compels
victims to go along with traffickers out of fear that either they or
their families will be harmed if they don't cooperate.
Often, human traffickers make threats to harm family members. Those
threats compel adult and child victims to remain in the sex trade or
other facets of human trafficking.
Also, human traffickers target the areas where migrants have been
deported. They know that victims often have lost their money on failed
smuggling attempts to the United States and are especially defenseless.
perils of being smuggled to the united states
Human smuggling is extremely dangerous for the people seeking to
enter the United States along its Southwest Border. Smugglers are
notorious for placing people in hazardous situations that can result in
their deaths. During smuggling operations, women and children are
especially at risk. They may suffer different forms of physical and
emotional abuse, including rape, beatings, kidnapping, and robbery.
When migrants are smuggled, they are often exposed to harsh conditions
such as unsuitable and overcrowded sleeping accommodations, coercion,
deceit, and verbal abuse.
Often, migrants pay the smugglers all of the money that they have
for illicit transportation to the United States. Other times, family
members already residing in the United States pay smuggler fees for
their family members to be smuggled into the country.
human trafficking involving juvenile organs
One element of human trafficking that is not well-known is organ
harvesting. Sadly, part of my humanitarian work in Central America has
revealed that there is a market for juvenile organs.
While engaged in humanitarian work at a prison in Central America,
I met with a former gang member who today is rehabilitated, but he has
spent a significant part of his life in prison. He explained that the
reason why organ harvesting has a market is due to buyers' personal
needs. For instance, he said that a buyer may ``have a family member
who is dying, and they will pay anything for their loved one. It is
like making a custom order. Organ traffickers view this exploitation as
a `job'.''
I asked him how a child becomes a victim of human trafficking. He
explained, ``if someone does not love their child and allows them to
wander on the street, and the trafficker has the opportunity to take
them, then he will. If he doesn't, someone else will.''
The former gang member spoke of one organ trafficker who operated
out of Mexico, Venezuela, and the Philippines. This organ trafficker
would frequent homeless places, shelters, encampments, and drug houses
where families camped with their kids. He would offer money to the
parents to take the kids out of that environment and would never return
with those children.
To the former gang member's knowledge, the last child this organ
trafficker kidnapped was 12 years old, and someone paid him $15,000 for
the child's eye. This was several years ago. Moving children from one
point to another was easy because the organ trafficker never had to
show documentation. He did not receive resistance from the kid because
the child's parents had given permission for the child to be with him.
They harvested the child's right eye in Mexico.
Human trafficking continues to grow as a global crime due to its
profitability. When a drug dealer makes a profit through selling drugs,
he has to continually obtain more product to make another sale. In the
case of sex trafficking, the same victim can be used repeatedly to make
a profit.

Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Sadulski. Members will be
recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning.
An additional round of questioning may be called after all
Members have been recognized. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning.
Gentlemen, thank you for your opening statements. We are in
a new era of impact from illegal crossings at our Southern
Border. We are pushing 3 years now with change in policy.
That's normal with the new administration. But the Biden
administration inauguration, it seemed to coincide with perhaps
the closing of the COVID era and an introduction of enhanced
migration for various reasons across the world. But the
policies of the Biden administration have, I believe,
unwittingly facilitated the business models of the cartels who
would thrive on human misery and human trafficking and drug
trafficking. I think things are getting so bad in America that,
even the existing criminal networks that have been around for
decades, you know, in illegal sex trafficking business, a lot
of which is semivoluntary. You know, people get pulled into
criminal networks for various reasons in life, but it is just
not the same as slavery. It is not the same as being pulled so
deep into a criminal network that you no longer exist as a
human being. You are being pulled from a human being that has
been drawn into a life of crime on the street for--because of
many factors. It is bad.
I had a CI call me a couple of years ago, a guy in New
Orleans--and, as you gentleman know, most confidential
informants, you know, they are on the edge of the criminal
networks themselves. They're homeless. They have drug issues,
et cetera. I had a CI call me and said, ``Cap, something is
happening out here that's real bad,'' that he has never seen
before in all of his years on the street. He was offered in the
middle of the night one night, he was offered a woman for
$2,500. He didn't understand that because it was a very high
price to hear on the street. The man making that offer
explained, ``Well, that's to own the woman, like she's yours.''
He was selling a human being--not access to a human being or
illegal sexual trafficking of that human being for a period of
time. We are talking about owning human beings.
Even the criminal networks are recognizing that America is
being pulled into a darkness we've never seen before.
Ambassador, you mentioned that traffickers operating with
impunity.
Mr. Villeda, you mentioned a 70 percent reduction of child
trafficking after a campaign of prosecution. I would like you
two gentlemen, please, in the remainder of my time, a minute-
and-a-half, beginning with you, Ambassador Richmond, please
respond to what would happen with the cartels and criminal
network's business model if we began aggressively prosecuting
in the United States child trafficking and putting a lot of
people behind bars that are currently operating, as you
described it, with impunity? Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. Chairman, I think there is little doubt that,
when there is no rule of law or when laws are not enforced, it
benefits traffickers' business models. It takes away the risk.
If prosecutions were increased, if investigations were
increased--particularly trauma-informed prosecutions where we
have both agents as well as prosecutors who understand the
impact of trauma on victims and understand how to investigate
this economically-motivated crime, I think there could be a
significant impact on traffickers' operations, particularly, if
those increased prosecutions are papered with thoughtful,
trauma-informed protection services for the survivors to make
sure that they get the care they need and wraparound services
for those survivors. If you can do both, prosecutions and
protection services, I think you'll see a much more
successful----
Mr. Higgins. So a significant impact you mentioned. Mr.
Villeda, you had cited a 78 percent reduction. Would you please
touch on that briefly, sir.
Mr. Villeda. We notice in the Dominican Republican that
with focused, targeted investments in capacity building of law
enforcement and prosecution, the crime of human trafficking
reacts and diminishes to the enforcement of the laws. So we
actually saw a 78 percent reduction in the Dominican Republic
in the sex trafficking of children. We have seen similar
results in other projects around the world.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Villeda, and Mr. Richmond for
your answers. My time has expired. I recognize the Ranking
Member, my friend and colleague, Mr. Correa, for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to say to the
witnesses that your comments are very sobering and reminds us
of the challenges ahead of us, the society as a country.
I agree with the Chairman, we have a new era, as you would
say of impact.
Refugees. Is this a U.S. issue or a global issue? Colombia
is now looking at not 2\1/2\, but 3 billion refugees. They're
bursting at the seams. Costa Rica, I met with the President 2
weeks ago, said the same thing: ``I have got a challenge with
the refugees within our borders and how to deal with the
maintenance sustainability.'' Mexico is saying the same thing.
We have policy changes, possibly as the Chairman had said. We
also have COVID that devastated a lot of countries in the
world, especially in Latin America. Honduras, with all due
respect to the Honduran President and the others, is really a
failed economy right now. COVID devastated them, and they
really don't have a plan on how to get out their economic woes.
Things could be said for many other countries, especially in
Latin America. We have a got wars, and they're driving people,
the Middle East as well as in Europe.
A year, a year-and-a-half ago, I was in Tijuana receiving a
lot of the Ukrainian refugees that are being processed into the
United States. So I'm going to ask you, each one of you, with
Ambassador Richmond, is this a U.S. challenge, or is this a
world challenge? Very quickly, sir.
Mr. Richmond. Well, clearly, trafficking is a global
challenge.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Villeda.
Mr. Villeda. It is a global challenge. Countries----
Mr. Correa. Mr. FitzPatrick.
Mr. FitzPatrick. Global. Absolutely.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Sadulski? I'm going off my notes because,
frankly, like the Chairman says, new era of impact. I'm trying
to figure out what's going to stop this. Building a wall. Do
you think building a wall is going to help?
Mr. Richmond. I think we need every possible intervention
to stop that.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Villeda.
Mr. Villeda. We need comprehensive solutions, sir.
Mr. Correa. Mr. FitzPatrick.
Mr. FitzPatrick. Comprehensive wall might create more
trafficking than it might stop.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Sadulski.
Mr. Sadulski. I believe it needs to be an all-hands-on-deck
approach, and I think that would include a wall.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. The reason I'm asking these
questions of big global scale is that this thing is going to
get worse before it gets better. You know, the more testimony
we hear from you, the experts--these economies are not getting
any better; they're getting worse. Chairman put together a trip
to Central America to go see the Darien Gap just a few weeks
ago, that had to be rescheduled. But, you know, I think the
most dangerous part of this trip is not the Darien Gap; it is
traveling through Mexico. By the time most of those victims
reach the border--and I say victims of human trafficking and
smuggling, 80 percent of those women are either raped or
sexually assaulted. For people to be that desperate to take
that trip north tells you people are in a dire situation, and I
don't see things getting any better in Central America or a lot
of those our Latin American countries.
So, you know, I'm going to ask each one of you again.
What's the answer? Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. The answer is to bring hope to the victims by
actually enforcing our laws and providing them----
Mr. Correa. But you've got to feed them too. Hunger is a
great motivator.
Mr. Villeda.
Mr. Villeda. Hunger is a motivator, but not the only one.
If they would have the opportunity to feel safe in their own
communities, many people would rather stay.
Mr. Correa. Mr. FitzPatrick.
Mr. FitzPatrick. I just want to make a comment about
prosecution; it's who we're prosecuting. I think there's a lot
of attention on prosecuting coyotes or transporters who are
moving people for trafficking, but it's factory owners and
agricultural farm owners who are actually exploiting people on
the land. So prosecution needs to be thought of----
Mr. Correa. What about the banking system? What about the
financial services system that actually transact and transfer
money from the victims to organized crime?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Sure, the FinCEN system has been designed
and the Liechtenstein Initiative has been designed to help look
for illicit transnational transactions. So there--and there is
a conference----
Mr. Correa. Mr. Sadulski, my last 9 seconds.
Mr. Sadulski. Yes, sir, I believe it comes down to
international collaboration between governments as well as
NGO's, as well as education to the migrants themselves. Because
I think there's a misconception in some areas of Latin America
of the dangers of coming across to the United States.
For example, a migrant that I recently spoke to explained
that he was unaware of how dangerous it was going to be. He
spoke of children and adult skeletal remains that he saw
scattered throughout the route. These are things that a lot of
migrants are not aware of in terms of the dangers. I believe
that is one part of the solution.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the witnesses for
their testimony today, and I yield.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the Ranking Member. I recognize
Chairman D'Esposito, the gentleman from New York, for 5 minutes
for questioning.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, again, for being here this afternoon.
Ambassador, in your witness testimony, you share how,
although, you say, ``poverty, illiteracy, disabilities, and
lack of strong families,'' are conditions that create
vulnerability, these conditions are not the causes of human
trafficking; they were vulnerabilities that traffickers
exploit. Can you elaborate on this for us? What are the root
causes of human trafficking?
Mr. Richmond. I think it's a really important distinction.
Vulnerabilities are real, and they matter. Many, many things
can make communities and individuals vulnerable. We mentioned
this, poverty. I think our foster care system leaves people
quite vulnerable. I think there is illiteracy, the lack of
strong families. All of these things make people vulnerable.
Criminals target vulnerable people, and traffickers, as
economically motivated criminals, are going to target the
people that are easiest in their mind to coerce and control.
People who are without legal status and present in the United
States have a special vulnerability. When I was a Federal
prosecutor at the Department of Justice and part of the Human
Trafficking Prosecution Unit, I prosecuted traffickers that
intentionally targeted undocumented vulnerable individuals
because they believed they would be easier to control.
I think the important idea is that it is good to work to
reduce vulnerabilities in general. But that is an indirect
approach to stopping trafficking. Because the root cause of
trafficking are the criminals who commit the crime, the women
and men who decide they're going to treat inherently valuable
people as disposable commodities.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. I think what's important here
is--and the Chairman pointed out--is this is a--especially for
many of the communities that we represent that are seeing human
trafficking--this is a new era of crime. Both of us coming from
law enforcement--you know, the Chairman mentions still speaking
to some CIs, and I have had the same experiences. This is a
new, again, a new era of crime. Even some of the most seasoned
criminals and perps on the street do not understand how this is
changing our community.
So, on that note, how do TCOs and traffickers benefit from
the current lack of law enforcement and border security,
especially on our Southern Border?
Mr. Richmond. I think that any criminal, whether it's an
individual or it is a transnational criminal organization are
going to benefit when laws are not enforced. I don't want to
overstate that law enforcement alone is sufficient; it's just
right now we have such stunningly low numbers of law
enforcement in terms of people actually being arrested and
prosecuted and held accountable for the heinous crime of human
trafficking, that, in a sense, the lack of enforcing laws make
it open season on vulnerable people. We have an increasing
number of vulnerable people, which means that traffickers have
an easier time identifying their next target.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right. I think one of the biggest issues is
not enforcing the law because law enforcement officials are
told by the administration right now not to enforce those laws.
That is part of the problem. How can the United States prevent
TCOs from abusing and trafficking migrants?
Mr. Richmond. I think that targeting our investigative
resources around the transnational criminal organizations,
actually having more dedicated specialized units that are
focused on that, where officers don't have an additional task
to investigate trafficking crimes, but instead it's their
primary task. If we had focused targeted specialized units
focused on labor trafficking, as well as targeted units focused
on sex trafficking, I think we would see a significant
difference.
Mr. D'Esposito. I know it was mentioned in some of the
opening statements, especially Mr. Villeda, but perhaps you can
expand, Ambassador, on--we should have coordination with Latin
America in combating trafficking. How do you think we can do a
better job of that?
Mr. Richmond. I think we need to continue engaging each
country throughout Latin America, encouraging them to enforce
their laws. They have signed up to the International
Convention, the Palermo Protocol, on Trafficking Persons. Make
sure that they are being held to account for enforcing their
laws, both to protect and provide services but also hold
traffickers accountable.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you Mr. Chairman, I yield back the
last 20 seconds of my time.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Payne, is recognized for
5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think a point or question that I have in this whole
scenario is, unfortunately, the demand for these human beings
is very concerning for me in this country. I mean, we're
supposed to be the beacon. Yet still traffickers are preying on
more and more people because there has to be a demand. So
that's very troubling to me.
But, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank you once again. Human
trafficking impacts adults and children. Children have unique
needs. Understanding that, I offered a bill called the Homeland
Security for Children Act, which was enacted into law last
Congress, and I drew a lot of my emphasis on this committee
around children and their needs. The law required all
components of DHS to incorporate the needs of children in its
planning and mission execution.
Mr. FitzPatrick, could you explain the importance of having
DHS offices take into consideration the needs of children that
are victims of trafficking and smuggling?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Thank you for that question.
There was a bill that has passed the House, H.R. 2. Part of
it, I believe it's title V, would streamline the screening of
unaccompanied children at the Southern Border. Imagine you're 9
years old, and you don't have a lawyer. You don't have a social
worker. You have a streamlined adjudication process. That
should not be the way things are for children at our Southern
Border. I don't think that the special protections that Central
American children have should be the ceiling. That should be
the floor, and others should be brought up to that.
So I think that looking at the push factors that cause
these children to be sent by parents and to flee Central
America or other countries and then the processing of those
children to be sure that it's fair and thorough and holistic
and trauma-informed and then also the protection of them once
they're resettled in the United States and don't end up in
meat-packing plants and car factories.
Mr. Payne. Yes. That's my other concern as well. You know,
we have a situation here that, you know, requires a lot of
concern and thought about what is it happening in those
countries that a parent is willing to send their child. I mean,
how devastating or distraught a parent must be to have to send
your child in those circumstances.
So we really need to look at what's going on in those
countries as well that makes people that desperate that they're
willing to take that chance on their child making it alone.
Let's see, recent estimates indicate--let's see, I'm sorry.
I lost my place. Recent estimates indicate that over 3 million
children are in forced labor world-wide. The Department of
Homeland Security has recognized the work done by the Center
for Countering Human Trafficking as a Homeland Security mission
in its Third Quadrennial Homeland Security Review. Other
efforts, such as public awareness campaigns, have raised the
salience of human trafficking in public.
Mr. FitzPatrick, in your testimony, you mentioned that we
need to take a whole-of-Government approach to combat
trafficking. Could you please highlight actions DHS has taken
in this area and that other agencies can learn from?
Mr. FitzPatrick. I've been really quite impressed with the
early steps that the CCHT--that's Center to Counter Human
Trafficking--has taken inside DHS. In particular, there is a
dedicated team looking at just labor trafficking and not at sex
trafficking.
I also think that DHS deserves great credit for its early
steps in the implementation of the Uyghur Forced Labor
Prevention Act. There have been thousands of shipments and
millions of dollars of goods that are tainted by forced labor
in China that have been prevented from getting into the U.S.
economy.
Mr. Payne. OK.
Mr. FitzPatrick. The victims of this crime are not just the
individuals. The victims of this crime are factory owners in
your Congressional districts who have to compete with factories
in China that are using slave labor, so thinking more
holistically about this as an unfair trade practice and not
just as a crime against individuals.
Mr. Payne. OK. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Strong, is recognized for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. Richmond, as we know, transnational criminal
organizations are well-informed on U.S. immigration law. In
fact, a Border Patrol Agent previously said that cartels even
go as far to study it and to find any loopholes they can to
exploit it.
I appreciate your comments about how exploitive
vulnerability and lawlessness--how migrants crossing the
Southwest Border are vulnerable to trafficking and abuse.
You briefly mentioned in your testimony, but I really want
to drive this point home, would greater U.S. border security
and law enforcement impact the cartels' human smuggling and
trafficking business?
Mr. Richmond. I think increased law enforcement in
enforcing all of our laws, border laws as well as trafficking
laws, is going to have an impact on cartels' and traffickers'
businesses.
I think we also want to look at the fact that where
enterprises or companies are benefiting financially or
otherwise from engaging in trafficking activities, they too can
be held accountable under the existing Trafficking Victims
Protection Act. So enforcing laws across the board will
strengthen the Government's response and negatively impact
traffickers. Meanwhile, the opposite is also true. Where we've
refused to enforce our laws, that works to the benefit of
traffickers.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. Sadulski, as you know, human smuggling is often a
dangerous life-threatening process for migrants because they
travel through international borders, gangs and cartel
territory, or vast jungles.
Do you believe migrants traveling on human smuggling routes
know the dangers of the journey to the United States and
specifically the risk of being trafficked?
Mr. Sadulski. No, sir, I most certainly don't believe they
know the risk. I think that there's a big misconception about
the routes, with the exception of the Darien Gap. With the
exception of there, I think there's a misconception on what the
route actually looks like and the dangers that it presents.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
How does the Biden administration's failure to secure the
Southwest Border facilitate human trafficking?
Mr. Sadulski. Well, human trafficking, it's a business.
Right now there has been a change from drug trafficking to
human trafficking because of the profitability. The border has
presented an increased number of people coming across, which,
as a result, has increased trafficking.
Mr. Strong. We've never seen this number of trafficking in
history. Do you believe the Biden administration has failed to
secure the Southern Border?
Mr. Sadulski. Yes, sir.
Mr. Strong. I want to ask each of you the same.
Ambassador Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. I think it's clear that the Southern Border
is not secure and hasn't been for a long time.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Sir.
Mr. Villeda. I'm not in a position to make such
categorizations, sir. But what I do know is that the U.S.
administration can certainly do more.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. FitzPatrick.
Mr. FitzPatrick. Depends on your definition of ``secure.''
If zero contraband and zero undocumented migrants is secure,
then the border has never been secure in the history of the
United States, and it will never be. So, depending on what you
mean by ``secure'' I think is an important point to take.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee, is recognized
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Is she prepared? Would you like me to move on?
Ms. Jackson Lee. I'm prepared.
Mr. Higgins. Yes, ma'am, you are always prepared, one of
the hardest-working Members of Congress. We'll recognize the
gentlelady from Texas.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much.
This is an area that many of us have confronted for many,
many years. Mr. FitzPatrick, I held a hearing on human
trafficking in 2014 with then-Chairman McCaul. Certainly it is
going on a decade ago, but we know that this is--we have
confronted this issue over and over again.
I'm about to sign a letter dealing with two rules offered
by DHS and the Department of Labor dealing with H-2A visas,
those of farm workers. For many of us, our concept and many of
the friends we grew up with or traveled from different places
came as farm workers. Remember the partnership between Dr. King
and Cesar Chavez, and they were trying to find--work together
for the equal rights of farm workers and, at the time, rights
for Negroes or colored people in the South, across the Nation.
That's what we viewed America as giving opportunity where there
is need.
I think that we will find that those persons who fall into
the depths of being trafficked really are trying to come here
to work. They are trying to come here for opportunity.
Unfortunately, we hear from the proposed viewpoint of a
President that says he's running again that he will have
deportation camps. I can only imagine the nightmares as the
world watches and wonders what has happened to America.
Unfortunately, I lived through the separation of families a
few years ago under the previous Trump era, and I'm very
grateful that we have a court settlement filed Monday by the
Biden administration, American Civil Liberties Union,
concluding a years-long legal dispute after thousands of
children were separated from their family at the Southern
Border. I literally witnessed those children when they were
making a tempered effort to reunite children and parents,
mostly mothers. The children were in shock. They did not
gravitate toward those mothers. It was lasting damage that
occurred. They didn't recognize who they were.
So I'm as anxious about cartels, the viciousness of cartels
and trafficking for people who are really trying to come here
to be able to contribute. Our farms say that they need more
workers. Various other places need workers.
So I just want to pose some questions to you very quickly.
This is a bigger framework than just talking about who doesn't
have resources. We need resources, and I hope my friends will
join me as we do the Department of Homeland Security
appropriations and we do the border security package that we
have resources to fight the cartels and the traffickers. That's
a big part of it. But we also have to recognize that people are
trying to come here to work, to work.
Mr. FitzPatrick, you mentioned in your testimony that child
migrants need to be screened by specially-trained border
personnel. What are the risks of an expedited screening of
child migrants by lesser-trained staff?
Let me add something else to it. What are the best ways we
can aid the countries in curbing the amount of migrants leaving
their countries? So, one, how do we deal with the children?
Then how do we deal with migrants? I laid the groundwork. I
think they're coming mostly not to bring fentanyl. That's
another fight, and I will stand with my colleagues, Republicans
and Democrats, at the gate fighting those who bring the
devastation of fentanyl, which we know is coming through China
and then in through the southern half of the United States.
But, if you can answer those two questions, children and then
migrants coming from other countries and curbing the amount of
migrants.
Mr. FitzPatrick. Thanks for those questions, and thank you
for your work on helping to reform the H-2 visa system, because
it may be most, certainly many, if not most, people who are
human trafficking who are migrants in the United States came
here legally on H-2 visas and find themselves exploited in
those situations as domestic workers, home health care workers,
even life guards at swimming pools, and farm hands working in
the migrant labor system.
As I mentioned, it's just when children have lawyers or
when trafficking victims have lawyers, then they have rights.
When they don't and have to stand before an adjudicator without
a social safety net, social workers or lawyers, they don't--the
outcome is not so good. It's hard for them to articulate that
they have a credible fear of trafficking if returned to their
home country, which is a qualification for asylum status.
So we all deserve lawyers. I mean, we have the right to an
attorney, so to speak. So children have the right for those
levels of services.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Then migrants--the Chairman is being
kind--migrants and them coming to the United States?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Yes. It's just--trying to streamline so
that children can be turned around quickly to deal with numbers
is no way to treat a child.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Migrant families I mean.
Mr. FitzPatrick. They should not be separated from their
families because the Flores settlement requires that the
children receive different treatment than their parents or that
there's some suspicion that children aren't legitimately the
children of those parents. I think there's--if you would
increase the funding for the adjudicators, the social workers,
the judges as included in the border supplemental, there's
plenty of border guards and other kind of hardened police and
border security provisions that are in that bill. I would urge
you to please include the other elements that are in the border
supplemental as well.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to put
into the record the Forbes article, dated October 16, 2023,
``Biden Administration Promises Benefits and Path to Asylum to
Migrant Families Separated Under Trump.'' This was a
settlement, so this is a responsibility that the administration
has to engage in.
Thank you so very much.
Mr. Higgins. Without objection.
[The information follows:]
Biden Administration Promises Benefits and Path to Asylum to Migrant
Families Separated Under Trump
Forbes, Last Updated: Updated Oct 16, 2023, 03:22pm EDT By: Ty Roush
https://www.forbes.com/sites/tylerroush/2023/io/16/biden-
administration-promises-benefits-and-path-to-asylum-to-migrant-
families-separated-under-trump/?sh=3zac84c256e9
TOPLINE
Migrant families separated under a Trump-era policy will be allowed
to request asylum in the U.S. and get benefits like housing and legal
counsel, as part of a court settlement filed Monday by the Biden
Administration and the American Civil Liberties Union--concluding a
years-long legal dispute after thousands of children were separated
from their families at the southern border.
KEY FACTS
A settlement proposal filed jointly by the American Civil Liberties
Union and the Biden Administration would provide previously separated
families with a special request for asylum in the U.S., regardless of
whether they were denied in the past. Any families that are granted
asylum under the agreement will have access to government-funded
housing benefits, legal counsel and medical and mental health services.
The settlement also prevents U.S. border officials from deliberately
separating future families for the next 8 years if parents illegally
enter the country with their children.
Under the terms of the deal, families will only be separated in
cases in which the parent was previously convicted on charges that
``demonstrate a threat to national security or public safety,'' or if
the child is being abused. Separated parents and children living in the
U.S. will also be able to petition to bring their immediate family
members from their home countries.
The settlement does not provide monetary compensation for the
families, a idea that was previously discussed, despite some other
lawsuits accusing the government of negligence, abuse and inflicting
emotional distress.
BIG NUMBER
3,881. That's how many children were separated from their families
between 2017 and 2021, according to the Department of Homeland
Security. Of these, 74 percent have been reunited with their families.
CRUCIAL QUOTE
``It is our intent to do whatever we can to make sure that the
cruelty of the past is not repeated in the future,'' Homeland Security
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas told the Associated Press.
WHAT TO WATCH FOR
District Judge Dana Sabraw--who issued an injunction on the policy
in 2018--will hold a hearing on the settlement in December. Anyone
opposed to the settlement will be allowed to raise objections to Sabraw
before the hearing.
KEY BACKGROUND
Family separation at the U.S.-Mexico border began en masse after
the Justice Department announced in 2018 it had implemented a ``zero
tolerance'' policy for migrants who cross the border illegally. All
migrants were referred to the DOJ for prosecution, while thousands of
children under the age of 18 who crossed the border with their parents
were sent to separate shelters. The policy was denounced by advocacy
groups like the ACLU, and President Donald Trump--who acknowledged the
separations were meant to deter unlawful migration--signed an executive
order to halt the policy, though investigations determined that
families continued to be separated throughout his term, according to
the Washington Post. President Joe Biden issued an executive order in
2021 to reunite families that were separated under the policy. Mayorkas
estimated in February that an interagency task force had reconnected
689 children, while the ACLU estimates between 500 and 1,500 migrant
children are still separated from their families.

Mr. Higgins. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen, is recognized
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It should be no surprise that policies that encourage the
explosive number of illegal immigrants coming across our
Southern Border are also a correlation tied into human
smuggling increases, human sex trafficking increases. We went
from, in 2019, 45-year lows of illegal immigration to now the
highest number in our Nation's history, 270,000 in the last
month reported coming across our Southern Border.
There is a power differential. We cannot address the
world's problems. It's not the job of the United States to
solve the world's problems on this. It is our job as Members of
Congress to address what we can, and what we can do is change
those incentives that are leveraging the Southern Border to be
a place where the cartel and other individuals are making money
heightened because of policies that have dramatically changed
in the last several years.
I was shocked--and I'm going to butcher your name. My last
name ``Brecheen'' is often mispronounced. I'm going to do my
best here. Sadulinski?
Mr. Sadulski. Sadulski, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. I'm so sorry.
Mr. Sadulski. That's OK.
Mr. Brecheen. I was shocked--you represent the American
Military Academy. You're a professor there. You talked about in
your interviews, your work on human smuggling about
interviewing a person that was involved in human smuggling who
had kidnapped a 12-year-old child, saw the procedure to extract
that young adult's eye, to then let it be sold into the
interior of the United States.
Mr. Sadulski. Well, sir, to clarify, the trafficker--or the
former trafficker that I had spoke with, who had been
incarcerated and gotten out of prison, he was speaking about
another trafficker. He wasn't the one responsible for the organ
harvesting. This was another trafficker that he was associated
with, and he was explaining the process of how that works, and
the surgery occurred in Mexico. I don't know what happened to
the eye.
Mr. Brecheen. So I want to follow up on that. I mean, we
talk about the, you know, heinous activity of sexual
trafficking, but organ harvesting of children.
Mr. Sadulski. Right.
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Richmond, you'd said something that was
intriguing to me.
So this eye was sold for $15,000, according to your
recollection.
Mr. Sadulski. That's correct, sir.
Mr. Brecheen. Fifteen thousand dollars for an eye. We know
that there's been a failure. Not only do we have the highest
number in 45 years of illegal--or 50 years of illegal
immigration in this country down from the 45-year low in 2019,
you used a statistic that I thought was astounding. You said,
since 2019, it's gone the opposite direction in the enforcement
of our laws on convictions in the Department of Justice of
human trafficking cases. How is that possible? How do we have
the highest number in our Nation's history of enforcement--or
of illegal immigration. We know there's a direct correlation to
increase in human smuggling and human trafficking, and yet we
now have the lowest number of convictions involving human
smuggling. How is that possible?
Mr. Richmond. Yes. There's certainly been a significant
drop, I think 48 percent.
Mr. Brecheen. Forty-eight percent, including your----
Mr. Richmond. In U.S. Federal courts. So that wouldn't
cover State courts, but Federal courts we've seen that drop.
Mr. Brecheen. Can I interrupt you? Because I want to be
clear on this. A 48 percent decrease in Federal convictions
involving human trafficking since 2019. In 2019, we had the
lowest number of illegal immigration crossings in our
country's--you know, they had seen in that time period. So how
is it that those numbers have flipped?
Mr. Richmond. I think there's a number of reasons why we've
seen a decrease in global investigations and prosecutions, and
it has been all over the world, but it has been true here in
the United States as well. I think one reason is a lack of
specialized--funded specialized units focused on both labor
trafficking and sex trafficking that could combat these crimes.
Specialized----
Mr. Brecheen. Because my time is short, can I ask you a
question? Is it also possible that the ability to identify the
criminals has also been less than--I'll give you a quick
example if you could respond to this.
The Trump administration initiated something in 2019--I
keep going back to that year--where it said we're actually
going to extract DNA evidence to find out if this young adult
coming with you across the border is actually related to you or
not. As a result of that, in that small sample, they saw--the
DNA testing showed that 30 percent of the adults arriving with
children were not the children's parents as they had initially
claimed.
That simple procedure, trying to verify if this child being
brought into the United States by this adult was theirs or not,
has been discarded by this administration. Is it possible that
we don't have the tools now to identify and backtrack--back map
back to those that are doing these criminal activities?
Mr. Richmond. I think it's worth noting--because when you
talk about identification, if we have 27.6 million victims in
the world and last year governments globally identified about
115,000, the governments around the world are identifying less
than half of 1 percent of all the victims we estimate to exist.
We have to radically increase our investment in combating human
trafficking if we're going to make a dent.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from Michigan, Mr. Thanedar, is recognized
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
A few months ago, after a lengthy 16-hour mark-up, my
Republican colleagues passed the Border Reinforcement Act of
2023 without accepting a single Democratic amendment. They
claim the bill is about border security, but it abandons CBPs,
ICEs, and DHS nongovernmental partners who provide essential
support for migrants.
Maybe my colleagues to the right should listen to the
agents because they have said that NGO's are critical to their
mission in border communities. NGO's elevate the pressure on
our border services freeing up resources for other vital
activities. We also know that NGO's offer enhanced stability to
migrants so they do not become even more vulnerable or
susceptible to human trafficking.
Mr. FitzPatrick, can you touch on the important role that
NGO's play in combating trafficking crimes and how basic
support and stabilization can help prevent someone from being
trafficked?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Thanks for that question.
Since I'm direct in alliance with NGO's, from large shelter
operators to groups that work on leadership in this sector, on
both sides of the aisle, from the McCain Institute to Vital
Voices, we're a nonpartisan organization that looks at all the
different parts of the problem.
There's actually a funding crisis that's going to come
like--I don't know if you know it, but there's something called
VOCA, Victims of Crime Act, which has a funding cliff ahead of
it. We're going to start seeing next year nonprofits having to
close operations and lay off staff because it's funded by
penalties from Federal courts, and those penalties from all
sorts of civil society is not enough to meet the current need.
Border guards don't want to be social workers, and
adjudication judges don't want to be lawyers for the defense or
have to perform that role. This is where civil society workers
come in to help do the support and the processing of
individuals as they determine whether or not they have a lawful
right to enter the United States as an asylum seeker or
trafficking victim.
So civil society is indispensable because you couldn't
possibly do that with all of the them being FTEs at the
Department of Homeland Security. You need nonprofit groups that
get funding, and matching funding is required from other
sources and foundations and individual contributors. So it's a
cost-effective way to help get the job done to make sure that
people's rights are protected.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
You know, as an immigrant, I came to this country at the
age of 24, and often, you know, I had to take shelter with
nonprofits when I couldn't hold on to a room in a rooming house
or had issues otherwise, and I got a lot of help as an
immigrant, and I owe it to them for what I was able to do
later.
So, instead of attacking nonprofits and religious
organizations doing humanitarian work, what should we be doing
in Congress to support NGO's and fight human trafficking?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Pass the Trafficking Victims Protection
Reauthorization Act that actually reauthorizes--Ambassador
Richmond's old department, his job--which has tens of millions,
96--I can't quite remember the number, but it's a substantial
amount. Most of their budget goes out the door to government
implementers, almost all of them nonprofit organizations, like
IJM, that do the work upstream in field around the world to do
what they can on reducing the push factors and also improving
the judicial systems in those countries.
So it's a cost-effective way to address the problem.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. FitzPatrick.
I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from New York, Goldman, is recognized for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for calling
this hearing today.
We're here I think appropriately focused on a significant
problem, which is the human trafficking and corollary of the
fentanyl trade that is predominated and controlled by
transnational criminal organizations called TCOs.
Mr. Richmond, would you agree that the most powerful TCOs
on the Southern Border are the Mexican drug cartels?
Mr. Richmond. I would certainly think that the drug cartels
have a significant impact.
Mr. Goldman. Understand you don't want to declare without
having any background, but the drug cartels have significant
control over human trafficking. Correct?
Mr. Richmond. I think we've definitely seen cases where
drug cartels or gangs have shifted to not just selling drugs
but also moved into selling illegal commercial sex as well as
forcing people to work.
Mr. Goldman. As well as the fentanyl trade that is running
rampant, correct?
Mr. Richmond. Indeed.
Mr. Goldman. Now, we've had witness after witness come
before this committee and testify that the Mexican drug cartels
are able to control the border and the human trafficking and
fentanyl enterprises because of their access to and possession
of guns, especially AR-15 weapons of war.
I assume none of you disagree that the cartels derive so
much of their power from their possession of guns, correct?
Anyone disagree?
All right. Seeing none, I will move on.
Mr. Villeda, do you know how many gun stores there are in
Mexico?
Mr. Villeda. IJM has no information on that matter, Mr.
Congressman.
Mr. Goldman. OK. The answer is one, one single gun store.
It takes months to get a gun.
Do you know how many American manufactured guns are
exported from the United States across the Southern Border to
Mexico every year, Mr. Villeda?
Mr. Villeda. I don't know that.
Mr. Goldman. Well, would you be surprised if I said as many
as 500,000 per year?
So it follows then, right, Mr. FitzPatrick, that one
important strategy to combat the cartels and disrupt human
trafficking and fentanyl trade would be to prevent the cartels
from getting access to weapons of war that give them strength
and power. Is that right?
Mr. FitzPatrick. I would have to consult my organizations
that work on the border in order to give an opinion.
Mr. Goldman. All right. Well, it's fairly common sense--and
I'm sure the two subcommittee Chairmen who have law enforcement
backgrounds would agree--that weapons can give a significant
source of power to the Mexican drug cartels.
Now, if Congress were going to pass laws to stop human
trafficking and the fentanyl trade and secure our border
against the Mexican drug cartels, wouldn't it follow, Mr.
Sadulski, that we would want to stop the exportation of
American-made guns going to Mexico?
Mr. Sadulski. Yes, it would.
Mr. Goldman. Well, unfortunately, H.R. 2, which Republicans
have repeatedly pointed to as their toughest ever border
security bill, does not mention guns one time, not once. So we
Democrats are taking action. We are trying to identify real
solutions that can get real results.
That's why today, along with my colleagues, Mike Thompson
and Joaquin Castro, I introduced the Disarming Cartels Act.
This bill would dramatically increase and intensify the
Homeland Security's efforts--the Department's efforts to combat
the trafficking of firearms and ammunition produced by American
companies and exported over the Southern Border. My bill would
ensure that the Department of Homeland Security increases
interagency collaboration to disrupt the flow of arms
trafficking and that we work with our partners in Mexico to
identify U.S.-based gun traffickers so we can stop that flow.
Now, my Republican colleagues repeatedly sit here hearing
after hearing after hearing pointing fingers at the Biden
administration for all of the border security issues. Well,
here's an opportunity to actually do something. I urge each and
every one of my friends on the other side of the aisle to join
me and support this legislation that every expert agrees will
help to secure our border.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from California, Mr. Garcia, is recognized
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I also want to continue some of this conversation around
what's really giving the cartels power at the Southern Border
as well.
Now, we know that cartels and our TCOs are destructive. We
know what they're doing around human trafficking. What's
happening along not just the border but human trafficking in
general is horrific. We can all and we should all condemn just
the horror that's happening to so many families and
particularly so many young women.
But it's also important that we also focuses on ways these
cartels maintain their power. One of the ways that they
maintain their power is, like, what was just said is weapons
and arms smuggling. So I think that's also very important to
talk about.
Now, each year, according to CBS news reporting, between
half a million and 1 million weapons enter Mexico illegally
from the United States, from us. We know that many of these
weapons are military grade weapons of war, including belt-fed
mini guns, grenade launchers, and a variety of other types of
weapons, and the overwhelming majority, of course, end up in
the hands of drug cartels.
So it's about 1 million weapons a year that actually get
smuggled into Mexico from the United States, and we have
allowed the cartels to essentially amass arsenals. These are
the weapons they often use to traffic human beings, to kill
innocent Mexicans and U.S. civilians and, of course, that they
use to attack law enforcement on both sides of the border.
Now, Mexico has been doing their part to solve the
avalanche of guns. Like was just mentioned, there is one gun
store in all of Mexico, and actually that one gun store only
issues 50 permits a year. So we know the guns are not coming
from Mexico. They're coming from us.
It shouldn't surprise anyone that, according to a variety
of reports anywhere between 70 and 90 percent of all of the
guns that are recovered in crime scenes in Mexico are actually
traced back to U.S. gun sales. So, if we're going to fight an
effective fight against the cartels, we need to make sure they
cannot get their hands on U.S. firearms.
Now, without even including ammunition and gear, the retail
value of U.S. weapon sales which go to the cartels is around a
half a billion dollars a year. So, given that, it's
unsurprising that according to the Council on Foreign
Relations, over 50 percent of all U.S. firearm dealers and up
to 80 percent of border safe Federal firearms license dealers
are actually dependent on Mexican cartel demand for their
economic existence. So, if you think about it, one-half of all
U.S. gun dealers would essentially go out of business if not
for gun sales that end up in the hands of the cartels.
So this is actually a huge public policy and public health
crisis. Both sides of the border need to be involved. For those
who want to take on human trafficking, the illegal guns that
are coming through the United States play a huge role in
fronting these cartels that, of course, are trafficking all of
these families from Central and South America and Mexico.
Now, we know that there's been a strong support from the
Biden administration. The bipartisan Safer Communities Act took
an important step in combating firearm straw purchasing and
trafficking. That was obviously the first reform we've seen in
decades, but we need to do a lot more.
I also recently introduced legislation that takes on ammo.
It's called the AMMO Act to reform the way we license, sell,
regulate, and oversee large ammunition sales in this country.
We also need to crack down on direct access to these guns by
the cartels.
Just really briefly I would like to go down through all of
our witnesses, and I want to thank you all for being here.
Would you agree, yes or no, that U.S.-trafficked guns are
critical to the cartels in maintaining their power?
We'll start with Mr. Richmond.
Mr. Richmond. I think, given the fact this is a human
trafficking hearing, it's important to note that Congress
wisely and innovatively in 2000 passed the Trafficking Victims
Protection Act which focuses on nonviolent----
Mr. Garcia. Sir, just back to my question. Yes or no, would
you say that guns that are trafficked are critical to cartels
maintaining their power? Yes or no.
Mr. Richmond. I think that most traffickers in the world
use nonviolent coercion to exploit their victims.
Mr. Garcia. So you can't answer the question? You don't
think that trafficked guns are critical to cartels maintaining
their power?
Mr. Richmond. I think this hearing is about human
trafficking----
Mr. Garcia. So yes or no, sir?
You won't answer the question. OK.
Mr. Villeda, do you think it's--it's not a hard question.
Do you think that trafficked guns are part of cartels
continuing their power? Yes or no.
Mr. Villeda. Part of the problem is there, but not the only
one.
Mr. Garcia. OK. Thank you.
Mr. FitzPatrick.
Mr. FitzPatrick. I couldn't say one way or the other.
Mr. Garcia. You couldn't say if guns and gun sales have
anything to with cartels maintaining their power?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Trafficked guns.
Mr. Garcia. Trafficked guns.
Mr. FitzPatrick. That's a subset of gun sales, and I
couldn't say.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. Sadulski.
Mr. Sadulski. Yes, guns are a problem.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much.
I don't think that was a very hard question. It's
unfortunate that it can't be answered.
Finally, just one other question for everybody. To
effectively fight against cartels, do we need a whole-of-
Government approach, which also should include addressing the
smuggling of guns? Addressing the smuggling of guns should also
be addressed by cartels.
Mr. Richmond, yes or no?
Mr. Richmond. We should enforce all our laws regarding
guns, as well as human trafficking.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. Villeda.
Mr. Villeda. The U.S. administration should cooperate with
local governments.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. FitzPatrick.
Mr. FitzPatrick. Sure, yes.
Mr. Garcia. Mr. Sadulski.
Mr. Sadulski. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garcia. Well, thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I'll yield back. Again, I want to say that
we've got to really focus on also guns and ammo sales if we
want to take on the human-trafficking issue.
Thank you.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentlewoman from Illinois, Mrs. Ramirez, is recognized
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman Higgins and Ranking
Member Mr. Correa.
Look, we've been in this committee hearing now for almost 2
hours, and I think we all agree that human smuggling and
trafficking is terrible, especially when we're inflicting this
pain, this trauma on children. Honestly, it disgusts us.
I am the oldest sister to a little sister who crossed the
border in search of her biological mother at the age of 12
weighing 65 pounds. So I will tell you that I have a little
personal experience to what happens when a young person is in
search of their parent and is coming through a coyote.
I also feel like it's a deplorable policy when being
trafficked or smuggled seems to be the only way that people can
come to seek asylum in this country. Time and time again, I've
heard from some of my colleagues here that, ``Well, what is the
root cause of migration?'' I also haven't seen any humane
pathways for people to come into this country legally so that
traffickers don't continue to marginalize, oppress, abuse,
rape, and do the things--the deplorable things that they do.
So I want to come back to what I always usually come back
to, which is the morality of human life here.
Mr. Villeda, you heard one of my colleagues ask the
question, what is the root cause of human trafficking? I heard
one of the witnesses mention, ``Well, look, poverty,
vulnerability. If they think they can take advantage of this
individual, they will, and they do.''
So, Mr. Villeda--this is also like Congressman Garcia, it's
a yes-or-no question--do you believe that we should pass
comprehensive protections that give survivors of human
trafficking permanent protection to stay and work in the United
States and seek the resources they need to thrive?
Mr. Villeda. Appropriately-screened migrants who have been
identified as victims should be given the opportunity to
receive proper care----
Mrs. Ramirez. So it's a yes. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Villeda.
Mr. FitzPatrick, what do you think? Yes or no?
Mr. FitzPatrick. That program already exists. There's a
system for that, and it just needs to be expanded and properly
funded, yes.
Mrs. Ramirez. So expanded and properly funded, but the
answer is yes. OK.
Well, Mr. FitzPatrick, my colleagues on the other side talk
about how they care about children. I hear about it all the
time here. I hear it on the House floor, but the legislation
that they passed in this committee, H.R. 2--I call it the Child
Deportation Act--was passed in the House this spring that
threatens to shut the Government down over what they propose to
be the set amount of time where a child will spend more time in
jail--currently I think they were talking about custody in CBP
from 3 days to up to 30 days.
Now, my little sister talks to me about the amount of time
she spent waiting to be sponsored and the trauma she's still
dealing with now at the age of 29. So I don't believe any
children should have to spend 1 single hour in a jail-like
setting, but the legislation is asking that that happen and
then also talks about deporting undocumented people, and that
includes children.
So, Mr. FitzPatrick, would forcing unaccompanied children
to remain in unsafe conditions without a guardian make them
more vulnerable to trafficking?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Yes, it would. I don't believe that
Congress can by act of Congress undo a court settlement that
the United States has agreed to, the Flores settlement in
particular.
So, to the extent that the law tries to get around what the
Government has already said it's going to do in a consent
decree in court, I'm not sure--I'm not a lawyer, but I'm not
sure that Congress can just simply say, ``We're not going to
honor that Flores agreement.''
Mrs. Ramirez. Yes. Thank you, Mr. FitzPatrick.
So let me ask you one other yes-or-no question. Would
sending children back to dangerous and deadly situations in
Mexico protect them or make them more vulnerable?
Mr. FitzPatrick. Is that a question to me?
Mrs. Ramirez. That's a question. Yes or no, would sending
children back to Mexico in a dangerous, deadly situation
protect them?
Mr. FitzPatrick. I'm against sending children back, period,
whether it's to Mexico or whether it's to their country of
origin. I think sending them to an intermediate country could
be even riskier than sending someone back to their country of
origin.
Mrs. Ramirez. Yes, I agree.
So, look, I just want to conclude. I want to see human
trafficking end. I think we all do here. We also have to ask
ourselves why are people crossing the border to begin with?--
and I think a couple of people brought that up here. I think
the final part of that is it is a policy choice that we don't
actually pass legislation that addresses the reason that people
need to migrate and create legal pathways.
So I'm not going to back down in the face of relentless
attempts to criminalize the right to seek asylum and endanger
children in the process. I really hope that if we're going to
be saying we care about children that we actually address it by
policy and create legal pathways so that human traffickers no
longer have business.
With that, I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Higgins. The gentlewoman yields.
Seeing no further Members present for questioning, I thank
the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the Members for
their questions.
Members of the subcommittees may have additional questions
for the witnesses, and indeed we do. We would ask that the
witnesses respond to these in writing. We'll be submitting
these questions in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:48 p.m., the subcommittees were
adjourned.]

[all]
