- HAVOC IN THE HEARTLAND: HOW SECRETARY MAYORKAS' FAILED LEADERSHIP HAS IMPACTED THE STATES

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

HAVOC IN THE HEARTLAND: HOW SECRETARY
MAYORKAS' FAILED LEADERSHIP HAS IM-
PACTED THE STATES

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JANUARY 10, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-47

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-059 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................    15

Witnesses

Mr. Austin Knudsen, Attorney General, State of Montana:
Oral Statement.................................................    20
Prepared Statement.............................................    22
Mr. Gentner Drummond, Attorney General, State of Oklahoma:
Oral Statement.................................................    25
Prepared Statement.............................................    26
Mr. Andrew Bailey, Attorney General, State of Missouri:
Oral Statement.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    31
Mr. Frank O. Bowman, III, Professor Emeritus of Law, University
of Missouri School of Law:
Oral Statement.................................................    35
Prepared Statement.............................................    36

For the Record

Hon. Donald M. Payne, Jr., a Representative in Congress From the
State of New Jersey:
Article, CBS News, November 30, 2023...........................    51
Hon. J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From the State
of California:
2023 Year in Review, January 9, 2024...........................    58
Hon. Daniel S. Goldman, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York:
Article, Washington Post, January 10, 2024.....................    70
Hon. August Pfluger, a Representative in Congress From the State
of Texas:
Document Issued by Speaker of the House Mike Johnson...........    73
Hon. Michael Guest, a Representative in Congress From the State
of Mississippi:
Blog entry, 15 Tuesday--Jan 2019...............................   100
Hon. Glenn Ivey, a Representative in Congress From the State of
Maryland:
Article, Daily Beast, January 9, 2024..........................   109
Article, Washington Post, January 9, 2024......................   110

Appendix I

Letter From Constitutional Law Experts.........................   137

Appendix II

Questions From Hon. August Pfluger for Austin Knudsen............   141
Questions From Hon. August Pfluger for Andrew Bailey.............   141
Questions From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson for Frank O.
Bowman, III....................................................   143

HAVOC IN THE HEARTLAND: HOW SECRETARY MAYORKAS' FAILED LEADERSHIP HAS
IMPACTED THE STATES

----------

Wednesday, January 10, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark Green
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, McCaul, Higgins, Guest,
Bishop, Gimenez, Pfluger, Garbarino, Greene, Gonzales, Ezell,
D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell, Strong, Brecheen, Crane, Thompson,
Jackson Lee, Payne, Swalwell, Correa, Thanedar, Magaziner,
Ivey, Goldman, Garcia, Ramirez, Menendez, Clarke, and Titus.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair may declare the
committee in recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony on
President Biden's and Secretary Mayorkas' open border policies
and how these failed policies have had profound and devastating
impacts throughout the country. This is the first hearing in
this committee's impeachment proceedings regarding Secretary
Mayorkas. I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Good morning. Today is a solemn occasion as this committee
begins official impeachment proceedings in the matter of
Department of Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas
and his handling of America's borders since taking office in
February 2021. I wish we weren't sitting here today. I wish
these proceedings were not necessary. I wish our Southwest
Border was secure. I wish that our Government was enforcing the
laws passed by the Congress and doing its job to keep the
American people safe. Unfortunately, Secretary Mayorkas has
done none of these things.
For almost a year, the House Committee on Homeland Security
has conducted a comprehensive investigation into the causes,
costs, and consequences of the unprecedented crisis at our
Southwest Border. Our evidence makes it clear Secretary
Mayorkas is the architect of the devastation that we have
witnessed for nearly 3 years. The findings of our
investigation, available to the public at Homeland.House.gov,
coupled with the Secretary's refusal to change course on the
reckless decisions facilitating this crisis, have left us with
no reasonable alternative than to pursue the possibility of
impeachment. The Secretary's actions have brought us here
today, not ours.
Since early 2021, we have watched in disbelief as historic
numbers of inadmissible aliens have poured across our borders,
both at official ports of entry and illegally crossing the
thousands of miles of our borders. On Secretary Mayorkas'
watch, Customs and Border Protection has recorded more than 8.1
million encounters at America's borders, including more than
6.7 million at our Southwest Border alone. For comparison, CBP
recorded just over 3 million encounters Nation-wide from fiscal
year 2017 to 2020.
Jeh Johnson, President Obama's former DHS Secretary,
previously said that 1,000 encounters a day ``overwhelms the
system.'' On Secretary Mayorkas' watch, encounters have never
averaged less than 3,000 per day, even going as high as 10- to
12,000 per day. Just a few days ago, internal CBP numbers
leaked to the media showed another 302,000 encounters at the
Southwest Border alone in December, by far an all-time record.
That is nearly enough people to fill the Rose Bowl 3 times in
just 1 month.
In addition to these catastrophic numbers of the record 1.8
million known gotaways who have entered the country on
Secretary Mayorkas' watch, individuals that Border Patrol
agents know slip across our border but are not apprehended, in
large part because the cartels overwhelm the agents with large
groups of coyote-paid and -escorted migrants, the agents see
them and they count them, but they cannot apprehend them. But
the numbers are most certainly far worse. As agents are moved
to crossing sites to process migrants and the border is
completely unmanned, there are no agents present to count the
known gotaways. The number of unknown gotaways is no doubt
enormous.
Thousands of agents have been pulled off the front lines to
process and release into our country record numbers of illegal
aliens who know they will be released into the country and
given a free bus or plane ticket to the city of their choice. I
ask you to watch this video.
[Video shown.]
Chairman Green. What Americans must understand today is
that these historic numbers, the chaos you just saw on the
screen, are the result of a much deeper problem. That problem
is not instability in other countries. It is not poverty, it is
not climate change. It is not supposedly broken immigration
system. All of these excuses have long predated Secretary
Mayorkas' tenure, and yet we have never experienced a crisis
like this. As even the New York Times admits, and I quote,
``Push factors don't explain the entire surge, and maybe not
even most of it. There have been no recent wars in Latin
America, and the region's poverty rate has been flat,'' the New
York Times.
I will also note that 2 of the 16 cities in the world with
the highest murder rates are right here in the United States.
Now, this crisis has been intentional. Secretary Mayorkas
was made aware of testimony given by President Biden's Attorney
General, Merrick Garland, where the AG admitted the current
policies are being exploited by the cartels. Yet Secretary
Mayorkas turns around and implements additional policies to
expand the catch-and-release measures empowering the cartels
and killing Americans. After nearly 3 years of watching this
unfold, what other conclusion is there but this is an
intentional crisis?
Secretary Mayorkas has brazenly refused to enforce the laws
passed by Congress as enacted policies that knowingly make our
country less safe. What we are seeing here is a willful
violation of his oath of office taken by Secretary Mayorkas.
Let me repeat that, a willful violation.
Secretary Mayorkas has used mass parole to release more
than 1.5 million inadmissible aliens into the country, despite
the Immigration and Nationality Act stating that parole is to
be used only as an, and I quote, ``case-by-case'' and
``temporary basis'' for a ``significant benefit or urgent
humanitarian reason.'' The chief patrol agent of the Border
Patrol's Laredo sector told us last June that, historically,
parole, and I quote, ``was used only in extreme humanitarian
instances. If a child was sick, had to go to the hospital, we'd
parole the parent in or something like that. But that was very
rare. It wasn't an everyday thing.'' This porter chief is
right.
The scale of Secretary Mayorkas' mass use and abuse of
parole is unprecedented and has been declared inconsistent with
the laws passed by Congress by multiple Federal judges, but
remains a central component of the Secretary's agenda.
The Immigration and Nationality Act also requires that
illegal aliens apprehended crossing the border be detained
pending their removal proceedings. Secretary Mayorkas has
ignored this law. In fiscal year 2013, according to DHS's own
numbers, the Obama administration detained 82 percent of
illegal aliens from the moment they were encountered until
their case was decided, and another 9 percent were held for at
least some portion of time after that. That is a pretty good
track record, and under a Democrat administration.
In Secretary Mayorkas' first year on the job, that 82
percent number dropped to just 10 percent. Illegal aliens not
detained at all jumped from 9 percent to 64 percent in fiscal
year 2021. In a court opinion earlier this year, Federal Judge
Kent Weatherell wrote, and I quote, ``The evidence establishes
that in late January or early February 2021, DHS made a
discrete change in detention policy from release only if there
is a compelling reason to release unless there is a compelling
reason not to.''
The deputy chief of the Border Patrol's Yuma sector told
our committee in September, ``The belief that they are going to
be released with no consequences is certainly something that
many migrants tell our agents.'' On Secretary Mayorkas' watch,
that's a pretty good bet.
Under his leadership, individuals guilty of violent crimes
and even some of the on the terrorist watch list have been
released into this country. Just Monday, multiple sources
confirmed Secretary Mayorkas admitted that released rates of
illegal aliens are currently around 85 percent. All told, DHS
numbers indicate that well over 3 million inadmissible aliens
have been released into our country on Secretary Mayorkas'
watch. Factor in the 1.8 million known gotaways, the
unqualifiable, unknown gotaways, that is roughly the population
of the State of South Carolina.
Not only has Secretary Mayorkas refused to detain these
individuals in accordance with the law, but he has also made it
nearly impossible for Immigrations and Customs Enforcement to
remove them. His policies have largely restricted the ability
of ICE to detain and remove the population of illegal aliens.
ICE removals dropped from more than 267,000 in fiscal year 2019
to less than 60,000 in fiscal year 2021 and 70,000 in 2022. The
fiscal year 2023 numbers were better, but were still more than
40,000 fewer than the lowest year of the last administration,
which largely occurred in the midst of the COVID pandemic.
Criminals as a percentage of all ICE arrests went from
around 90 percent in fiscal year 2020 to just 43 percent in
fiscal year 2023. The Secretary is not even living up to his
own flawed standards that supposedly prioritize threats to
public safety.
The former sector chief in San Diego told us in May 2023
that he didn't think the consequences of being removed from the
country was being utilized enough to deter illegal immigration.
Even Texas Democrat Mr. Cuellar has said, and I quote, ``If you
don't detain people, if you don't send people back, then the
border becomes a speedbump.''
On top of all this, upon entering office, Secretary
Mayorkas immediately began dismantling effective policies that
had secured the Southwest Border despite being warned by
experienced border security personnel of the consequences that
would result. That, coupled with his consistent decision to
double down on his own unlawful policies, indicates an
intentionality to this crisis.
I must note with great emphasis, these are not simple
policy differences. This is a years-long pattern of refusing to
enforce the laws passed by Congress.
Our investigation also uncovered the fact that Secretary
Mayorkas has violated the authority of his office. Secretary
Mayorkas has directed the Department to create numerous new
unlawful mass-parole programs that have allowed an
unprecedented number of individuals to enter our country who
otherwise would have no lawful basis to be here and to
incentivize migrants to make the dangerous and sometimes deadly
travel to our Southern Border.
He has also effectively told ICE officers not to do their
job in enforcing America's immigration laws. According to his
own guidance to ICE, and I quote, ``The fact an individual is
removable should not alone be the basis of an enforcement
action against them.'' And, ``Our personnel should not rely on
the fact of conviction'' for a flatly deportable crime, but
must consider, ``mitigating factors that militate in favor of
declining enforcement action.''
He has even overseen the reckless and irresponsible use of
Federal law enforcement personnel to sweep under the rug the
mess he has made at the Southwest Border. Border Patrol agents
from the Northern Border have been deployed to the Southwest
Border to assist in processing and releasing illegal aliens
into the interior. Hundreds of law enforcement professionals
from Homeland Security Investigations have been pulled from
serious investigations like sex crimes, child exploitation, and
other atrocities to perform administrative functions at the
border. One whistleblower claimed that his team was told to
shut down its investigations and were then sent to the border
to make sandwiches.
The Secretary has abused his authority and put Americans at
risk. Secretary Mayorkas has repeatedly lied to the American
people and to the U.S. Congress. Our investigation uncovered
more than 100 instances where Secretary Mayorkas misled the
public. Notably, he claimed in an April 2022 hearing to have
operational control of the Southwest Border as defined by
Federal statute. This was false.
He then told another lie by claiming in subsequent hearings
that he does not use the statutory definition of operational
control, despite doing so in that 2022 hearing. Watch for
yourself.
[Video shown.]
Chairman Green. Secretary Mayorkas told this very committee
in September 2021, and I quote, ``The border is no less secure
than it was previously.'' CBP recorded more than 192,000
encounters at our border that month alone, compared to around
58,000 the prior September. It was clear the border was not
secure, so why did he mislead Congress? Another video, please.
[Video shown.]
Chairman Green. He even stood at the White House podium in
September 21 and falsely accused mounted Border Patrol agents
in the Del Rio sector of whipping illegal aliens crossing the
border. Earlier that same day, DHS emails showed that his staff
had informed him that an eyewitness said no whipping occurred,
yet he advanced the narrative at the highest levels anyway.
One sector chief told us, and I quote, ``We never whipped
anybody. It was never really cleared up, and that takes a toll
on our agents.'' Please play the video.
[Video shown.]
Chairman Green. This is just a taste of Secretary Mayorkas'
misconduct. However, I want to close by reminding everyone that
we are here today not only because House Republicans are
determined to hold Secretary Mayorkas accountable, but because
more than 200 House Democrats voted on November the 13th to
refer Articles of Impeachment to our committee. We are now
acting in a bipartisan way, I suppose, in taking up those very
articles.
I briefly want to make it clear to the American people:
Secretary Mayorkas' refusal to follow the law is sufficient
grounds for impeachment proceedings. The Constitutional history
is overwhelmingly clear on this subject. The Founders designed
impeachment not just to remove officials engaged in criminal
behavior, but those guilty of such gross incompetence that
their conduct had endangered their fellow Americans, betrayed
the public trust, or represented a neglect of duty. According
to one scholar, there is, and I quote, ``a settled
understanding beyond dispute that impeachable offenses are not
limited to prosecutable crimes. Rather, the Framers of the
Constitution understood, and the House of Representatives has
consistently concluded, that the impeachment power reaches all
manner of gross misconduct in office that does serious harm to
the U.S. political system, the U.S. Constitutional order, or
the people of the country. The actions, policies, and
statements of Secretary Mayorkas easily meet the standards.''
Over the next few hours, you might hear a lot about process
and procedure. After a thorough year-long investigation, this
committee is following the Constitution and procedure as
directed by the House's vote this past November. Make no
mistake, attacks on the integrity of the process are meant to
distract you from the deadly consequences of our open border.
Unprecedented cartel control of our Southwest Border, with
record amounts of fentanyl flooding across between ports of
entry and into our communities, killing tens of thousands of
Americans every year. Over 300 individuals on the terrorist
watch list apprehended illegally crossing the Southwest Border
since fiscal year 2021, compared to just 14 from Fiscal Year
2017 to 2020. Families devastated by violent criminal aliens
who have committed murder, rape, and assault, to say nothing of
the vehicular crimes committed. CBP and ICE personnel losing
faith in their mission, they and their families bearing the
brunt of this onslaught at the border. The human costs of this
crisis are very real.
The dollar costs of this crisis have been astronomical as
well. New York City alone projects that it will have to spend
$12 billion dealing with the flow of illegal aliens into the
city by 2025, and it is even cutting the police force to pay
for it. One county in Texas had to cut salaries to afford
burials and cremations of illegal aliens found dead in their
jurisdiction. These costs will be felt for years to come.
As I stated when we started this investigation almost a
year ago, we will follow the facts. We have done just that, and
the facts have led us here. I look forward to the testimonies
of these distinguished attorneys general who have watched this
crisis play out unabated in their States.
For the sake of our homeland security and the well-being of
the people of the United States, Secretary Mayorkas must be
held accountable.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentleman from
Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening statement.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark Green
January 10, 2024
Today is a solemn occasion, as this committee begins official
impeachment proceedings in the matter of Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas and his handling of
America's borders since taking office in February 2021. I wish we were
not sitting here today. I wish these proceedings were not necessary. I
wish our Southwest Border was secure.
I wish that our Government was enforcing the laws passed by
Congress and doing its job to keep the American people safe.
Unfortunately, Secretary Mayorkas has done none of those things.
For almost a year, the House Committee on Homeland Security has
conducted a comprehensive investigation into the causes, costs, and
consequences of the unprecedented crisis at our Southwest Border. Our
evidence makes clear: Secretary Mayorkas is the architect of the
devastation we have witnessed for nearly 3 years. The findings of our
investigation--available to the public at homeland.house.gov--coupled
with the Secretary's refusal to change course on the reckless decisions
facilitating this crisis, have left us with no reasonable alternative
than to pursue the possibility of impeachment.
The Secretary's actions have brought us here today, not ours. Since
early 2021, we have watched in disbelief as historic numbers of
inadmissible aliens have poured across our borders, both at official
ports of entry and illegally across the thousands of miles of our
borders.
On Secretary Mayorkas' watch, Customs and Border Protection (CBP)
has recorded more than 8.1 million encounters at America's borders,
including more than 6.7 million at the Southwest Border alone. For
comparison, CBP recorded just over 3 million encounters Nation-wide
from fiscal year 2017-2020 combined. Jeh Johnson, President Obama's
former DHS Secretary, previously said that 1,000 encounters a day
``overwhelms the system''--on Secretary Mayorkas' watch, encounters
have never averaged fewer than 3,000 per day, even going as high as 10-
12,000 per day.
Just a few days ago, internal CBP numbers leaked to the media
showed another 302,000 encounters at the Southwest Border alone in
December--by far an all-time record. That's nearly enough people to
fill 3 Rose Bowls--in just 1 month.
In addition to these catastrophic numbers are the record 1.8
million known gotaways who have entered the country on Secretary
Mayorkas' watch--individuals that Border Patrol agents know slip across
our border, but are not apprehended in large part because cartels
overwhelm the agents with large groups of coyote-paid and -escorted
migrants. The agents see them, and count them, but cannot apprehend
them. But the numbers are most certainly far worse. As agents are moved
to crossing sites to process migrants, and the border is unmanned,
there are no agents present to count the known gotaways. The number of
unknown gotaways is no doubt enormous. Thousands of agents have been
pulled off the front lines to process and release into our country
record numbers of illegal aliens who know they will be released into
the country and given a free bus or plane ticket to their city of
choice.
What Americans must understand today is that these historic
numbers--the chaos you just saw on the screen--are the result of a much
deeper problem, and that problem is not instability in other countries.
It is not poverty. It is not climate change. It is not a supposedly
``broken immigration system.'' All of these excuses have long predated
Secretary Mayorkas' tenure, and yet, we have never experienced a crisis
like this. As even the New York Times admits, and I quote, ``push
factors don't explain the entire surge--and maybe not even most of it.
There have been no recent wars in Latin America, and the region's
poverty rate has been flat.'' I'll also note that 2 of the 16 cities in
the world with the highest murder rates are right here in the United
States.
No, this crisis has been intentional. Secretary Mayorkas was made
aware of testimony given by President Biden's Attorney General Merrick
Garland where the AG admitted the current policies are being exploited
by the cartels. Yet Secretary Mayorkas turns around and implements
additional policies to expand the catch-and-release measures empowering
the cartels and killing Americans. After nearly 3 years of watching
this unfold, what other conclusion is there but that this is an
intentional crisis?
Secretary Mayorkas has brazenly refused to enforce the laws passed
by Congress and has enacted policies that knowingly make our country
less safe. What we're seeing here is a willful violation of the oath of
office taken by Secretary Mayorkas. Let me repeat that, ``a willful
violation.''
Secretary Mayorkas has used mass parole to release more than 1.5
million inadmissible aliens into this country, despite the Immigration
and Nationality Act stating that parole is to be used only on a ``case-
by-case'' and ``temporary'' basis, for a ``significant public benefit
or urgent humanitarian reason.'' The chief patrol agent for the Border
Patrol's Laredo Sector told us last June that historically parole ``was
used only in extreme humanitarian . . . instances . . . if a child was
sick, had to go to the hospital, we'd parole the parent in or something
like that. But that was very rare. It wasn't an everyday thing.'' This
border chief is right.
The scale of Secretary Mayorkas' mass use--and abuse--of parole is
unprecedented and has been declared inconsistent with the laws passed
by Congress by multiple Federal judges, but remains a central component
of this Secretary's agenda.
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) also requires that
illegal aliens apprehended crossing the border be detained pending
their removal proceedings. Secretary Mayorkas has ignored this law. In
fiscal year 2013, according to DHS's own numbers, the Obama
administration detained 82 percent of illegal aliens from the moment
they were encountered until their case was decided, and another 9
percent were held for at least some portion of that time.
That's a pretty good track record--and under a Democrat
administration.
In Secretary Mayorkas' first year on the job, that 82 percent
number dropped to just 10 PERCENT. Illegal aliens not detained at all
jumped from 9 percent in fiscal year 2013 to 64 PERCENT in fiscal year
2021. In a court opinion earlier this year, Federal judge Kent
Wetherell wrote,``The evidence establishes that in late January or
early February 2021, DHS made a discrete change in detention policy
from release only if there is a compelling reason to, to release unless
there is a compelling reason not to.''
The deputy chief for the Border Patrol's Yuma Sector told our
committee in September, ``the belief that they are going to be released
with no consequence is certainly something that many migrants tell our
agents.'' On Secretary Mayorkas' watch, that's a pretty good bet. And
under his leadership, individuals guilty of violent crimes and even
some on the terrorist watch list have been released into the country.
Just Monday, multiple sources confirmed Secretary Mayorkas admitted
that release rates of illegal aliens are currently around 85 percent.
All told, DHS numbers indicate that well over 3 million
inadmissible aliens have been released into our country on Secretary
Mayorkas' watch. Factor in the 1.8 million known gotaways, and that's
roughly the population of the State of South Carolina.
Not only has Secretary Mayorkas refused to detain these
individuals, but he has also made it nearly impossible for Immigration
and Customs Enforcement to remove them. His policies have largely
restricted the ability of ICE to detain and remove the population of
illegal aliens.
ICE removals dropped from more than 267,000 in fiscal year 2019 to
less than 60,000 in fiscal year 2021, and 70,000 in fiscal year 2022.
Fiscal year 2023 numbers were better but were still more than 40,000
fewer than the lowest year of the Trump administration--which largely
occurred in the midst of the COVID pandemic! Criminals, as a percentage
of all ICE arrests, went from around 90 percent in fiscal year 2020 to
just 43 percent in fiscal year 2023. The Secretary is not even living
up to his own flawed standards that supposedly prioritize ``threats to
public safety.''
The former sector chief in San Diego told us in May 2023 that he
didn't think the consequence of being removed from the country was
being utilized enough to deter illegal immigration. Even Texas Democrat
Henry Cuellar has said, ``if you don't detain people, if you don't send
people back, then the border becomes a speedbump.''
On top of all this, upon entering office, Secretary Mayorkas
immediately began dismantling effective policies that had secured the
Southwest Border--despite being warned by experienced border security
personnel of the consequences that would result. That, coupled with his
consistent decision to double down on his own unlawful policies,
indicates an intentionality to this crisis.
And I must note with great emphasis: These are not simple policy
differences. This is a years-long pattern of refusing to enforce the
laws Congress has passed.
Our investigation also uncovered the fact that Secretary Mayorkas
has violated the authority of his office.
Secretary Mayorkas has directed the Department to create numerous
new unlawful mass-parole programs that have allowed an unprecedented
number of individuals to enter into our country who otherwise would
have no lawful basis to be here, and to incentivize migrants to make
the dangerous and sometimes deadly travel to our Southern Border.
He has also effectively told ICE officers not to do their job in
enforcing America's immigration laws. According to his own guidance to
ICE, ``the fact an individual is a removable [alien] . . . should not
alone be the basis of an enforcement action against them.'' And,
``[o]ur personnel should not rely on the fact of conviction,'' for a
flatly deportable crime, but must consider ``mitigating factors that
militate in favor of declining enforcement action.''
He has even overseen the reckless and irresponsible use of Federal
law enforcement personnel to sweep under the rug the mess he's made at
the Southwest Border. Border Patrol agents from the Northern Border
have been deployed to the Southwest Border to assist in processing and
releasing illegal aliens into the interior. Hundreds of law enforcement
professionals from Homeland Security Investigations have been pulled
from serious investigations into sex crimes, child exploitation, and
other atrocities to perform administrative functions at the border. One
whistleblower claimed that his team was told to shut down its
investigations and were then sent to the border to make sandwiches. The
Secretary has abused his authority and put Americans at risk.
Secretary Mayorkas has repeatedly lied to the American people, and
to Congress.
Our investigation uncovered more than 100 instances in which
Secretary Mayorkas misled the public. Notably, he claimed in an April
2022 hearing to have operational control of the Southwest Border as
defined by Federal statute. That was false. He then told another lie by
claiming in subsequent hearings that he does not use the statutory
definition of operational control--despite doing so in that 2022
hearing!
Secretary Mayorkas told this very committee in September 2021,
``the border is no less secure than it was previously''. CBP recorded
more than 192,000 encounters at our borders that month alone, compared
to around 58,000 the prior September. It was clear the border was not
secure, so why did he lie to Congress about it?
He even stood at the White House podium in September 2021 and
falsely accused mounted Border Patrol agents in Del Rio of ``whipping''
illegal aliens crossing the border. Earlier that same day, DHS emails
showed that his staff had informed him that an eyewitness said no
whipping occurred, yet he advanced the narrative at the highest levels
anyway. One sector chief told us, ``we never whipped anybody . . . [I]t
was never really cleared up, and that takes a toll on our agents.''
This is just a taste of Secretary Mayorkas' misconduct. However, I
want to close by reminding everyone that we are here today not only
because House Republicans are determined to hold Secretary Mayorkas
accountable, but because more than 200 House Democrats voted on
November 13 to refer articles of impeachment to our committee. We are
now acting on a bipartisan basis in taking up those articles.
And I briefly want to make it clear to the American people--
Secretary Mayorkas' refusal to follow the law is sufficient grounds for
impeachment proceedings. The Constitutional history is overwhelmingly
clear on this--the Founders designed impeachment not just to remove
officials engaged in criminal behavior, but those guilty of such gross
incompetence that their conduct had endangered their fellow Americans,
betrayed the public trust, or represented a neglect of duty. According
to one scholar, there is ``a settled understanding--beyond dispute--
that impeachable offenses are not limited to prosecutable crimes.
Rather, the Framers of the Constitution understood, and the House of
Representatives has consistently concluded, that the impeachment power
reaches all manner of gross misconduct in office that does serious harm
to the U.S. political system or the U.S. Constitutional order. The
actions, policies, and statements of Secretary Mayorkas easily meet
that standard.''
Over the next few hours, you might hear a lot about process and
procedure. And after a thorough year-long investigation, this committee
is following the Constitution and procedure as directed by the House's
vote this past November. Make no mistake--attacks on the integrity of
this process are meant to distract you from the deadly consequences of
our open border.
Unprecedented cartel control of our Southwest Border, with record
amounts of fentanyl flooding across between ports of entry and into our
communities, killing tens of thousands of Americans every year. Over
300 individuals on the terrorist watch list apprehended illegally
crossing the Southwest Border since fiscal year 2021--compared to just
14 from fiscal year 2017-2020. Families devastated by violent criminal
aliens who have committed murder, rape, and assault, to say nothing of
the vehicular crimes committed. CBP and ICE personnel losing faith in
their mission, they and their families bearing the brunt of this
onslaught at the border. The human costs of this crisis are very real.
The dollar costs of this crisis have been astronomical, as well.
New York City alone projects that it will have spent $12 billion
dealing with the flow of illegal aliens into the city by 2025, and it
is even cutting the police force to pay for it. One county in Texas had
to cut salaries to afford burials and cremations of illegal aliens
found dead in their jurisdiction. These costs will be felt for years to
come.
As I stated when we started this investigation almost a year ago,
we will follow the facts. We have done just that, and the facts have
led us here. I look forward to the testimonies of these distinguished
attorneys general, who have watched this crisis play out unabated in
their States.
For the sake of our homeland security, and the well-being of our
people, Secretary Mayorkas must be held accountable.

Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, in April, before this committee even began
its so-called impeachment inquiry, Chairman Green promised
donors at a campaign event that he would bring an impeachment
case against Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas.
According to a recording of his comments obtained by the media,
the Chairman went on to tell those deep pocket contributors to,
``Get the popcorn'' and ``it's going to be fun.''
The Chairman may have thought that only those in the
campaign event would hear his remarks, but the truth has a way
of coming out. His promise to a room full of donors tell the
American people all they need to know about why Republicans are
hell-bent on impeaching Secretary Mayorkas.
The promise of impeachment was made at a campaign event,
and shortly afterwards, Republicans began their so-called
investigation into Secretary Mayorkas. It is now campaign
season, and Republicans recently rolled out their impeachment
proceedings against the Secretary like a preplanned,
predetermined political stunt it is.
This is not a legitimate impeachment. Republicans want to
throw political red meat to their base and keep that campaign
cash coming. They know their already razor-thin majority is
slipping away and think impeaching Secretary Mayorkas, even
though there is absolutely no basis for it, will keep them in
control of the House.
Republicans certainly aren't going to win votes based on
their abysmal legislative record. This has been the most
unproductive, dysfunctional Congress in memory. They kicked
their own Speaker out and then couldn't agree on a new one.
They paralyzed the House for weeks while they fought among
themselves. They have struggled to keep the Government funding,
and are continually on the verge of shutting it down. A Member
of their party was expelled for lying about practically
everything in his life.
Extreme MAGA Republicans have created this impeachment
circus sideshow, in part to try to distract from their own
failures. They took their sideshow on the road recently,
traveling to the border to stand behind a podium, making canned
speeches and posing for photo ops.
But for all their border security bluster, Republicans
opposed funding necessary to secure the border. They tried to
cut money from Customs and Border Protection personnel and have
refused to take up the President's supplemental funding
request. Chairman Green himself recently penned an op-ed
saying, and I quote, ``Not another dime to DHS,'' until the
Republican border bill is signed into law, even though he knows
full well that disastrous bill has absolutely zero chance of
being enacted.
It should be unthinkable that a Chairman of the Committee
on Homeland Security would threaten to defund DHS, but that is
exactly what happened.
This is funding our front-line border and immigration
agencies need to better secure the border. Republicans have
tried to excuse their opposition to border funding by claiming
that Border Patrol doesn't want more funding, but that is
blatantly false. In interviews with the committee, Border
Patrol chiefs unequivocally supported more resources.
Republicans know that; they were in the room and they have the
transcripts. But let me refresh their memory.
Jason Owens, currently the chief of the Border Patrol,
said, ``We always need more agents.'' Chief Modlin in Tucson,
an agency, ``We need a lot more, a lot more people.'' From
Chief Heitke in San Diego, `We always need resources and
technology.'' From Chief Bovino in El Centro, ``The additional
resources is the correct technology assist with control of the
border.'' Finally from Chief Chavez in El Paso, ``Providing
support for critical positions and resources by Congress really
does impact positively the deployment of agents to the front
line.''
Every one of these chiefs told the committee that having
more resources would help them better secure the border.
Republicans go to the border in dress pants and polo shirts to
pose for pictures, but then leave the hardworking agents in
uniform and work boots behind without the resources they asked
for. Democrats want to give border agents what they need to
secure the border and Republicans do not.
The truth is, securing the border isn't really the
Republicans' top concern. If it was, they would provide the
people with boots on the ground at the border what they need to
get the job done. Republicans would rather exploit a
challenging policy issue for their own perceived political
gain.
Republicans disagree with the Biden administration's border
and immigration policies. They are angry that this
administration won't take babies from their moms or put kids in
cages like the last administration. You cannot impeach a
Cabinet Secretary because you don't like the President's
policies.
Let me say that again. You cannot impeach a Cabinet
Secretary because you don't like a President's policies. That
is not what impeachment is for. That is not what the
Constitution says.
Republicans are willing to do grave damage to the
Constitution they claim to hold dear because they think it will
benefit them politically. In doing so, they are targeting
Secretary Mayorkas, a public servant who spent his
distinguished 30-year career serving our country as a Federal
prosecutor and in leadership positions across the Department of
Homeland Security.
The facts show Secretary Mayorkas is doing his job across
the Department's many critical homeland security missions,
including border security and immigration enforcement. Despite
what Republicans would have Americans believe, Secretary
Mayorkas is enforcing immigration law.
According to a recent analysis by the Cato Institute,
someone who crosses the border under the current administration
is more likely to be removed from the United States than
someone who crossed under former President Trump. Republicans
don't care about that. This impeachment sham clearly isn't
about facts. It is not about the law. It is about pure and
simple politics.
Just look at those whose impeachment resolutions have been
referred to this committee. Consider what kind of backroom
deals Republican leadership must have made with the most
extreme MAGA members. Or as one Republican Member recently put
it, and I quote, ``We are simply accommodating our least
sensible conference Members.'' I certainly agree.
Democrats are doing everything they can to hold the line
against Republican chaos. Democrats want to strengthen border
security. We want to keep fentanyl off the streets. We want to
keep communities safe. This circus sideshow impeachment does
none of that.
Mr. Chairman, let's drop this baseless impeachment and
start doing the real work of securing the homeland for the
American people.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
January 10, 2024
In April, before this committee even began its so-called
``impeachment inquiry,'' Chairman Green promised donors at a campaign
event that he would bring an impeachment case against Secretary of
Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas.
According to a recording of his comments obtained by the media, the
Chairman went on to tell these deep-pocketed contributors to ``get the
popcorn'' and ``it's going to be fun.'' The Chairman may have thought
that only those at the campaign event would hear his remarks, but the
truth has a way of coming out.
His promise to a room full of donors tells the American people all
they need to know about why Republicans are hell-bent on impeaching
Secretary Mayorkas. The promise of impeachment was made at a campaign
event, and shortly afterward Republicans began their so-called
``investigation'' into Secretary Mayorkas.
It's now campaign season, and Republicans recently rolled out their
impeachment proceedings against the Secretary like the pre-planned,
pre-determined political stunt it is. This is not a legitimate
impeachment.
Republicans want to throw political red meat to their base and keep
that campaign cash coming. They know their already razor-thin majority
is slipping away and think impeaching Secretary Mayorkas--even though
there's absolutely no basis for it--will help them keep control of the
House.
Republicans certainly aren't going to win votes based on their
abysmal legislative record. This has been the most unproductive,
dysfunctional Congress in memory. They kicked their own Speaker out and
then couldn't agree on a new one. They paralyzed the House for weeks
while they fought amongst themselves. They have struggled to keep the
Government funded and are continually on the verge of shutting it down.
A Member of their party was expelled for lying about practically
everything in his life.
Extreme MAGA Republicans have created this impeachment circus
sideshow in part to try to distract from their own failures. They took
their sideshow on the road recently, traveling to the border to stand
behind a podium making canned speeches and posing for photo ops. But
for all their border security bluster, Republicans oppose providing the
funding necessary to secure the border. They tried to cut money for
Customs and Border Protection personnel and have refused to take up the
President's supplemental funding request.
Chairman Green himself recently penned an op-ed saying ``not
another dime to DHS'' until the Republican border bill is signed into
law--even though he knows full well that disastrous bill has absolutely
zero chance of being enacted. It should be unthinkable that a Chairman
of the Committee on Homeland Security would threaten to de-fund DHS.
But that's exactly what happened. This is funding our front-line border
and immigration agencies need to better secure the border.
Republicans have tried to excuse their opposition to border funding
by claiming that Border Patrol doesn't want more funding--but that is
blatantly false. In interviews with the committee, Border Patrol chiefs
unequivocally supported more resources. Republicans know that--they
were in the room, and they have the transcripts. But let me refresh
their memory:

Jason Owens, currently the chief of the Border Patrol, said:
``We always need more agents.''

From Chief Modlin in Tucson: `` . . . as an agency, we need
a lot more--a lot more people.''

From Chief Heitke in San Diego: ``We are always in need of
resources and technology.''

From Chief Bovino in El Centro: ``The addition of resources
in the correct technology assists with control of the border.''

And finally, from Chief Chavez in El Paso, ``Providing
support for critical positions and resources by Congress really
does impact positively the deployment of agents to the front
line.''
Every one of these chiefs told this committee that having more
resources would help them better secure the border. Republicans go to
the border in dress pants and polo shirts to pose for pictures, but
then leave the hardworking agents in uniform and work boots behind
without the resources they have asked for. Democrats want to give
border agents what they need to secure the border and Republicans do
not.
The truth is, securing the border isn't really Republicans' top
concern. If it was, they'd provide the people with boots on the ground
at the border what they need to get the job done. Republicans would
rather exploit a challenging policy issue for their own perceived
political gain.
Republicans disagree with the Biden administration's border and
immigration policies. They're angry that this administration won't take
babies from their moms or put kids in cages like the last
administration. You cannot impeach a Cabinet Secretary because you
don't like a President's policies.
Let me say that again--you cannot impeach a Cabinet Secretary
because you don't like a President's policies. That's not what
impeachment is for. That's not what the Constitution says. Republicans
are willing to do grave damage to the Constitution they claim to hold
dear because they think it will benefit them politically.
And in doing so, they are targeting Secretary Mayorkas--a public
servant who has spent his distinguished 30-year career serving our
country as a Federal prosecutor and in leadership positions across the
Department of Homeland Security.
The facts show Secretary Mayorkas is doing his job across all the
Department's many critical homeland security missions, including border
security and immigration enforcement. Despite what Republicans would
have Americans believe, Secretary Mayorkas is enforcing immigration
law.
According to a recent analysis by the CATO Institute, someone who
crosses the border under the current administration is more likely to
be removed from the United States than someone who crossed under Trump.
Republicans don't care about that. This impeachment sham clearly isn't
about the facts. It's not about the law. It's about politics, pure and
simple. Just look at whose impeachment resolution has been referred to
this committee. Consider what kind of backroom deals Republican
leadership must have made with its most extreme MAGA members.
Or, as one Republican member recently put it, `` . . . we are
simply accommodating our least sensible . . . conference members.'' I
certainly agree. Democrats are doing everything we can to hold the line
against Republican chaos. Democrats want to strengthen border security.
We want to keep fentanyl off our streets. We want to keep communities
safe. This circus sideshow impeachment does none of that.
Mr. Chairman, let's drop this baseless impeachment and start doing
the real work of securing the homeland for the American people.

Mr. Thompson. Before I yield back, however, Mr. Chairman, I
have some parliamentary inquiries.
Chairman Green. You are recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman, isn't it true that there is no
language in either rule X or rule XI that grants the Committee
on Homeland Security jurisdiction over the impeachment of any
Federal officer?
Chairman Green. That is not a valid parliamentary inquiry.
You need to state the rule and how it relates to this
proceeding.
Mr. Thompson. That is why it is an inquiry because I am
referencing either rule X or rule XI that grants the Committee
of Homeland Security jurisdiction over impeachment of any
officer.
Chairman Green. There was a vote on the House floor,
actually, the motion made by the Democrats to move impeachment
articles to this committee. That trumps the rules, and it
passed the House floor and we are proceeding in accordance with
the demands of the U.S. House of Representatives by vote of the
Members.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Is the Chair aware that of the five
resolutions impeaching Secretary Mayorkas introduced in the
House so far this Congress, just one, House Resolution 863, has
been referred to the Committee of Homeland Security and that
four others have been referred by the Speaker to the Committee
on Judiciary?
Chairman Green. Again, I need to know the rule that you
think this is in violation of, so it is not a correct
parliamentary inquiry.
Mr. Thompson. I didn't understand your ruling.
Chairman Green. Not a valid parliamentary inquiry.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Would the Chair inform the committee of which
rule or precedent supports the idea that the motion to refer
overrides House rules on committee jurisdiction, particularly
over a Constitutional matter that should have been referred to
the Committee on Judiciary?
Chairman Green. That is not a valid parliamentary inquiry.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Has the full House authorized this
impeachment inquiry such as it did on January 14, 1876, for the
investigation of then-Secretary of War William W. Belknap, or
such as the House did on December 13, 2023, for the
investigation of President Biden?
Chairman Green. Again, not a valid parliamentary inquiry.
The House of Representatives voted to send this to this
committee.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Is the Chair aware that the Committee on the
Judiciary adopted internal rules of procedure for the conduct
of its impeachment inquiry of ex-President Trump in 2019? Does
the Chair intend to follow suit and adopt additional committee
rules to ensure due process for Secretary Mayorkas in this as-
yet unauthorized inquiry?
Chairman Green. Again, not a valid parliamentary inquiry.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. In reference to the Secretary's right to due
process, I have the following parliamentary inquiry, Mr.
Chairman. Does the committee intend to follow the Secretary to
be represented by counsel during these impeachment proceedings?
Chairman Green. The committee will follow the rules of the
House on that measure.
Mr. Thompson. So, do I understand that Secretary Mayorkas
will be allowed counsel?
Chairman Green. The committee will follow the rules of the
House on that.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Does the committee intend to allow the
Secretary's counsel to be present at all hearings and
deposition?
Chairman Green. The committee will follow the rules of the
House.
Mr. Thompson. Additional inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Does the committee intend to allow the
Secretary's counsel to present evidence and object to the
admission of evidence?
Chairman Green. The committee will follow the rules of the
House.
Mr. Thompson. Is that a no?
Chairman Green. The committee will follow the rules of the
House.
Mr. Thompson. So do the rules allow it? That is my point.
Chairman Green. We will follow the rules of the House as
they are written. The question isn't pertinent to this
committee hearing today.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I think we will get to that at some
point, Mr. Chairman. But I just want to go on the record in
pursuit of this, is that when former President Trump had
impeachment matters brought before, Senator Lindsey Graham made
sure that he was afforded counsel and questions and everything.
I am just trying to make sure that we follow some kind of order
in that.
Chairman Green. As I stated, Mr. Ranking Member, we will
follow the rules of the House.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Does the committee intend to allow the Secretary's counsel to
call and cross-examine witnesses?
Chairman Green. Again, the committee will follow the rules
of the House.
Mr. Thompson. Further parliamentary inquiry.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen is recognized.
Mr. Thompson. Does the committee intend to give the
Secretary's counsel access to and the ability to respond to the
evidence added by the committee?
Chairman Green. The committee will follow all of the rules
of the House.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With that, I yield
back.
Chairman Green. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Hon. Jackson Lee follows:]

Statement of Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee
January 10, 2024
Chairman Green, and Ranking Member Thompson, it is a sad day that
the committee has been convened to hold an impeachment hearing
targeting the current Secretary of Homeland Security without merit or
consideration of the consequences to the agency or how this action may
undermine the current challenges the Nation is facing.
There is no basis for impeaching Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas, who
is carrying out his duties faithfully.
Secretary Mayorkas has not committed ``Treason, Bribery, or other
high Crimes and Misdemeanors''--the United States Constitution's
standard--for an impeachment.
Secretary Mayorkas is carrying out his duties faithfully.
House Republicans may not approve of the Biden administration's
policies, but policy differences are not grounds for impeachment under
the Constitution.
House Republicans are trying to distract from their inability to
govern and score political points with their extreme MAGA political
base by impeaching the Secretary.
Rather than abusing their power as the Majority in the House of
Representatives with an unjustified impeachment process, they should
focus on keeping the Government open and join with Democrats to provide
border personnel the funding they need to do their job.
I regret that today's witnesses have been summoned to participate
in an impeachment process hearing.
If they were made aware of the true purpose for being present
today, that will be made clear during the questions phase of the
hearing.
The committee has been well-served over my tenure when it has taken
the time to listen to local and State governments on homeland security
issues, it is my hope that today's hearing does not detract from this
history.
As State Attorneys General and a legal scholar, these witnesses
know that agencies do not make law, they implement or enforce laws that
are made by legislatures, enacted by Executive actions, or mandated by
court decisions.
I look forward to their testimony:

The Hon. Austin Knudsen, attorney general, State of Montana;

The Hon. Gentner Drummond, attorney general, State of
Oklahoma;

The Hon. Andrew Bailey, attorney general, State of Missouri;
and

Frank O. Bowman, III, professor emeritus, University of
Missouri School of Law (*Democratic Witness*).
In 1776 the Framers declared the self-evident and later the
universal truth that all persons are created equal and endowed by their
Creator with the inalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit
of happiness.
As important, the Framers declared that ``to secure these rights,
governments are instituted among men, deriving their just power from
the consent of the governed.''
This genius of self-government is the Framers' gift to us and
America's gift to the world, and for nearly 250 years the world has
looked upon the United States with wonder, awe, and envy not just for
its awesome powers and achievements, but for being the exemplar to
which most freedom-loving nations aspire.
But as President Lincoln reminded us at Gettysburg, the proposition
that a people can govern themselves is not to be taken for granted; it
is a proposition that will be tested time and again and it for us, the
living, to highly resolve to commit ourselves to the great task always
before us, that government of the people, by the people, and for the
people not perish from the earth.
As Thomas Paine said in his time, the past 14 years were times that
tried one's soul. The Nation was tested, severely so, by what can only
be described as the modern-day Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse: a
deadly pandemic, economic devastation unseen since the Great
Depression, social justice unrest, and the very real threat of
authoritarianism.
While the threat posed by these challenges are still with us to
varying extent, we can all rejoice that the Nation withstood the
challenge, e pluribus unum, by standing together as ``We The People.''
President Lincoln reminded us that in times of testing and
challenge that ``the fiery trial through which we pass will mark us
down in honor or dishonor until the latest generation'' but that so
long as the people ``retain their virtue and vigilance, no
administration, by any extreme of wickedness or folly, can very
seriously injure the government in the short space of 4 years.''
And Lincoln was right, for on Election Day 2020, Americans by a
substantial majority, voted to withhold consent to govern from an
incumbent administration and confer it upon another.
That act of self-government and sovereign expression was solemnized
on January 20, 2021, at noon when Joseph R. Biden and Kamala D. Harris
took the oath of office as the 46th President and 59th Vice-President
of the United States.
The Philadelphia Miracle of 1789 endures but only because we
Americans resolve that it does and work to make it so.
The President takes the oath of office pledging to preserve,
protect, and defend the Constitution.
As does every one of my Congressional colleagues, I have sacredly
pledged true faith and allegiance in defending the Constitution against
all enemies, foreign and domestic and to well and faithfully execute
the duties of the office I hold. I do this ever mindful that the
purpose of our form of government is ``to form a more perfect union, to
establish justice, to insure domestic tranquility, to provide for the
common defense, to promote the general welfare, and to secure the
blessings of liberty for posterity.''
But we all have a responsibility to preserve and strengthen this
Constitutional republic and pass it on to the next generation by
engaging in robust, lawful, and peaceful civic activity to hold our
Government to account and to peaceably assemble when necessary to
petition for a redress of grievances as shown by the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. at the March on Washington, following the example of
Mahatma Gandhi; by John Lewis and the Civil Rights foot soldiers at the
Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama; by Elizabeth Cady Staton and
Lucretia Mott at Seneca Falls; by Cesar Chavez leading the fight for
human dignity of farmworkers, and by Black Lives Matter demonstrators
protesting inequalities in the criminal justice system.
For the work of democracy is never complete, our union is always in
the process of being made more perfect.
The ingredients for good policy are competence, capability, and
willingness to put aside partisanship and place national interest
first.
At this moment in our Nation's history Republicans are attempting
to impeach Secretary Mayorkas not for any malfeasance or wrongdoing--
but because they disagree with his actions carrying out the Biden
administration's border and immigration policies.
Using policy differences as grounds for impeachment is an abusive
political action that the Founders rejected as antithetical to the U.S.
Constitution.
Republicans have not alleged that the Secretary has committed an
impeachable offense, so their ``reports'' attempting to legitimize
their unfounded case for impeachment effort contain blatant
misinformation and politically-motivated rhetoric, such as criticizing
the termination of harmful but barely utilized Trump-era immigration
and border policies, which were not laws--a fact they either do not
understand or willfully ignore.
Such a political theater has no basis in the history of American
Constitutional law, as Article II of the U.S. Constitution sets the
standard for impeachment of ``civil officers'' as ``Treason, Bribery,
or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.''
The Biden administration's departure from the failed, cruel, and
sometimes unlawful border and immigration policies of the previous
administration is certainly not an impeachable offense.
Impeachment under these circumstances is not a Constitutional
remedy for political and policy differences.
Impeachment is an extraordinary remedy reserved for the most
egregious political offenses, not policy differences. Indeed, Madison
objected to the term ``maladministration'' being added to the list of
impeachable offenses during the Constitutional Convention because it
would upset the separation of powers.
The first and only impeachment of a Cabinet official occurred in
1876 following extensive evidence of corruption.
Republican Congressman Tom McClintock, the Chairman of the
Committee on the Judiciary's Subcommittee on Immigration Integrity,
Security, and Enforcement, described Rep. Greene's attempt to impeach
Secretary Mayorkas over policy disagreements as a ``perilous path'' for
future governance.
Chairman McClintock went on to argue that the redefinition of
impeachment found in H. Res. 863 ``would utterly destroy the separation
of powers at the heart of our Constitution.
While these are the basis for this committee not moving forward in
the process, there are compelling reasons why the committee should be
actively engaged in Immigration Reform.
unaccompanied children at the border?
Under the direction and behest of the previous administration's
Secretaries of Homeland Security the saddest, most tragic situation
regarding immigration policy occurred when tens of thousands of
unaccompanied children were taken from their parents or removed from
the care of responsible adults.
The image of children in cages will haunt our Nation for decades to
come, but when this was occurring too many of my friends on the other
side of the aisle found no fault with the past administration's crisis-
generating border policies that caused so much suffering for children
and their parents.
The same border challenges are part of our mission as a committee,
and we are as much to blame as any administration that we under-
resource or allow to pursue policies that cause injury and harm to
asylum seekers or refugees needing assistance.
As a former Ranking Member of the Homeland Security's Subcommittee
on Border Security, my commitment to securing our Nation's borders and
protecting the homeland from terrorist attacks remains unwavering.
The United States has a Federal policy supported by laws that
govern how non-citizens are to be treated, and the rights and well-
being of the most vulnerable are to be met when in U.S. custody?
During the Obama administration, I visited CBP facilities when tens
of thousands of unaccompanied children were arriving at the border
weekly during the previous administration and observed how DHS met the
challenge of receiving them, feeding them, and placing them safely in
the custody of the Department of Health and Human Services was
routinely met.
I was shocked to learn in December 2018, that two children died in
separate incidents while in the custody of the U.S. Border Patrol,
which were the first deaths of children in Border Patrol custody in
more than a decade.
CBP issued a final directive regarding enhanced medical screening
procedures in December 2019. At the committee's request, the Government
Accountability Office (GAO) reviewed CBP's compliance with its new
procedures. GAO will issue its findings in a report to be released to
the public the day of the committee's hearing.
In January 2019, this committee requested documents related to
these deaths.
After the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) failed to produce
all requested documents, the committee issued a subpoena for the
documents in November 2019.
DHS did not produce all the documents demanded by the subpoena, and
documents that have been produced had extensive and improper
redactions.
The committee under Chairman Thompson identified significant
deficiencies with both reviews.
The committee also found that the Inspector General omitted key
information from the public summary of one of its reviews, rendering
the summary inaccurate and potentially misleading.
Because of the deficiencies of the Inspector General's
investigations of the children's deaths and the failure of DHS under
secretaries appointed by Trump not complying with committee document
requests, the committee lacked full and complete information regarding
the circumstances in which these deaths occurred.
Unfortunately, the deaths of children in U.S. custody did not end
with those two precious lives being lost.
During an 8-month period from 2018 to 2019, 6 children are known to
have died in U.S. custody.
It was not until March 2021, when President Biden signed a
memorandum creating a task force to reunite families separated at the
U.S.-Mexico border during the Trump administration's ``zero tolerance''
policy did the Department of Homeland Security start the process of
reuniting families.
previous administration's border failures
The Trump administration wasted critical resources on an
ineffective border wall and encouraged irregular migration by cutting
off lawful pathways and abandoning efforts to improve conditions in the
region that drive migration.
Increased migration in the hemisphere, which began in 2018, is a
result of on-going political upheaval, economic crises, and criminal
violence that went unaddressed by the prior administration.
In March 2020, border restrictions were put in place in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, based on a Title 42 public emergency health
authority.
This controversial Trump-era policy allowed U.S. officials to
swiftly turn away migrants who crossed the U.S.-Mexico border on the
grounds of preventing the spread of COVID-19.
Under Title 42, officials turned away migrants more than 2.8
million times since March 2020.
This did not stop people from coming to our border, which resulted
in tens of thousands of refugees and asylum seekers languishing just on
the other side of the border.
When President Biden took office, he inherited a broken immigration
system that the prior administration had gutted.
president biden and secretary mayorkas' successes
Title 42 Had To End
President Biden has called on Congress to pass comprehensive
immigration reform since his first day in office.
As law makers we must take responsibility for the gaps in policy
that allow States to shoulder the burden of a broken immigration
system.
As the House Committee responsible for border security policy
making, Congress have failed to act even when bipartisan efforts at
serious reform were undertaken.
As a result of lack of Congressional action, the Biden
administration is using the tools it has available to secure the border
and build a safe, orderly, and humane immigration system.
Secretary Mayorkas as head of DHS began a whole-of-Government
approach in Fall 2021 to prepare for the end of Title 42.
In May 2022, Secretary Mayorkas issued the six-pillar plan that
outlined preparations to prepare for surges in migration and the
lifting of Title 42.
The plan showed measurable success.
The power of immigration reform to reduce unlawful entry is proven
through the Biden administration method of promoting the largest
expansion of legal pathways for safe, orderly, and humane migration in
decades, and put in new rules to encourage people to use those lawful
pathways instead of making the dangerous journey to try to enter
unlawfully.
The success of the lifting of Title 42 was not sustainable without
resources and changes being made to immigration laws.
Instead, Republican Governors have become the poster children for
increased irregular migration because of their work to send people from
the Southern Border to New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and Los
Angeles, which sent a message that unlawful border crossings were
welcomed.
Once again families are coming by the tens of thousands at the
invitation of Texas Governor Abbott and Florida Governor Desantis
because word of them providing buses and flights to U.S. cities is
reaching communities and this encourages people to come to our border
for the promise that they are going to be welcomed.
As a result migrant encounters with Border Patrol increase over the
summers, with public reporting indicating that encounters between ports
of entry are slightly higher than such encounters in April 2023 before
Title 42 was terminated.
Notably, the rollout of the CBP One App in January 2023 that
allowed undocumented individuals to schedule appointments at ports of
entry has resulted in a shift in encounters toward the ports of entry.
power of diplomacy
Diplomacy is also an important component of the success we are
seeing on the border because the administration has secured agreements
with our regional partners, including Mexico and Colombia, to quickly
remove people and crack down on criminal networks operating in the
Darien.
In June 2022, the President mobilized 21 leaders to adopt the Los
Angeles Declaration on Migration and Protection representing a
collective commitment and a coordinated approach to reducing irregular
migration and expanding legal pathways throughout the region.
Under the L.A. Declaration, countries like Colombia, Ecuador, and
Costa Rica have stepped up to better integrate millions of Venezuelan
and Nicaraguan migrants they host--many of whom would otherwise make
the dangerous overland journey to the U.S. border.
The new border enforcement measures build on prior actions taken by
the administration to streamline the immigration process and make it
more effective.
The final ingredient is legislative action by Congress to address
increasing the capacity of immigration courts to prioritize the orderly
and fair processing of asylum claims of certain recent arrivals, while
ensuring those not seeking protection or who don't qualify are promptly
returned to their country of origin.
The administration is continuing to aggressively increase legal
pathways, enforce our immigration laws, target smugglers who prey and
profit on vulnerable migrants and seek to traffic drugs into our
country, and work collaboratively with cities and States that are
impacted.
Republicans who have used immigration as a wedge issue attempted to
derail the President's efforts.
It is time to focus on the places and communities receiving new
residents and families to make sure the transition a win-win for new
immigrants and communities.
providing resources to larger urban areas and rural areas
Democrats have proposed legislation, such as the Dream Act and the
American Dream and Promise Act, that would provide a pathway to
citizenship for young undocumented immigrants brought to the United
States as children, also known as Dreamers.
Democrats are focused on providing resources to communities
receiving migrants, implementing policies to ensure an orderly, humane
border, and keeping the Government funded.
Democrats also recognize that while there are near-term costs to
receiving migrants, immigrants contribute significantly to the U.S.
economy, fuel our growth, and provide a net benefit to our country's
finances by paying billions in taxes annually.
Democrats also support comprehensive immigration reform that would
create a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants and improve
border security measures while respecting the rights and dignity of all
individuals.
In July 2021, the House passed a bill that would create a pathway
to citizenship for undocumented farmworkers and their families, called
the Farm Workforce Modernization Act.
This would protect workers from exploitation and abuse and would
provide stability for the agricultural industry.
Democrats have advocated for a comprehensive immigration reform
package that would address the root causes of migration, improve border
security, and create legal pathways for people to enter the U.S.
lawfully.
The Biden-Harris administration, under the direction of Secretary
Mayorkas, are showing Congress, the Nation, and the world what is
indeed possible when immigration is not treated like an offense to the
Nation instead of the fuel that drives our economy and injects vitality
into our communities.
Because of joint Congressional and White House support since early
2021, DHS and CBP increased their border-holding capacity by over a
third through the construction of new facilities.
CBP has increased the efficiency of migrant processing and reduced
the time noncitizens spend in temporary holding by 30 percent.
Over the years, I worked with my fellow Democrats and Republican
Members of this committee to made sure that these unaccompanied
children stay safe and have a legal documentation in the United States,
while the Republican party sadly has steadfastly opposed all the
legislations that benefits these children.
I ask my colleagues to come together and move past the discord and
to stand true to our ideals as Americans and protect our most
vulnerable--by continued support for the needs of unaccompanied
children who come to us in need.
Thank you. I yield back the balance of my time.

Chairman Green. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today, and I ask that our witnesses
please rise and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Green. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you. Please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Mr.
Knudsen, Austin Knudsen was sworn in as Montana's 25th attorney
general on January the 4th, 2021. Prior to that, he was elected
to the Montana House of Representatives in 2010. From 2015 to
2019, he served as the speaker of the Montana House of
Representatives.
Gentner Drummond was sworn in as Oklahoma's 19th attorney
general on January the 9th, 2023. Mr. Drummond's law experience
spans nearly 30 years and includes service as an assistant
district attorney in Pawnee and, how do you pronounce it, Osage
counties, and as an attorney in private practice.
Andrew Bailey was sworn in as the 44th attorney general of
the State of Missouri on January the 3rd, 2023. Mr. Bailey is a
veteran of the United States Army in which he served in combat
as a commissioned officer following the terrorist attacks of
September 11.
Mr. Frank Bowman is the University of Missouri's curators
distinguished professor emeritus and Floyd R. Gibson Missouri
endowed professor of law emeritus at the University of Missouri
School of Law. He has also taught at Georgetown University Law
Center, Washington and Lee University, Gonzaga University,
Indiana University's McKinney School of Law, Wake Forest
University, and the University of Denver. In spring of 2023,
was visiting fellow at Oxford University's Rothermere American
Institute.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today, and I now
recognize Mr. Knudsen for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF AUSTIN KNUDSEN, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF MONTANA

Mr. Knudsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Members of the
committee.
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, Members of the
distinguished committee, my name is Austin Knudsen, Montana
attorney general. As the attorney general and chief law
enforcement officer for the State of Montana, I'm grateful for
this committee's attention to how Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas'
failed leadership has impacted States like Montana.
The Southern Border certainly presents a difficult
challenge for any administration, but Secretary Mayorkas and
the Biden administration have absolutely poured gasoline on
this fire. The Southern Border and the drugs flowing across it
into communities large and small across our Nation are
ultimately the reason that I am the attorney general of Montana
today.
I'm from rural Montana, where I was a private practice
attorney until two drug dealers sped past my kids' school, one
shooting at the other out of his vehicle window in broad
daylight. After that incident, I became our elected county
prosecutor, where I saw what I thought were the absolute worst
things possible. Babies born addicted to drugs, kids thrown
into foster care because their parents would rather buy drugs
than take care of them. Young girls sexually assaulted by
family members on drugs. People murdered over $20 drug deals
gone wrong. So to say that I was encouraged by the previous
administration's progress in securing our Nation's border is an
understatement. It's also an understatement to say that I was
horrified to see this administration under Secretary Mayorkas'
leadership begin to erase that progress and systematically
dismantle policies and programs meant to secure our borders.
The most devastating impact of the open border on Montana
has been the massive quantities of Mexican cartel fentanyl and
methamphetamine. In 2020, drug task forces in Montana seized
6,663 dosage units of fentanyl. In 2021, the first year of
Secretary Mayorkas' watch at the border, that quantity exploded
tenfold to 61,000 dosage units of fentanyl. In 2022, Montana
tripled that, seizing nearly 190,000 dosage units of cartel
fentanyl. The numbers aren't finalized yet for 2023, but I can
tell you that as of the third quarter of 2023, Montana is on
track to have seized nearly a half million dosage units of
fentanyl and another 200 pounds of meth. The cartels trafficked
100 percent of that fentanyl and meth across the Southern
Border.
In just 1 week during March 2022, 17 people on the
Blackfeet Indian Reservation overdosed on fentanyl. Four of
them died. I spoke with a woman later that year from the Fort
Peck Indian Reservation, which is where I'm from. She was
raising her grandkids because both of her sons were killed in
two separate fentanyl overdose incidents. Nation-wide,
indigenous people suffer the highest rate of fentanyl
overdoses. In Montana, the opioid overdose death rate among
Native Americans is twice that of white people.
The devastation of Secretary Mayorkas' refusal to
faithfully execute the laws goes beyond the deaths it causes
and the anguished families left to pick up pieces. These drugs
cause people to do absolutely unspeakable things. A suspect in
a current drug case in Montana was taking delivery of drugs
that were being supplied directly from the cartels in Mexico.
She kept her minor daughter living in a yard shed and allowed
the man delivering those drugs to sexually assault her daughter
as part of that drug deal.
In another case last year, a young mother who was homeless
was able to finally find a bedroom in a house, not knowing that
that room had been recently occupied by a fentanyl user.
Shortly after taking residence, that mother found her 11-month-
old child not breathing. Fortunately, medical and law
enforcement personnel responded quickly enough to administer
naloxone before the fentanyl from the prior occupant killed
that infant child.
The Trump administration overcame fierce opposition at
every turn and was able to gain control of our Southern Border
as no previous administration could. But all of that progress
has been destroyed. Secretary Mayorkas is the architect of that
destruction.
The American people are watching. They know that our border
was secure just a few years ago. They see the devastation
metastasizing in our communities from drugs and human
trafficking. The conclusion is clear. Secretary Mayorkas has
violated his oath, and I urge this body to impeach.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Knudsen follows:]
Prepared Statement of Austin Knudsen
January 10, 2024
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, Members of the committee:
As the attorney general and chief law enforcement officer for the State
of Montana, I am grateful for your committee's attention to how
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas' failed leadership has impacted States
like mine. The crisis at the border is a self-inflicted injury the
policies of Secretary Mayorkas have brought upon our Nation. The
Southern Border presents a difficult challenge for any administration.
But Secretary Mayorkas and the Biden administration have poured
gasoline on the fire. He has violated his oath to defend the homeland
and uphold the Constitution by repeatedly disregarding the laws passed
by Congress. To that end, he has instructed the men and women of his
Department to violate Congressional mandates and circumvent court
orders issued after States like Montana have taken the drastic measure
of filing suit against the Federal Government to stop the madness at
the Southern Border.
His actions as Secretary have turned the border into an effectively
meaningless 2,000-mile line in the sand, ceding operational control to
Mexican drug cartels--some of the most savage and depraved
organizations in world history. In turn, the cartels have seized on
Secretary Mayorkas' weakness, driving addiction and death in our
country, expanding their enterprises into human trafficking and
smuggling, and engaging in a reign of terror in communities on both
sides of the border while the Secretary forces Customs and Border
Patrol agents watch in horror.
The Southern Border and the drugs flowing across it into
communities large and small across our Nation are ultimately the reason
I am the Montana attorney general today. I am from rural Montana--about
as rural as you can get--where I was a private practice attorney until
two drug dealers drove by my kids' school firing guns at each other out
their windows in broad daylight.
Not long after that incident, I became our county prosecutor. And
there, my eyes truly opened to the devastation that the drug epidemic
was hoisting onto our community. I saw what I thought were the worst
things possible: babies born addicted to drugs, kids thrown into foster
care because their parents would rather buy drugs than take care of
them, young girls and women sexually assaulted by family members on
drugs, people murdered over $20 drug deals gone wrong. I had to commit
a high school classmate to a psychiatric hospital because drugs had
essentially fried his brain.
So, to say that I was encouraged by the previous administration's
progress in securing our Nation's border is an understatement. It's
also an understatement to say that I was horrified to see this
administration, under Secretary Mayorkas' leadership, begin to erase
that progress and systematically dismantle policies and programs meant
to secure the border. Since then, it has been like watching a train
wreck in slow motion as our citizens fall victim to violent crime,
become addicted to drugs, and, in hundreds of thousands of cases, die
because Secretary Mayorkas is derelict in his duty to secure the
border.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Institute on Drug Abuse. Drug Overdose Death Rates.
https://nida.nih.gov/research-topics/trends-statistics/overdose-death-
rates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The most devastating impact of the open border on Montana has been
the massive quantities of fentanyl and methamphetamine. In 2020, drug
task forces in our State seized 6,663 dosage units of fentanyl. In
2021, the first year of Secretary Mayorkas' watch at the border, that
quantity exploded tenfold to 61,000. In 2022, we tripled that, seizing
nearly 190,000 dosage units. The numbers aren't finalized for 2023, but
as of the third quarter, we were on track to seize nearly one half-
million dosage units of fentanyl and yet another 200 pounds of
methamphetamine.\2\ This is a staggering amount of drugs for a
northern-tier State with just over 1 million residents--and the cartels
trafficked 100 percent of that fentanyl and methamphetamine across the
Southern Border. Once it crosses, it can be in Montana within 24 hours
and it has a deadly effect on our communities, especially reservations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Gibson, Kylie. Significant spike in fentanyl leads to rising
overdose rates in Montana, KECI (December 31, 2023), https://
nbcmontana.com/news/local/significant-spike-in-fentanyl-leads-to-
rising-overdose-rates-in-montana.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In just 1 week during March 2022, 17 people on the Blackfeet Indian
Reservation overdosed on fentanyl. Four died.\3\ I spoke with a woman
later that year from the Fort Peck Indian Reservation who was raising
her grandkids after both of her sons were killed by fentanyl. In
January of last year, a combination of methamphetamine and fentanyl
that came across the border from Mexico killed a woman who was 7 months
pregnant. Nation-wide, Indigenous people suffer from the highest rate
of fentanyl overdoses.\4\ In Montana, the opioid overdose death rate
among Native Americans is twice as high than it is for white people.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Blackfeet tribe declares emergency after drug overdoses,
ASSOCIATED PRESS (March 23, 2022). https://apnews.com/article/covid-
health-opioids-synthetic-opioids-e03fee8a19c143ab5e- 1c3ae3787e439f.
\4\ National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Opioid
Overdose Prevention in Tribal Communities. CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL
AND PREVENTION (August 25, 2023). https://www.cdc.gov/injury/budget/
opioidoverdosepolicy/TribalCommunities.html.
\5\ Bolton, Aaron. Tribal leaders sound the alarm after fentanyl
overdoses spike at Blackfeet Nation (June 1, 2022) NPR, https://
www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2022/06/01/1101799174/tribal-leaders-
sound-the-alarm-after-fentanyl-overdoses-spike-at-blackfeet-nation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The devastation of Secretary Mayorkas' refusal to faithfully
execute the laws goes beyond the deaths it causes and the anguished
families left to pick up the pieces. These drugs cause people to do
unthinkable things. A suspect in a current drug case was taking
delivery of drugs that were being supplied directly from Mexico. She
had a minor daughter living in a shed who was sexually assaulted by the
man delivering the drugs. In another case last year, a young mother who
was homeless was able to find a bedroom in a house, not knowing that
the room had been recently occupied by a fentanyl user. Shortly after
taking residence, that mother found her 11-month-old child not
breathing. Fortunately, medical and law enforcement personnel responded
quickly enough to administer naloxone before the fentanyl killed the
child.
Nor does the impact of Secretary Mayorkas' policies end with the
proliferation of drugs into Montana communities. In a human trafficking
operation this summer, our agents arrested three men from Central
America. All three were in the country illegally but on deferred
action. One had been deported once before and was again apprehended
after crossing the border but had been allowed to stay. These men were
all here and able to engage in this criminal activity because of the
policies Secretary Mayorkas has implemented at the Department of
Homeland Security.
While the crisis at the Southern Border is often the focus of
attention, the Northern Border is also a grave concern to me. The
border between Montana and Canada is 545 miles long. Recent reports
indicate the fentanyl super labs have been proliferating in that
country, including in British Columbia, a province directly adjacent to
Montana. In one November bust, authorities there seized approximately
55 pounds of fentanyl and 6.5 pounds of fentanyl diluted for
distribution, along with 10 industrial-sized barrels worth of chemical
precursors. In all, the seizure represents over 2.5 million street
doses of the drug.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Fentanyl equal to 2.5 million street doses seized at rural
property in Mission, B.C.: police, CBC NEWS (November 2, 2023), https:/
/www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/fentanyl-drug-lab-police-
seizure-mission-bc-1.7016534.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This is particularly alarming because under Secretary Mayorkas, DHS
has made it a common practice to redeploy Border Patrol personnel from
States like Montana to the Southern Border. As this committee has
revealed, thousands of Border Patrol agents and officers were relocated
between October 2020 and April 2023, with a substantial increase in
Federal fiscal year 2023.\7\ I have first-hand knowledge that this
includes agents from Montana. Adding insult to injury, the redeployed
personnel were not there to help secure the border, but to process and
more quickly release illegal aliens into the interior of our country.
The redeployments forced stations at the Northern Border cut back on
patrols, and curtail participation in joint law enforcement operations,
ultimately lessening their effectiveness to disrupt cross-border
smuggling. The specter of Canadian fentanyl super labs with a
production capacity that far exceeds demand in their Nation and a
Northern Border that could again be left unguarded by the whims of a
Homeland Security Secretary who prioritizes political points over
safety is terrifying for every law enforcement officer in Montana.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ U.S. House Committee on Homeland Security. Phase 2 Interim
Report: DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas has Emboldened Cartels,
Criminals, and America's Enemies (September 7, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As I said in my opening, the tragedy is that this crisis is
entirely self-inflicted. The Trump administration overcame fierce
opposition at every turn and was able to gain control of our Southern
Border as no other previous administration could. But all that progress
has been destroyed. Secretary Mayorkas is the architect of that
destruction. He took an oath to ``well and faithfully discharge the
duties'' of his office and support and defend our Constitution. By any
objective measure, he has failed to keep his oath. At the direction of
Secretary Mayorkas, the Department of Homeland Security has wreaked
havoc at our Southern Border, exacerbated the fentanyl epidemic, and
emboldened the drug cartels.
I've heard some claim that this is merely a resource issue--that if
Congress would simply appropriate funds for more Border Patrol agents
or immigration judges, we could solve the border crisis. As a
prosecutor, I'm always in favor of giving law enforcement the tools
they need to succeed. But the reality is that no amount of funding or
resources will change the status quo as long as Secretary Mayorkas is
in charge. It's not negligence and it's not incompetence. It's ideology
and intransigence.
By willfully and intentionally failing to enforce our Nation's
immigration laws, Secretary Mayorkas has violated his oath of office
and breached the trust placed in him by the American people.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See generally Hans A. von Spakovsky, Lora Ries, & Steven G.
Bradbury, THE CASE FOR IMPEACHMENT OF ALEJANDRO NICHOLAS MAYORKAS
SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY, THE HERITAGE FOUND., Feb. 6, 2023,
https://www.heritage.org/immigration/report/the-case-impeachment-
alejandro-nicholas-mayorkas-secretary-homeland-security (discussing the
legal case for impeachment of Secretary Mayorkas); see also Lawrence
Tribe, AMERICAN CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 217 (Mineola, NY: Foundation Press,
1978) (noting there's ``wide agreement'' that impeachable offenses
include ``misapplication of funds, abuse of official power, neglect of
duty, encroachment on or contempt of legislative prerogatives, and
corruption.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For the last 3 years, I have joined attorneys general across the
country in legal challenges to the Biden administration's disastrous
border policies. Over and over, the Department of Homeland Security has
argued in court filings that its refusal to enforce the laws passed by
Congress is not subject to judicial review.\9\ Secretary Mayorkas has
repeatedly hidden behind the concept of ``prosecutorial discretion.''
In some instances, the courts have halted this illegal behavior and
prevented further damage.\10\ In others, however, the courts have
deferred to the Secretary's discretion.\11\ Meanwhile, the Biden
administration has gone to court to stop States from defending the
border.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See, e.g., Texas v. United States, 40 F.4th 205 (5th Cir.
2022).
\10\ See, e.g., Florida v. United States, Nos. 23-11528, 23-11644,
2023 U.S. App. LEXIS 13863, at *1 (11th Cir. June 5, 2023); Florida v.
United States, No. 3:21-cv-1066-TKW-ZCB (N.D. Fl. Mar. 8, 2023).
\11\ See, e.g., Biden v. Texas, 142 S. Ct. 2528 (2022); Arizona v.
Biden, 31 F.4th 469, 472 (6th Cir. 2022).
\12\ See, e.g., John Kruzel & Andrew Chung, White House turns to US
Supreme Court in Texas razor-wire border dispute, REUTERS (Jan. 2,
2024), https://www.reuters.com/world/us/biden-administration-asks-us-
supreme-court-intervene-texas-border-row-2024-01-02/; Olivia Alafriz,
U.S. seeks court order requiring Texas to remove floating barrier in
Rio Grande, TEXAS TRIBUNE (July 26, 2023), https://
www.texastribune.org/2023/07/26/rio-grande-floating-barrier-
injunction/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a prosecutor, I can tell you this: There's an obvious difference
between exercising discretion and complete abdication. The courts may
not be able to hold Secretary Mayorkas accountable for violating his
oath of office, but this body can and should.
Impeachment is a serious and solemn process. It isn't to be taken
lightly or used to settle mere policy disagreements. But the Framers
understood that impeachment is an appropriate response if members of
the Executive branch abdicate their duties or statutory
responsibilities.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See, e.g., FEDERALIST 65 (Hamilton); Joseph Story, 2
COMMENTARIES ON THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES WITH A
PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY OF THE COLONIES AND
STATES, BEFORE THE ADOPTION OF THE CONSTITUTION 221 (Boston, MA:
Hilliard Gray & Co.; Cambridge, MA: Brown, Shattuck and Co., 1833);
Jared P. Cole & Todd Garvey, IMPEACHMENT AND THE CONSTITUTION,
CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE REPORT No. R46013, at 36, Nov. 20, 2019,
https://crsreports.Congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46013; Elizabeth B.
Bazan & Anna C. Henning, IMPEACHMENT: AN OVERVIEW OF CONSTITUTIONAL
PROVISIONS, PROCEDURE, AND PRACTICE, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE
REPORT FOR CONGRESS No. 98-186, Apr. 8, 2010, at 28, https://
digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc29530/m1/1/high- _res_d/98-
186_2010Apr08.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American people are watching. They know that our border was
secure just a few years ago. They see the devastation metastasizing in
on our communities from drugs and human trafficking. The conclusion is
clear: Secretary Mayorkas has violated his oath of office and the
consequences have been dire. I urge this body to impeach.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Knudsen. I now recognize Mr.
Drummond for 5 minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GENTNER DRUMMOND, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF
OKLAHOMA

Mr. Drummond. Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the committee. Thank you for inviting
me to participate today in this hearing on this critical issue.
I am Gentner Drummond and I was elected Oklahoma's attorney
general in 2022. As the chief law enforcement officer of
Oklahoma, it is my duty to protect the people of my State. I'm
here to testify about the dangers my citizens face due to a
porous border and the failure of our Federal Government to
enforce its laws.
In the early evening of November 20, 2022, law enforcement
responded to a quadruple homicide after a Chinese national
allegedly entered a garage on a 10-acre marijuana farm in rural
Oklahoma. According to investigators, the assailant killed
three men execution-style with gunshots to the back of their
head and one woman with two shots to her abdomen. The carnage
of that day is but one tragic example of a failed system
plagued by failing leadership.
Throughout Oklahoma, law enforcement comes into contact
daily with foreign nationals who have entered our country
illegally or who remain here illegally, or both. This is all
too common in Oklahoma's illegal marijuana grow operations.
The voters of Oklahoma legalized medical marijuana in 2018.
While that legalization led to the legitimate cannabis
business-related businesses throughout our State, organized
criminals have overtaken the industry. Our law enforcement
partners report that the foreign nationals most often involved
in these illegal enterprises come from China and Mexico.
The one thing these criminals have in common is that they
have no regard for our laws or public safety. Criminal illegal
immigrants are not content with growing only black-market
marijuana. They also produce and distribute fentanyl, and they
engage in sex trafficking and labor trafficking. Oklahoma's law
enforcement community fights a constant battle against these
evils. The Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs,
the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, and scores of local
law enforcement agencies deserve much praise for their great
and heroic efforts.
While there have been many great successes, the on-going
border crisis ensures a never-ending flood of illegal foreign
nationals who continue to perpetrate crimes that endanger our
people. When I was sworn in as attorney general, I pledged to
the people of my State that I would do everything in my power
to protect them from these dangerous criminals. I petitioned
our legislature for greater resources and broader authority to
combat the threat. They responded with millions of dollars for
equipment and personnel, and they granted my office more power
to fight this criminal epidemic being fueled by our border
crisis.
In response, I established the Organized Crime Task Force,
the first of its kind for Oklahoma, and it is needed primarily
because Federal officials have failed to enforce the laws and
to secure our border. In the short 7 months since its creation,
the Organized Crime Task Force has investigated and is
prosecuting more than 50 complex, multijurisdictional criminal
cases. The vast majority of these cases involve Mexican or
Chinese drug syndicates.
These illegal foreign actors burden my State with
additional costs that cannot be fully quantified. For instance,
the Oklahoma Department of Corrections reports that it is
currently housing more than 500 illegal immigrants convicted of
various violent crimes. Before those criminal aliens were sent
to the Department of Corrections, they were in custody of our
local jails, which have their own costs for housing. Likewise,
there is a significant cost for law enforcement in the
investigating of these crimes and for the prosecutors who
prosecute them.
The unsecured border contributes to costs beyond the
criminal justice system as well. While it is not possible to
ascertain the exact amount of the costs, it is easy to
understand the magnitude. Illegal immigration cost Oklahoma
taxpayers more than $750 million each year with a minimal
offset return.
Mr. Chairman, Members of the committee, I believe it is
time for accountability. The people of Oklahoma don't deserve
to live under constant threat from criminal foreign nationals.
We don't deserve to have our communities flooded with illegal
drugs that were smuggled across an unsecure border. We don't
deserve to have our loved ones ripped away by those same drugs.
I ask you to remember the people of Oklahoma as you did
deliberate. Remember the murder victims. Remember the drug
overdose victims and the families who mourn them. Of course,
please remember the law enforcement officers who risk their
lives every day to protect us from it all.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Drummond follows:]
Prepared Statement of Gentner Drummond
Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members
of the committee. Thank you for inviting me to participate in today's
hearing on this critical issue.
I am Gentner Drummond, and I was elected as Oklahoma's Attorney
General in 2022.
As the chief law enforcement officer of Oklahoma, it is my duty to
protect the people of my State. I am here to testify about the dangers
my citizens face due to a porous border and the failure of the Federal
Government to enforce the law.
In the early evening of November 20, 2022, law enforcement
responded to a quadruple homicide after a Chinese national allegedly
entered a garage on a 10-acre marijuana farm in Kingfisher County,
about an hour's drive west of Oklahoma City. According to
investigators, the man then pulled out a handgun and kept it trained on
a group of people--also Chinese nationals--who were inside. He said
they owed him $300,000 that he had invested in the grow operation, and
that they had exactly 30 minutes to pay up or he would kill them all.
According to investigators, the assailant killed 3 men, execution-
style, with gunshots to the back of the head, and one woman with two
shots to the abdomen. Another man sustained a gunshot wound but
survived after being medi-flighted for emergency surgery. It took
personnel from 6 law enforcement agencies to process the gruesome
scene.
Much to the credit of law enforcement, police arrested the suspect
in Florida 2 days later.
The carnage of that day is but one tragic example of a failed
system plagued by failing leadership. Throughout Oklahoma, law
enforcement comes into daily contact with foreign nationals who entered
our country illegally or who remain here illegally--or both. This is
tragic and common in Oklahoma's illegal marijuana grow operations.
The voters of Oklahoma legalized medical marijuana in 2018. While
that legalization led to some legitimate cannabis-related businesses,
organized criminals have overtaken the industry. Our law enforcement
partners report that the foreign nationals most often involved in these
illegal enterprises come from China and Mexico. We have identified
individuals from many other countries, to include Cuba, Bulgaria, and
Russia.
The one thing these criminals have in common is that they have no
regard for our laws or public safety. Criminal illegal immigrants are
not content with only growing black-market marijuana. They also produce
and distribute fentanyl, and they engage in sex trafficking and labor
trafficking.
Oklahoma's law enforcement community fights a constant battle
against these evils. The Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
Drugs, the Oklahoma State Bureau of Investigation, and scores of
municipal and county law enforcement agencies deserve much praise for
their heroic efforts. Thanks to the leadership of Director Donnie
Anderson, the director of the Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics, his agents
and law enforcement partners have seized countless tons of dangerous
drugs and arrested untold numbers of traffickers. It should be no
surprise to this committee that many of these criminals are foreign
nationals who entered this country illegally through our unsecured
Southern Border.
Even the State agency that was created to regulate the legal
marijuana market has been forced to combat the explosion of illegal
grows. My office has a strong partnership with the Oklahoma Medical
Marijuana Authority, led by Director Adria Berry, which provides
critical information to our agents and other law enforcement. Thanks to
this collaboration, we are able to identify and investigate criminal
enterprises that all too often are operated by foreign nationals.
While there have been great successes, the on-going border crisis
ensures a never-ending flood of illegal foreign nationals who continue
to perpetrate criminal activities that endanger our people.
You may wonder how these foreign nationals have infiltrated the
medical marijuana industry in Oklahoma. The pattern is a common one.
Foreign operatives conduct a ``straw'' purchase of rural property just
outside city limits. Sometimes they have a front man lease the real
estate. Either way, they take steps to conceal their activities. It is
common to see that they have pushed up a berm to prevent visibility
from the roads. They often will post armed personnel to stand watch and
imply threat.
Members, you can imagine the impact these kinds of actions have in
communities throughout rural Oklahoma. Families are scared. They feel
unsafe. Smaller law enforcement departments are literally out-manned
and out-gunned, and they feel ill-equipped to address the threat.
When I was sworn in as Attorney General, I pledged to the people of
Oklahoma that I would do everything in my power to protect them from
these dangerous criminals. I petitioned our legislature for greater
resources and broader authority to combat this threat. They responded
with millions of dollars for equipment and personnel, and they granted
my office more power to fight this criminal epidemic being fueled by
the border crisis.
In response, I established the Organized Crime Task Force. It is
the first of its kind for Oklahoma. And, of course, it is needed
because Federal officials have failed to enforce the law and secure the
border. In the short 7 months since its creation, the Organized Crime
Task Force has investigated and is prosecuting more than 50 complex,
multi-jurisdictional criminal cases. The vast majority of these cases
involve Mexican or Chinese drug syndicates.
Because these foreign actors have no vested interest in the well-
being of our communities, law enforcement officials have discovered
rampant building-code violations that, in turn, have led to fires and
explosions. In one case alone, fire at an illegal marijuana grow
destroyed more than 10,000 acres and necessitated deploying the
National Guard and other agencies across Oklahoma and Texas. In the
wake of such incidents, my office demanded strict enforcement of
building codes against these illegal foreign operators. As a result,
approximately one-half of the marijuana grows in the State were found
to be out of compliance. That translates to thousands of unsafe
operations across Oklahoma, putting lives and communities at risk.
These foreign actors are creating additional costs that cannot
fully be quantified. For instance, the Oklahoma Department of
Corrections reports that it currently houses nearly 500 illegal
immigrants convicted of State crimes. At an average cost of $63.53 per
inmate per day, the State of Oklahoma pays roughly $11 million per year
to incarcerate criminal illegals.
Before those criminal aliens were sent to the Department of
Corrections, they were in the custody of a local jail, who have their
own costs for housing. Likewise, there is a significant cost for law
enforcement to investigate these crimes and for prosecutors to
prosecute them.
The unsecure border contributes to costs beyond the criminal
justice system as well. Oklahoma's water resource authority reports of
strain on the utility grid when these operations--which employ no one
legally and give nothing back to the community--demand commercial
levels of water consumption. We have seen instances where a lone
farmhouse is purchased by a foreign entity and a line that once
consumed 3,000 to 4,000 gallons a month began consuming tens or
hundreds of thousands of gallons monthly. This can equal the
consumption of the entire local grid. Other bad actors drill un-
permitted wells and draw down from the subterranean water of legitimate
farmers, sometimes eliminating the source supply completely. Once these
operations have run their course, the criminals simply pull up stakes
overnight, leaving behind dilapidated, unsafe structures that are an
environmental blight and a threat to public safety.
Additionally, it is widely understood that Oklahoma, like every
other State, bears a significant financial burden related to the
routine services that must be provided to those who are here illegally.
While it is not possible to ascertain the exact amount of that cost to
Oklahoma, it is easy to understand the magnitude of that cost. The
State bears the burden for the education, health, and welfare of a
robust and growing illegal population. It is estimated that well over
100,000 live among us, costing Oklahoma taxpayers more than $750
million each year--with minimal offsetting return. (FYI SOURCE:
Federation for American Immigration Reform)
It is important to note that the illegal immigrant population in
Oklahoma is vulnerable to exploitation. My office has observed many
instances where members of this population become victims of horrific
crimes. Every case being investigated by my Organized Crime Task
Force--every single case--involves some level of undocumented labor
trafficking. Law enforcement is seeing this particularly in operations
run by Chinese nationals. Officers see tell-tale signs such as
abandoned and substandard living conditions for workers and a complete
disregard for human welfare, not to mention countless Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) violations. We have examples of
illegal workers being fed from dog-food bowls, and our agents plan to
begin using so-called ``cadaver'' dogs to find potential unknown
victims of these wretched conditions.
During an investigation into illegal drug activities by Chinese
nationals, our agents recently coordinated with other law enforcement
to serve simultaneous warrants on multiple addresses. At one location,
agents found two female Chinese nationals, who spoke no English.
Mattresses on the floor of their bedroom were littered with condoms,
lotion, and other unsavory supplies. The women had been in the country
for months, but they could not say where they were and they had not
been out of the house since their arrival. They simply awoke every day,
worked, and went back to sleep. This living horror, which was merely
incidental to the initial investigation, further illustrates the human
cost of allowing persons to remain unsafe and undocumented.
These foreign actors are blatant and cavalier in their efforts. Our
investigators are finding job advertisements on international websites
targeting and recruiting poor and rural Chinese. These ads, in
Mandarin, are thinly-veiled offerings to engage in criminal activity.
One particularly distasteful ad recruits ``girls under 50'' for
``purely formal bed'' and ``four days off a month.'' Another offers
jobs for a ``massage spa'' to people who are ``able to endure
hardships'' and who have ``good hygiene.''
Illegal aliens forced into this clandestine world have nowhere to
turn. On the occasions that Oklahoma law enforcement does find people
at these operations, agents resort to Google Translate attempting to
communicate with Mandarin-speaking workers. The agents contact HSI, but
invariably they are told that the system is too overloaded for the
Federal Government to assist.
In the end, our officers know it doesn't really matter whether HSI
responds. We confirm that anyone brought in to HSI will simply be
released. Without appropriate recourse, officers typically are forced
to leave the victimized illegal aliens where they were found.
The upshot is this: If an immigrant claims he or she has entered
the country before November 1, 2020, to be deported they must have
incurred at least two DUIs or a DUI plus a more egregious crime. This
situation puts the criminal in control. The local field office director
of HSI has been disempowered from removing persons without convictions,
even if they are repeatedly implicated in criminal reports. Illegal
immigrants are also taking advantage of VAWA (Violence Against Women
Act) programs or DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals)
participation.
And it is important to remember that the crimes of these foreign
actors range from prostitution to money-laundering to underground
casinos. Among the Mexican drug cartels, the Oklahoma Bureau of
Narcotics and Federal authorities have seen increased activity from
cartels such as La Familia, the New Generation Jalisco Cartel and the
notorious Sinaloa Cartel.
With the cartels harvesting so much marijuana in Oklahoma, the
issue is no longer about smuggled marijuana from Mexico. Rather, the
contraband of choice is now fentanyl, a narcotic as addictive as it is
deadly. In this regard, the director of the Houston High-Intensity Drug
Trafficking Area, Mike McDaniels, reports that we are seeing
unprecedented levels of partnership between Chinese nationals and the
Mexican cartels operating along the Southwest Border. Chinese and
Mexican nationals work alongside the cartels to produce the opioid in
labs in Mexico before transporting it across the border. Director
McDaniel indicates the cooperation extends to organized distribution
schemes to the United States. The illicit fentanyl industry is
incredibly lucrative. One gram, roughly the weight of a single Sweet &
Low packet, can produce 500 pills at an expense of about 10 cents. On
the street, each pill sells for between $10 and $20.
When Oklahoma law enforcement first interdicted large quantities,
we were not seeing an equivalent amount on the street, which led us to
believe that the supply was supporting drug habits of insular
communities such as foreign-run marijuana grow operations. Tragically,
that threat has now invaded our own communities. In 2017, Oklahoma
recorded 54 fentanyl overdoses. Only 5 years later, that number grew to
474. While final figures for this past year are not yet known, we do
know there were 317 fentanyl deaths in the first 5 months of 2023
alone. The situation has become so dire, in fact, Oklahoma's Department
of Mental Health now operates vending machines for Naloxone, which is
used to treat people who are overdosing on an opioid.
The opioid user is not the only one put in harm's way. In August of
last year, law enforcement officers in northern Oklahoma responded to a
local residence for a welfare check. An officer checking out the
premises unknowingly was exposed to fentanyl. He collapsed to the
ground, unconscious. The officer's partner was able to administer a
triple dose of Naloxone to bring him back from the brink of death.
Mr. Chairman, Members of the committee, I believe it is time for
accountability. The people of Oklahoma don't deserve to live under
constant threat from criminal foreign nationals. The people of Oklahoma
don't deserve to have their communities flooded with illegal drugs that
were smuggled across our unsecure border. Oklahoma families don't
deserve to have their loved ones ripped away by those same drugs.
Members, once the hearing process is concluded, you will have a
very weighty decision to make. I trust that each of you has great
respect for that solemn duty, and that you will make your decision with
great care and deliberation.
As I conclude my testimony here today, I want to ask you to
remember the people of Oklahoma as you deliberate. Remember the murder
victims, and the drug overdose victims, and the families who mourn
them. And of course, please remember the law enforcement officers who
risk their lives every day to protect us from it all.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Ranking Member, and Members of the
committee.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Drummond.
I now recognize Mr. Bailey for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW BAILEY, ATTORNEY GENERAL, STATE OF MISSOURI

Mr. Bailey. Distinguished Members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to appear before you this morning. My
understanding of border security comes from direct, hands-on
experience securing a nation's border. It was earned on a
barren desert battlefield half a world away from the turret of
an M-2 Bradley fighting vehicle. In 2005, as a newly-minted
second lieutenant in the United States Army, my platoon
deployed to the Nineveh Province, Iraq, under the command of
then-Colonel H.R. McMaster, was tasked with securing the border
between Iraq and Syria. Our mission was simple: close the
border.
That's exactly what we did. We did not capture people and
release them into the interior of the country. We did not hand
out citations and ask individuals to report back in 10 years.
No. We closed the border to ensure the country was safe.
Since 2021, more than 8 million illegal immigrants have
entered the United States, and that is more than the population
of my home State of Missouri. These numbers are not an
accident. There is only one reason 8 million people illegally
cross a sovereign nation's border. Because they know that they
can get away with it. Why wouldn't they? In the last 3 years of
Secretary Mayorkas' reign, there has been an orchestrated lack
of enforcement of our Nation's immigration laws. He has failed
to do that which is most fundamental to his mission: protect
our border. That failure has not only led to today's
impeachment proceeding, it has given rise to an unprecedented
level of State actions necessary to fill the vacuum created by
the Secretary's refusal to do his job.
I'd like to highlight for you a few of the actions my
office has taken as we fight to secure the Southern Border. One
of those is our fight to force him to finish President Trump's
border wall. In an interview last Wednesday on CNN, Secretary
Mayorkas stated, we need additional resources and we need them
now. Our lawsuit proves he already has funding, he just refuses
to use it.
In fiscal year 2020, Congress appropriated funds explicitly
for the purpose of constructing barrier systems at our Southern
Border to keep unauthorized individuals out of our country. In
the appropriation, Congress explicitly stated the money shall
only be available for the construction of barrier systems along
the Southwest Border. Secretary Mayorkas and his administration
refused to comply with Congress's command.
Missouri immediately filed suit. DHS attempted to argue we
did not have standing to challenge its refusal to use the
funds, but the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that States
can indeed bring such a challenge. That ruling cleared the way
for our lawsuit against the Secretary's refusal to finish
President Trump's border wall, and it allowed the lawsuit to
move forward.
So while we battle in court over Secretary Mayorkas'
refusal to use taxpayer dollars in the manner Congress
explicitly prescribed, we have little sympathy for his pleas
for more resources. Rather than find ways to secure our border,
Secretary Mayorkas has been busy enacting policies to make it
easier to enter our country illegally. We filed suit again
against Secretary Mayorkas for allowing hundreds of thousands
of illegal immigrants to be paroled into the United States
every year. Parole allows non-citizens to physically enter and
remain in the United State for up to 2 years, or even longer,
while their application is reviewed without lawful status.
We also filed suit to halt Secretary Mayorkas' attempt to
implement a rule that redefined what had previously been
considered an illegal border crossing as a lawful pathway.
Rather than acknowledge the root cause of the influx of illegal
immigrants pouring over our border, the Secretary tried to
define the problem away by simply making something that was
once illegal, something legal without Congressional
authorization. Mayorkas' process would allow vast numbers of
illegal immigrants to enter the country and receive instant
work authorization under bogus asylum claims.
Secretary Mayorkas has enacted illegal policies that are
akin to posting a ``Come In, We're Open'' sign along the
Southern Border. Without taking responsibility for the
consequences of his actions, States are then forced to bear the
enormous cost of Secretary Mayorkas' failure. The States should
not need to do the Federal Government's job for them. Secretary
Mayorkas swore an oath to faithfully execute the laws of our
land.
In Missouri, we remove officials who do not do their jobs
because we have seen first-hand the catastrophic toll it takes
on entire communities. My office was forced to take action to
remove a Soros-backed prosecuting attorney from office for her
refusal to do her job that resulted in the killing and maiming
of countless Missourians. Since we took action, order has been
restored to the city of St. Louis. It is rightful for Congress
to consider removing a Government official who refuses to do
his job for the same reason, to restore order.
We have reached a point of no return. We're doing
everything we can at the State level to rectify this disaster,
but Congress has a role to play for accountability. While we
battle in the Nation's courts, Congress must use every tool at
its disposal to obtain accountability for the American people.
I thank the committee for its time and welcome its
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bailey follows:]
Prepared Statement of Andrew Bailey
January 10, 2024
``A nation without borders is not a nation.''--President Donald J.
Trump.
i. introduction
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
this morning.
Our borders define us geographically, culturally, and militarily.
Secure borders are the bedrock upon which safe and prosperous societies
are built. That ubiquitous truth has been self-evident for millennia,
and it remains true today regardless of whether or not the current
administration and Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas choose to believe it.
My understanding of border security comes from direct, hands-on
experiencing securing a Nation's border. It was earned on a barren
desert battlefield half a world away from the turret of an M2 Bradley
Fighting Vehicle. In 2005, as a newly-minted 2nd Lieutenant, my platoon
deployed to Nineveh Province, Iraq, under the command of General H.R.
McMaster and was tasked with securing the northwest border between Iraq
and Syria. Our mission was simple and clear: close the border. And
that's exactly what we did. We did not capture people and release them
into the interior of the country. We did not hand out citations and ask
folks to report back in 10 years. And we certainly did not send a
``border czar'' on fruitless missions to identify the ``root causes''
of regional migration. No, we closed the border to ensure the country
was safe from those who wanted to cross the border to undermine the
sovereignty and safety of the Nation.
I learned many lessons about leadership and security during my two
deployments to Iraq, but chief among them is this: mission success is a
function of competent command. Where the leader leads, the troops will
go. When the leader has a clear vision, a strong work ethic and a sense
of mission integrity, success and security will follow. Conversely,
when a leader is indecisive and evasive, chaos will reign--and crisis
is inevitable.
Make no mistake, a crisis is exactly what we have. Since 2021, more
than 8 million illegal immigrants have entered the Unites States. That
is more than the population of Missouri. The illegal immigration rate
is so high that in 2023, more illegal immigrants entered our country
than there were babies born in the United States. A recent Gallup poll
shows that 72 percent of Americans consider the situation at our
Southern Border a ``crisis'' or a ``major problem.'' And 82 percent of
Americans say they worry about illegal immigration. Those numbers are
alarming, and they have been getting worse nearly every month for the
past 3 years.
These numbers are not an accident; they happened by design. There
is only one reason 8 million people illegally cross a sovereign
nation's border: because they know they can get away with it. And why
wouldn't they? In the last 3 years of Secretary Mayorkas' reign, there
has been an orchestrated lack of enforcement of our Nation's
immigration laws. Our border has become a rudderless ship of chaos.
Secretary Mayorkas, either at the direction of his superiors or of
his own volition, has abdicated his responsibilities. He has failed to
uphold his oath of office. He has failed to enforce our Nation's
immigration laws. And he has failed to do that which is most
fundamental to his mission: protect our border.
That failure has not only led to today's impeachment proceeding; it
has given rise to an unprecedented level of State actions necessary to
fill the vacuum created by the Secretary's ineptitude. State attorneys
general like me and my colleagues here today have become the vanguard
in the fight for border security.
I'd like to highlight for you a few of the actions my office has
taken as we fight to secure the border and keep Missourians, and all
Americans, safe.
ii. secretary mayorkas is already in possession of resources needed to
secure the border
In an interview last Wednesday on CNN, Secretary Mayorkas stated,
``we need additional resources. We need them now and that is why we
submitted a supplemental funding package quite some time ago.''
In reality, we all know he already has funding. He just refuses to
use it.
In fiscal year 2020, Congress appropriated funds explicitly for the
purpose of constructing barrier systems at the Southern Border to keep
unauthorized individuals out of our country. In the appropriation,
Congress explicitly stated the money ``shall only be available for
construction of barrier systems along the Southwest Border,'' and
provided specific criteria on their use and where the barrier systems
may be constructed. Secretary Mayorkas and his administration refused
to comply with Congress' command.
When asked why the current administration ``did not build a
barrier, such as a wall, to keep migrants out,'' Secretary Mayorkas
replied that ``[i]t is not the policy of this administration'' because
``[w]e do not agree with the building of a wall.'' DHS expressed its
intention to ``end wall expansion.'' The administration even ``call[ed]
on Congress to cancel remaining border wall funding'' because they knew
that without Congressional action, they would need to use the
appropriated funds for their specified purpose: finish the construction
of President Trump's border wall. Yet when Congress did not capitulate
to his demands, the Secretary ignored his Constitutional obligations to
abide by Congress's appropriations laws and opted not to use the
funding for the purpose Congress directed.
Missouri, alongside Texas, immediately filed suit. DHS attempted to
argue we did not have standing to challenge its refusal to use the
funds, but the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that States can
indeed bring a challenge. That ruling cleared the way for our lawsuit
against the Secretary's refusal to finish President Trump's border wall
to move forward. We anticipate a ruling from the district court any day
now.
So while we battle in court over Secretary Mayorkas' refusal to use
taxpayer dollars in the manner Congress intended, we have little
sympathy for his pleas for more resources. Congress gave him resources.
He simply refuses to use them.
iii. secretary mayorkas is not even attempting to faithfully execute
the laws; rather, he is working to loosen them
Rather than find ways to secure our border, Secretary Mayorkas has
been busy enacting policies to make it easier to enter our country
illegally.
In January, Missouri filed suit against Secretary Mayorkas over a
new DHS program that unlawfully creates a de facto pathway to
citizenship for hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants. Despite
the fact that an Executive agency cannot create immigration programs
without the express permission of Congress, DHS instituted a new visa
system that would allow for up to 360,000 illegal immigrants from Cuba,
Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela to be ``paroled'' into the United
States every year. Parole allows noncitizens to physically enter and
remain in the United States even though they do not have a legal basis
for being admitted. Although Congress authorized a limited parole power
for illegal immigrants who meet very specific and stringent standards,
Secretary Mayorkas' program does not meet these standards. Contrary to
existing law, the program creates a pathway for program participants to
apply from their home country and gain lawful status to enter and stay
in the United States for up to 2 years, or even longer, while their
application is reviewed. Even worse, Secretary Mayorkas instituted the
program without engaging in the notice and comment rulemaking process
required by law. This program is another instance of Mayorkas abusing
his Executive authority to further his dangerous open borders agenda at
the expense of the States and their taxpayers.
A mere 3 months later, Missouri again filed suit against Secretary
Mayorkas, this time for his attempt to implement a rule that would make
it even easier for persons to illegally immigrate into the United
States. His new ``Circumvention of Lawful Pathways'' rule redefined
what had previously been considered illegal border crossings as
``lawful pathways.'' The Circumvention Rule references a new
``process'' that would allow vast numbers of illegal immigrants to
enter the country and receive instant work authorization and quick
access under bogus asylum claims. These migrants, who previously would
have had to cross the border illegally, will still lack lawful status
in the United States (though with a false imprimatur of legality,
thanks to the Secretary's unlawful procedures), and the States will be
forced to bear the cost of their presence. Rather than acknowledge the
root cause of the influx of illegal immigrants pouring over our border,
the Secretary tried to define the problem away by simply making
something that was once illegal into something legal.
Missouri has not only filed suit against Secretary Mayorkas--we
have given him advice on how to fix these problems. In the wake of the
October 7 terrorist attacks on Israel, we called on DHS to make
regulatory changes that close the catch-and-release loophole that DHS
is currently exploiting to implement its mass release policy at the
Southwest Border. In the Petition for Rulemaking we submitted directly
to the Secretary, we asked DHS to end the blatantly unlawful catch-and-
release policies because of the horrendous effects on the security of
our country. DHS is releasing illegal immigrants at a rate of over 1
million per year, and that does not include the ones being released on
parole under Sec. 1182(d)(5). Even worse, in addition to unlawfully
releasing inadmissible immigrants into the United States, DHS is giving
the ``parolees'' a court date many years in the future. DHS's unlawful
decisions are allowing millions of illegal immigrants to remain in the
United States for 15 years or longer before ever approaching a judge's
bench.
Secretary Mayorkas does not care.
His refusal to secure the border has resulted in an unprecedented
flood of unvetted migrants into the interior of our Nation. We have no
idea who Mayorkas has allowed into Missouri communities. After what
happened in Israel, it is more vital than ever that we secure our
border and keep Americans safe.
My office is doing everything in its power to hold Mayorkas
accountable and end the border crisis that he created.
iv. the cost to the states
Secretary Mayorkas has enacted illegal policies that are akin to
posting a ``Come In, We're Open'' sign along the Southern Border, later
refusing to take any responsibility for the consequences of his
actions. States are then forced to bear the enormous cost of Secretary
Mayorkas' failure. Despite it not being in the States' job descriptions
to fight cartels, catch illegal immigrants, or subsidize illegal
immigrants' driver's licenses and educations, State leaders are forced
to make an impossible choice: leave the Federal Government to its
reckless policy choices, which inherently leaves our communities to be
ravaged, or face the wrath of a Federal Government who wants us to sit
down and shut up.
The choice for me is clear: I will not sit idly by while Missouri
communities continue to be decimated by the weight of unchecked illegal
immigration under Secretary Mayorkas' watch.
The Secretary may be pushing his open border agenda in the name of
compassion, but the facts tell a different story. It is not
compassionate to the women and children being trafficked by cartels at
the Southern Border. It is not compassionate to the Americans losing
their loved ones in the streets to fentanyl. And it is not
compassionate to Americans who do not know who has been let loose in
their communities.
Members of the Committee, here are some key figures:
More than 8 million illegal immigrants have entered America from
Mexico since 2021, not including `got-aways'. Estimates indicate there
have been as many as 1.8 million `got-aways'.
Roughly 3 million people were encountered illegally entering the
United States in fiscal year 2023. On Mayorkas' watch, we have set the
record for the highest number of yearly illegal alien encounters in
U.S. history.
December broke a record for monthly encounters with more than
302,000.
A November report by the House Committee on Homeland Security
indicates annual Federal and State tax dollar support for illegal
immigrants exceeds the annual GDP of 15 States. Only a small fraction
is ever recouped from the taxes paid by illegal immigrants, according
to the report. Medicaid is the biggest expense, at $12.4 billion
dollars in the past 2 years. In fiscal year 2022, taxpayers provided
millions of illegal immigrants with nearly 6 billion in food stamps.
Let's talk about fentanyl. Nearly 12,500 grams fentanyl were seized
by the Missouri Highway Patrol in 2023. It takes only 2 milligrams of
fentanyl to cause an overdose death. With a population of more than 6
million in the State of Missouri, 12,500 grams of fentanyl could kill
Missouri's entire population twice over.
There has also been:

a 500 percent surge in child fentanyl exposure deaths,

a nearly 75 percent increase in fentanyl overdoses in
Missouri between 2019 and 2023, and

a total of 43 Missouri children died from unintentional
fentanyl poisonings in 2022.
Let's turn to human trafficking. Missouri ranks fourth on the list
of the States with the highest human trafficking rate in the United
States, with 4.30 per 100,000 citizens. This makes sense with two
interstates flowing through our major cities directly from the Southern
Border. In 2021, the National Human Trafficking Hotline Database
recorded 1,100 human trafficking tips in our State. Missouri law
enforcement was able to rescue 327 victims from those tips. Most cases
revolved around sex trafficking, with the NHTH recording 210 sex
trafficking cases, and 15 labor trafficking-related.
And yet while these statistics shed light on a nauseating reality,
some of the costs to Missourians cannot be quantified. The loved ones
lost to fentanyl or human trafficking can never be replaced, much less
properly described in this hearing today.
And yet, Secretary Mayorkas' failure does not discriminate. Red
States are not the only ones facing this problem. Blue States are also
begging the Federal Government to course correct, as they too are
forced to bear the unspeakable burden of tens of thousands of
unauthorized migrants entering their communities.
Only weeks ago, Arizona Governor Katie Hobbs deployed the National
Guard to the border to protect her State against the influx of
unauthorized migrants flooding into their cities. Prior to that,
Illinois Governor J.B. Pritzker sent a letter to DHS begging for
Federal aid to assist in managing the massive cost from illegal
immigrants residing in his State. Before that, New York Governor Kathy
Hochul declared a state of emergency to handle what she dubbed a
``crisis.''
v. congress must bring accountability
The fact of the matter is that every State is a border State. Every
State and its citizens are forced to bear the brunt of Secretary
Mayorkas' ineptitude. My call to Congress today is simple: remove that
burden from the shoulders of everyday Americans and put it back where
it belongs--on the shoulders of those sworn to protect us.
The States should not need to take steps to do the Federal
Government's job for them. Secretary Mayorkas swore an oath to
faithfully execute the laws of our land, including those intended to
protect Americans. Congress has even given DHS ample tools to do its
job. But let's be clear: this hearing today is not about resources.
It's about Secretary Mayorkas' refusal to use the resources given to
him in good faith.
That is important. So often, we are told that Congress has the
power of the purse and can use it to check failures by the Executive
branch. But the power of the purse means little if Executive officials
are going to ignore the appropriations laws this body creates.
In Missouri, we remove officials who do not do their jobs because
we have seen first-hand the catastrophic toll it takes on entire
communities. It is rightful for Congress to consider removing a
Government official who refuses to do his job.
We have reached a point of ``no-return.'' The attorneys general
sitting before you today are doing everything we can at the State level
to rectify this appalling situation, but Congress has a role to play
for accountability. While we battle in the Nation's courts, Congress
must use every tool at its disposal to obtain accountability for the
American people.
I welcome the committee's questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Bailey.
I now recognize Mr. Bowman for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF FRANK O. BOWMAN, III, PROFESSOR EMERITUS OF LAW,
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI SCHOOL OF LAW

Mr. Bowman. Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson,
Members of the committee, I'm honored to address this
committee, and I'm also pleased to share the witness table with
three distinguished elected officials, one of whom immediately
to my right, Mr. Bailey, I last remember seeing around 2011, as
a second-year law student in my evidence class at Mizzou. As
attorney general of Missouri, he has surely come up in the
world. Congratulations to you from an old professor. I, on the
other hand, remain simply an old professor.
I understand this to be the first in a series of hearings
on whether Constitutional grounds exist to impeach Homeland
Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. The testimony so far has
focused on the performance of Secretary Mayorkas and the Biden
administration relating to immigration policy and enforcement.
I'm not an expert on immigration policy. I will not comment on
it here. I have, however, been studying Constitutional
standards for impeachment for over 25 years. I've written
numerous articles and a book on the history of impeachment,
from its origins in England in 1376 through the two
impeachments of President Trump. My subject, therefore, will be
the Constitutional standard for impeaching a Cabinet officer.
The key point about impeachment in our Constitution is that
it is not supposed to be a routine tool to resolve ordinary
public policy debates, even very passionate ones, debates
between political parties or between one house of Congress and
the Executive branch. It is, instead, a measure of last resort,
reserved, as one Framer put it, for great and dangerous
offenses. In other words, for official misconduct which is
extraordinarily serious in degree and critically of a type that
corrupts or subverts Governmental processes or the
Constitutional order itself.
That the Framers intended impeachment to be rare is obvious
from their decision that conviction requires two-thirds of the
Senate. That they intended to rule it out as a weapon of
ordinary political debate is plain from how they defined
impeachable conduct.
The Constitution provides that the President, Vice
President, and all civil officers of the United States shall be
removed from office on impeachment for and conviction of
treason, bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors. A
Cabinet Secretary is a civil officer subject to impeachment.
But a Cabinet Secretary, like the President, is not impeachable
unless he's proven to have committed treason, bribery, or other
high crimes and misdemeanors.
There's no suggestion that I'm aware of that Secretary
Mayorkas has committed either treason or bribery. Hence, any
Article of Impeachment against him must establish that he
committed high crimes and misdemeanors.
The Framers chose the English parliamentary term of art,
high crimes and misdemeanors, rather than other possible terms,
like maladministration, because they wanted a flexible term
that could reach unanticipated new forms of grave official
misconduct, but equally and critically, because they did not
want an impeachment that would be the equivalent of a vote of
no confidence in modern parliamentary systems, a vote that
could remove the President or other Executive branch officials
between elections whenever the legislature disapproves of
administration policy.
For over two centuries, students of the Constitution have
universally agreed, in the words of the great impeachment
scholar Charles Black, that whatever may be the grounds for
impeachment and removal, dislike of a President's policy is
certainly not one of them. To be properly impeachable, official
conduct must meet a very high threshold of seriousness. It must
also be of a type that corrupts and subverts the political and
Governmental process, and it ought to be plainly wrong
regardless of legal technicalities. The most commonly
encountered categories of impeachable conduct are official
corruption, abuse of power, betrayal of the Nation's foreign
policy interests, and subversion of the Constitution. There is
no serious allegation of which I'm aware that the Secretary has
done any of those things.
Now, some might mischaracterize the Secretary's
implementation of the President's policy priorities as an abuse
of power. But impeachable abuse of power involves employing the
powers of office for illegal or illegitimate ends, particularly
to gain personal, political, or financial advantage; to benefit
personal or political allies; or to injure political or
personal enemies, and especially when the abusive exercise of
official power undermines Constitutional values. Following the
policy directives of one's elected superior in pursuit of that
superior's policy aims is simply not an impeachable abuse of
power.
Finally, impeachment of a Cabinet Secretary over policy
agreements is not only contrary to long-established
Constitutional understanding, but useless as a practical
matter. If the official actions of the officer are in accord
with the directives of his elected superior, the President,
removing the Secretary changes nothing. If Members of this
committee disapprove of the Biden administration's immigration
and border policies, the Constitution gives this Congress a
wealth of legislative powers to change them. Impeachment is not
one of those powers.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Bowman follows:]
Prepared Statement of Frank O. Bowman, III*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* Academic titles provided for identification purposes only. The
opinions expressed herein are those of the author, do not reflect those
of any other person or entity, and are not endorsed by the University
of Missouri.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wednesday, January 10, 2024
introduction
I am honored to have the privilege of addressing the Members the
House Homeland Security Committee in this first of what I understand to
be a series of hearings inquiring into whether Constitutional grounds
exist to impeach Alejandro Mayorkas, Secretary of the Department of
Homeland Security. Although the Committee's previously-issued reports,
the title of this hearing, and the identity of my distinguished fellow
witnesses suggest that much of its focus will be on the performance of
Secretary Mayorkas, his department, and the Biden administration
generally in relation to immigration policy and enforcement and other
issues concerning control of the United States' Southern Border, I am
not an expert on those topics. I will not comment on them here.
I have, however, been studying and writing about the Constitutional
standards for impeachment for over 25 years. I submitted testimony to
the House Judiciary Committee on the meaning of ``high Crimes and
Misdemeanors'' during the Clinton matter \1\ and since then have
written fairly copiously on a wide range of topics relating to
impeachment. In addition to articles in the scholarly and popular
press,\2\ I published in 2019 a book on the subject with Cambridge
University Press, the second edition of which appeared in November of
last year.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Background and History of Impeachment, Hearing before the
Subcommittee on the Constitution, House Judiciary Committee, 105th
Cong., 2d Sess., Nov. 9, 1998, at 342-372.
\2\ See, e.g., Bowman, British Impeachments (1376-1787) and the
Present American Constitutional Crisis, 46 HASTINGS CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
QTRLY 745 (2019); Bowman, High Crimes & Misdemeanors--The
Constitutional Limits on Presidential Impeachment, 72 SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA L. REV. 1517 (Sept. 1999) (with Stephen L. Sepinuck).
\3\ BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS: A HISTORY OF IMPEACHMENT
FOR THE AGE OF TRUMP, Second Edition (Cambridge University Press 2023)
(hereinafter BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I want to emphasize that, although I have opinions about whether
the evidence I have so far seen regarding Secretary Mayorkas meets the
Constitutional standard for impeachment of a civil officer of the
United States, I am not appearing as a witness for or against any
person or party. Rather, I am appearing to offer the committee such
advice as I can based on a quarter-century of study of impeachment
under the American Constitution.
constitutional standards for impeachment
Article II, Section 4 of the Constitution provides that, ``The
President, Vice President and all Civil Officers of the United States,
shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of,
Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.''\4\ A Cabinet
Secretary is a ``civil officer'' subject to impeachment. But a Cabinet
Secretary, like the President, Vice President, or any other civil
officer, is not impeachable unless he or she is proven to have
committed ``Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ U.S. Const., art II, sec. 4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are here today to discuss Secretary of Homeland Security
Mayorkas and there is no suggestion that he has committed either
treason or bribery. Hence, any article of impeachment against him must
establish that he committed ``high Crimes and Misdemeanors.''
``High Crimes & Misdemeanors'' and Policy Disputes
At the Constitutional convention in 1787, once the delegates
decided that Presidents and others should be impeachable, they proposed
various definitions of impeachable conduct. In the last exchange,
George Mason first suggested ``treason, bribery, or
maladministration.'' James Madison recoiled at ``maladministration,''
saying, ``So vague a term will be equivalent to tenure during the
pleasure of the Senate.'' Whereupon Mason withdrew
``maladministration'' and proposed instead ``other high Crimes and
Misdemeanors.'' This suggestion was adopted with no dissent or further
discussion.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ 2 THE RECORDS OF THE FEDERAL CONVENTION OF 1787 550-52 (Max
Farrand, ed. 1911).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The key point about the exchange between Mason and Madison is that,
although Madison was a consistent supporter of a strong impeachment
power as a check on Presidential authority, he rejected any formula
that would subordinate the President to Congress. Mason had made the
same point earlier in the convention when he coupled his endorsement of
impeachment with the admonition that the President should not, by
virtue of impeachment, become ``the mere creature of the
Legislature.''\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 2 THE RECORDS OF THE FEDERAL CONVENTION OF 1787 86 (Max
Farrand, ed. 1911).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Both Mason and Madison wanted to avoid creating an impeachment
mechanism that was the equivalent of the ``vote of no confidence''
common in modern parliamentary systems, a vote that could remove the
President or other Executive branch officials between elections
whenever the legislature disapproves of the official's behavior or the
administration's policy choices.\7\ As the great Professor Charles
Black put the matter in his seminal Nixon-era survey of impeachment:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS, supra note 3, at 92. See
also, CHARLES L. BLACK, JR. AND PHILIP BOBBITT, IMPEACHMENT: A HANDBOOK
28 (2d ed. 2018); Keith Whittington, Impeachment in a System of Checks
and Balances, 87 MO. L. REV. 844 (2022) (the adoption of ``high crimes
and misdemeanors'' by the convention ``seemed to capture the range of
potential dangers that concerned Madison and others, without leaving
the President vulnerable to impeachment over routine political and
policy disagreements'').

``Madison's reason for objecting to `maladministration' as a ground was
that the inclusion of this phrase would result in the President's
holding his office `during pleasure of the Senate.' In other words, if
mere inefficient administration, or administration that did not accord
with Congress's view of good policy, were enough for impeachment and
removal, without any flavor of criminality or distinct wrongdoing,
impeachment and removal would take on the character of a British
parliamentary vote of `no confidence.' The September 8 colloquy
[between Mason and Madison] makes it very plain that this was not
wanted, and certainly the phrase `high Crimes and Misdemeanors,'
whatever its vagueness at the edges, seems absolutely to forbid the
removal of a President on the grounds that Congress does not on the
whole think his administration of public affairs is good. ***
[W]hatever may be the grounds for impeachment and removal, dislike of a
President's policy is definitely not one of them, and ought to play no
part in the decision on impeachment. There is every reason to think
that most congressmen and senators are aware of this.'\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ CHARLES L. BLACK, JR. AND PHILIP BOBBITT, IMPEACHMENT: A
HANDBOOK (2d ed. 2018) (emphasis added).

Since at least 1805, there has been consensus among students of
impeachment that it should not be attempted based on simple policy
disagreements between Congress and the Executive branch,\9\ and that
impeachment must not be employed to subordinate the Executive to
Congress.\10\ In recent years, that consensus has become, if anything,
more settled. For example, Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote in his
1992 history of the impeachments of Justice Samuel Chase and President
Andrew Johnson that Johnson's acquittal was beneficial insofar that
conviction might have made impeachment merely a means to ``frustrate
the President in his effort to carry out his program.''\11\ In 1999,
preeminent impeachment scholar Michael Gerhardt reviewed all the Senate
impeachment decisions to that point and observed that the Senate has
``concluded that impeachable offenses do not include errors of judgment
or policy differences.''\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ The principle that impeachment should not be a weapon of
partisan political warfare was established in the 1805 case of Justice
Samuel Chase. Chase, an ardent Federalist, did and said a number of
probably intemperate things on the bench, but was impeached primarily
because President Jefferson and the Republican-controlled House of
Representatives disliked his politics and wanted to remove him and
replace him with one of their own. The Senate acquitted Chase, a result
said to establish that impeachment should not be employed as a partisan
weapon, particularly against the judiciary. BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES &
MISDEMEANORS, supra note 3, at 123-31.
\10\ Constitutional Grounds for Presidential Impeachment, Report by
the Staff of the Impeachment Inquiry, Comm on the Judiciary, U.S. House
of Representatives, 93d Cong, 2d Sess. 16, 26 (Feb. 1974).
\11\ WILLIAM H REHNQUIST, GRAND INQUESTS: THE HISTORIC IMPEACHMENTS
OF JUSTICE SAMUEL CHASE AND PRESIDENT ANDREW JOHNSON 270 (1992).
\12\ Michael J. Gerhardt, Putting the Law of Impeachment in
Perspective, 43 ST. LOUIS U. L.J. 905, 921 (1999).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreover, the principle that the limitation of impeachment to
``high Crimes and Misdemeanors'' was intended to preclude Congress from
seeking to control Executive policy through removal or its threat
extends beyond the President to his principal Cabinet officers. As
Raoul Berger, the other great impeachment scholar of the 1970's,
concluded:

``In setting up an independent President who was to serve for a term,
and in making Cabinet officers a part of the Executive branch, the
Framers surely were aware that a mere vote of no confidence could not,
as in England, topple a Secretary. *** It was because the separation of
powers left no room for removal by a vote of no confidence that
impeachment was adopted as a safety valve, a security against an
oppressive or corrupt President and his sheltered ministers.''\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ RAOUL BERGER, IMPEACHMENT: THE CONSTITUTIONAL PROBLEMS 98
(1973).

During the first impeachment of President Donald Trump, his
defenders vehemently endorsed the ancient principle that impeachment
ought not be based on ordinary policy disagreements between a
Presidential administration and Congress. As John Malcom of the
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Heritage Foundation wrote:

``The impeachment process is not intended to serve as a partisan
political weapon. It is to apply to those who are unfit for office, not
those who are merely incompetent or disagreeable. Its purpose is to
address serious misconduct, not to settle policy disputes.''\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ John Malcolm, Impeaching Donald Trump: A Game of Political
High Stakes Poker, The Heritage Foundation (Oct. 8, 2019), https://
www.heritage.org/political-process/commentary/impeaching-donald-trump-
game-political-high-stakes-poker. See also, Andrew C McCarthy, Trump
vs. the `Policy Community': We resolve policy disputes by elections,
not impeachments, NATIONAL REVIEW (November 12, 2019), https://
www.nationalreview.com/2019/11/trump-vs-the-policy-community/; Jordan
Sekulow, Impeachment 101: Policy Disagreements & ``Whistleblowers,''
ACLJ (November 26, 2019), https://aclj.org/public-policy/impeachment-
101-policy-disagreements-whistleblowers (``Policy disagreements are not
a case for impeachment.'').

The President's defenders got the principle exactly right. Indeed,
that principle rests not merely on the text of the Constitution, the
original understanding of that document's text, and lengthy American
precedent, but on important considerations relating to the proper and
efficacious conduct of public business in our tripartite national
Government.
The Framers adopted impeachment because they recognized that some
mechanism other than elections might be needed to remove officials in
extraordinary cases of egregious misconduct amounting to, in George
Mason's phrase, ``great and dangerous offenses.'' But because they
wanted none of the three co-equal branches to exercise undue influence
over the other, they were, as noted, equally determined to avoid making
impeachment a means by which Congress could subordinate the Presidency
to its will. Impeachment, conviction, and removal of the President over
policy disagreements, however heated, would produce just such
subordination.
Impeachment of a subordinate Executive branch official over policy
differences is even less desirable. The purpose of impeachment is to
remove an official whose continuance in office would pose an on-going
risk of really serious harm to the Governmental body in which he or she
serves, to the Nation's vital interests, or to the Constitutional order
itself. Implicit in that purpose is the limitation that impeachment
should not be considered if removal of the particular officer would
effect no material change. For example, removal of a corrupt judge
stops further corrupt acts by that judge, and removal of a law-breaking
autocratic President can prevent incipient tyranny. By contrast,
removing a Cabinet Secretary because one disapproves of the policy he
is pursuing at the behest of his Constitutional superior, the
President, changes nothing (other than the personal fortunes of the
Secretary) because the President remains in office and in charge of
policy.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Moreover, when, as is now the case, the Senate is controlled
by the President's party, there is no practical obstacle to replacement
of the impeached official with a successor equally committed to the
President's policy priorities and approaches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Put simply, on one hand, even if successfully impeaching and
removing a Cabinet officer could change the policy of a Presidential
administration, using impeachment for that purpose would be contrary to
America's Constitutional design. On the other hand, given that removing
a Cabinet Secretary is profoundly unlikely to change policy, such an
impeachment would almost certainly be futile.
Adding to the essential futility of a policy-based impeachment, the
Framers made successful impeachment very difficult. Not only did they
adopt language that, properly construed, limits impeachable offenses to
extreme cases and great offenses, but they required a two-thirds
majority for conviction in the Senate. If there is no serious prospect
that the Senate will convict an official whose impeachment is in
contemplation, the House ought to have the most compelling
justification for embarking on an impeachment inquiry. Otherwise, the
scarce legislative resources of the House will be expended on an
inevitably contentious battle that cannot produce any practical result
and will serve no public end.
Other Grounds for Impeachment?
It may be that Secretary Mayorkas's critics will disavow any
intention of impeaching him because they disagree with the policies of
the Biden administration. But if so, on what proper Constitutional
ground might the Secretary's impeachment be based?
``High Crimes and Misdemeanors'' is a specialized Constitutional
term of art that does not mean what it seems to mean. During President
Trump's first impeachment proceeding, his defenders insisted that crime
or perhaps ``crime-like'' conduct was necessary, or at the least that
there must be a violation of ``established law.''\16\ As a
Constitutional matter, they were incorrect. No indictable criminal
offense is necessary.\17\ Nor indeed must there be a statutory
violation or transgression of a specific judge-made rule.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ Trial Memorandum of Pres. Donald J. Trump 81-84 (Jan. 20,
2020), Proceedings of the U.S. Senate in Impeachment Trial of Donald
John Trump, Part. III.
\17\ Frank O. Bowman, III, Constitutional Crabgrass: President
Trump's Defenders Distort the Impeachment Clause, Just Security (Jan.
24, 2020), https://www.justsecurity.org/68240/constitutional-crabgrass-
president-trump-defenders-distort-the-impeachment-clauses-frank-bowman-
high-crimes-misdemeanors/.
\18\ As Justice Joseph Story observed in Section 797 of his 1833
treatise Commentaries on the Constitution, ``no previous statute is
necessary to authorize an impeachment for any official misconduct.''
See also, BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS, supra note 3, at 352-53.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, President Trump's defenders were right at least in
emphasizing that impeachable ``high Crimes and Misdemeanors'' must be
matters of grave public importance and involve misconduct of a
magnitude akin to the commission of a very serious crime.
Many commentators have concluded that impeachable offenses ought to
be of the magnitude of a serious criminal offense by applying the
interpretive maxim ejusdem generis to the whole phrase ``Treason,
Bribery, or other High Crimes and Misdemeanors.'' The fancy Latin means
no more than that later words in a series should be read in relation to
the early ones. In this case, impeachable ``other high crimes and
misdemeanors'' should be similar in type and severity to treason and
bribery. As Charles Black wrote:

``The catch in applying this ejusdem generis rule is the difficulty
(sometimes) of correctly pinning down the `kind' to which the specific
items belong. In the present case, however, the `kind' to which
`treason' and `bribery' belong is rather readily identifiable. They are
offenses (1) which are extremely serious, (2) which in some way corrupt
or subvert the political and Governmental process, and (3) which are
plainly wrong in themselves to a person of honor, or to a good citizen,
regardless of words on the statute books.''\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ BLACK AND BOBBITT, supra note 7, at 34.

President Trump's defenders were also correct in observing that
previous impeachments, particularly of Presidents, have tended to
involve conduct that at least might be charged as a serious crime. The
reason for that historical trend is plain enough. As Black put it,
``The fact that [an allegedly impeachable] act is also criminal helps,
even if it is not essential, because a general societal view of
wrongness, and sometimes of seriousness, is, in such a case, publicly
and authoritatively recorded.''\20\ In short, a provable violation of
law is useful in demonstrating the seriousness of alleged misconduct.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ BLACK AND BOBBITT, supra note 7, at 38.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In sum, the foundational requirement for impeachable ``high Crimes
and Misdemeanors'' is that they must be of extraordinary seriousness
and ought to be of a type that corrupts or subverts governmental
processes or the Constitutional order. In the United States, the types
of behavior most commonly found to meet this basic requirement have
been official corruption; abuse of power; betrayal of the Nation's
foreign policy interests; and subversion of the Constitution.
There is no contention of which I am aware that Secretary Mayorkas
has engaged in official corruption of any kind, betrayed the Nation's
foreign policy interests, or subverted the Constitutional order. I can
imagine that those who disagree with the Secretary's actions as head of
the Department of Homeland Security implementing the policy priorities
of President Biden, or with his exercise of the discretionary authority
of his office in aid of implementing those priorities, might
mischaracterize the Secretary's official conduct as an ``abuse of
power.'' However, long precedent establishes that impeachable abuse of
power involves employing the powers of one's office for illegal or
illegitimate ends--particularly to gain personal political or financial
advantage, to benefit one's political allies, friends, or relations, or
to injure one's personal or political enemies--and especially when the
abusive exercise of official power threatens to undermine
Constitutional values such as electoral democracy, or in the present
case, the separation of powers.\21\ Following the policy directives of
one's elected superior in pursuit of that superior's policy aims is
simply not an impeachable abuse of power.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ See generally, BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS, supra note
3, at 38, 105-07, 192-94, 331-32, 342-46, 353-54, 405-08.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Impeachment for personal incapacity: It also has been argued,
although there is less consensus on the point, that ``high Crimes and
Misdemeanors'' can reach extraordinary instances of professional
incapacity expressed in failures to perform one's official
responsibilities through extreme incompetence, neglect of duty, or
official malpractice. In principle, this must be so at least in extreme
cases. As Charles Black famously observed 50 years ago, if the
President were to move to Saudi Arabia so he could have 4 wives and
proposed to perform his duties henceforth exclusively by phone and
wireless communication, that would necessarily be impeachable (not
because of the 4 wives, perhaps, but because he could not properly
fulfill many of his Constitutional responsibilities).
Despite the theoretical availability of impeachment based on
allegations of extreme professional incapacity, the foundational
requirement of extraordinary seriousness and corruption or subversion
of Governmental processes or the Constitutional order remains. In part
for that reason and in part because other and easier remedies exist,
actual instances of impeachment in the United States for personal
incapacity or extraordinarily bad professional performance are
vanishingly rare.
The only two cases that arguably fit this category are those of
U.S. District Judges John Pickering of New Hampshire (1803) and Mark H.
Delahay of Kansas (1873). Pickering was impeached, convicted, and
removed essentially for being both alcoholic and insane. Delahay was
impeached primarily because his ``personal habits''--being habitually
drunk on the bench--made him unfit for office, and he resigned before
formal impeachment proceedings against him could be concluded.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Id. at 132-135.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
No Executive branch official has ever been impeached for personal
incapacity. The only Cabinet officer ever impeached was William
Belknap, President Ulysses Grant's Secretary of War, charged in 1876
with corruptly selling the post of trader at Fort Sill, Oklahoma
Territory. Belknap's singular case illustrates two important points.
First, he was impeached for ordinary tawdry corruption. No Cabinet
officer has ever been impeached for incapacity or radically poor
official performance. The obvious reason is that any Cabinet officer
whose performance is really so egregiously deficient as to border on
the impeachable will simply be dismissed by the President. Indeed, that
is exactly what happened to Belknap. As soon as the allegations
surfaced, President Grant fired the Secretary. But the House, at that
point controlled by Democrats for the first time since the Civil War,
decided to impeach Belknap anyway to cause political trouble for Grant
and his Republican Party.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ Id. at 118-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the very singularity of the Belknap case is revealing. Only
once has the House employed impeachment against a Cabinet officer for
the transparent purpose of gaining partisan political advantage. And in
that case, the officer really had committed impeachable corruption. The
House has never impeached a Cabinet officer because it thought the
officer was personally incapable or was doing a terrible job. Nor has
it ever sought to categorize a Cabinet officer's faithful pursuit of
Presidential policy as an impeachable dereliction. To paraphrase
Charles Black's observation quoted above, until today, ``There [has
been] every reason to think that most Congressmen and Senators are
aware'' that ``whatever may be the grounds for impeachment and removal,
dislike of a President's policy is definitely not one of them.''
In the case of Secretary Mayorkas, I am unaware of any information
that would support an argument that he is personally incapable of
performing his office. All public information of which I aware
concerning his background, education, training, prior service, and
record in his current office \24\ suggests that he is an experienced,
diligent, competent administrator carrying out to the best of his
ability directives of his elected superior. That one Congressional
party disapproves, even disapproves vigorously, of President Biden's
policies on immigration or other matters within the Secretary's purview
does not make the Secretary impeachable, at least if Constitutional
language, the original understanding of the founding generation, 230
years of precedent, and considerations of good government and the
proper relations between the coordinate branches have any meaning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Alejandro Mayorkas, Dept. of Homeland Security, https://
www.dhs.gov/person/alejandro-mayorkas.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
alleged violations of immigration law as grounds for impeachment
Perhaps in recognition of the Constitutional principles articulated
above, the committee Majority seems to be attempting to cast its
concerns about Secretary Mayorkas as allegations of violations of law.
Most of the supposed legal violations involve debates over the extent
and proper exercise of the Secretary's discretionary authority in the
immigration field. Although there is pending litigation over some of
the Secretary's actions,\25\ there has been, so far as I am aware, no
final resolution of any of this litigation materially adverse to the
positions taken by the Department of Homeland Security. The Department
has both lost and won some cases in lower courts, and has in some cases
succeeded in having lower court losses reversed on appeal. Critically,
in the two cases that have reached the U.S. Supreme Court, the justices
sided with the Department.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ Revealingly, the Department has been sued both by immigrant
advocates who think its immigration rules and policies are too
restrictive and by those, primarily Republican State attorneys general,
who think the opposite.
\26\ Biden v. Texas, 597 U.S. 785 (2022) (reversing lower court
decision and finding that immigration detention is not mandatory under
 1225(b)(2)(A) because  1182(d)(5)(A) grants parole authority and
that an administration is not obliged to adopt a return to Mexico
policy if the Government lacks the capacity to detain all would-be
migrants); United States v. Texas, 599 U.S. 670 (June 23, 2023)
(reversing lower court decision voiding DHS guidelines for immigration
enforcement and removal priorities, holding that plaintiffs did not
have standing to challenge these guidelines, and emphasizing that the
Secretary had long-recognized discretion over arrest and prosecution
decisions as set forth in the guidelines).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a Constitutional matter, the existence of active litigation
challenging discretionary actions by a Cabinet Secretary (or indeed by
a President) is no ground for impeachment. This may be even more true
where, as in the present case, much of the litigation has been brought
by State attorneys general of the opposite party to the President and
his administration. This is particularly true when, at least to date,
the positions taken by those attorneys general have not been accepted
by the U.S. Supreme Court.
Even if the Supreme Court were to rule against the administration
on significant questions, that is not a proper ground for
impeachment.\27\ Legal disputes over the exercises of Executive
authority are a commonplace in every administration. And every
President wins some and loses others. If the mere existence of such
disputes were impeachable, every President and every Cabinet officer
would be impeachable many times over.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ CASS R. SUNSTEIN, IMPEACHMENT: A CITIZEN'S GUIDE 124-25
(2017).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
there is, at least at present, no constitutional case for impeaching
secretary mayorkas
I recognize that today's hearing is only the first in a proposed
series directed at determining whether grounds exist for impeaching
Secretary Mayorkas. However, all the arguments for impeaching Secretary
Mayorkas of which I am currently aware boil down to expressions of
disapproval of the Biden administration's alterations of Trump-era
immigration policies coupled with claims that these alterations have
produced various allegedly harmful consequences. If one believes that
both legal and illegal immigration are bad for the country and ought to
be dramatically constrained, then one can fairly oppose Biden's policy
choices. If Members of Congress oppose this administration's policy
choices, they have ample tools to express that opposition through
legislation. But, at least if Congress seeks to remain true to
established Constitutional law and precedent, that opposition cannot be
transmuted into a case for impeaching Secretary Mayorkas.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Bowman.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
This is for the three attorneys general. Do you believe
that Secretary Mayorkas has failed to enforce or has subverted
laws passed by the United States Congress? We will start and go
left to right.
Mr. Knudsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. Yes or no?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Drummond. He has failed to perform his duties and is
culpably inefficient.
Chairman Green. Has he failed to enforce laws passed by the
U.S. Congress?
Mr. Drummond. He has.
Mr. Bailey. Yes, sir. He's--Secretary Mayorkas is acting in
violation of the law and in violation of Constitutional order
by negating Congress' appropriations authority and directives
in the appropriations bill and undermining the rule of law by
perverting the plain text of the statutes as it relates to the
parole process and its promulgation of the circumvention rule.
Chairman Green. Thank you. Do you believe that Secretary
Mayorkas, again, we are going to hit the three of you, do you
believe that Secretary Mayorkas has defied court orders issued
by the United States courts, which I can cite if you want me
to, but I am sure you are probably aware of them, do you
believe that Secretary Mayorkas has defied court orders issued
by the courts, Federal Courts?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Bailey. Yes. It should never come to having to go to
court against Secretary Mayorkas because he should be following
the laws enacted by this body.
Chairman Green. Thank you. In testimony to Chip Roy before
the House of Representatives, you saw some of the video there,
the Secretary said yes to the question of whether DHS possessed
operational control of the Southwest Border as defined by the
Secure Fence Act. I might add, ``act'' meaning the Congress
passed it. In subsequent testimony to the Senate, Secretary
Mayorkas stated that no one has ever had operational control of
the border and that he does not use that definition of
operational control as defined by the Secure Offense act.
Given these statements, do you believe that Secretary
Mayorkas misled Congress while under oath in describing DHS's
operational control of the border? Again, gentlemen, the three
of you.
Mr. Knudsen. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I do.
Mr. Drummond. I believe he politicized his answer and
failed to be authentic.
Mr. Bailey. Yes, absolutely.
Chairman Green. Attorney General Merrick Garland
acknowledged in testimony to the U.S. Senate that drug cartels
were exploiting the current Mayorkas policies in order to
traffic humans and harmful drugs into the United States.
Secretary Mayorkas on March 28, 2023, stated that he was
unaware of this. Now, we, of course, informed him. Now armed
with this knowledge, Mayorkas continues the same policies, in
fact, doubling down with newer policies that even exacerbate
the same horrible outcomes.
Do you think Secretary Mayorkas is doing this with full
knowledge that these cartels are exploiting his policies?
Mr. Knudsen. Mr. Chairman, there is no doubt there's ample
evidence out there for human trafficking and drug trafficking
are increasing at an exponential level at the Southern Border.
Yes.
Mr. Drummond. Mr. Chairman, based on my testimony today and
the facts that are well-known by the Secretary, there's a
porous border that's feeding constantly illegal actors in
Oklahoma.
Chairman Green. Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. Yes. His unlawful behavior as it relates to the
circumvention rule and subversion of the parole process
exacerbate and encourage the cartels and cede control of the
border to the cartels in ways unimaginable prior to these
policy positions.
Chairman Green. Thank you. Where impeachment is concerned,
the scale is very important. How would you describe the scale
or comparable size of this border crisis based on your law
enforcement experience? We will start with Mr. Knudsen.
Mr. Knudsen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Based on my prior
prosecuting experience, I can tell you since 2020, the fentanyl
and human trafficking specifically--well, fentanyl and
methamphetamine trafficking have increased in my State. There's
no other word than meteoric. I can tell you about the first
fentanyl case that I prosecuted in 2019. That was a relatively
small amount by today's standards, but at the time, we thought
that was a large bust, and, again, that was in 2019. Our
seizure numbers from our various drug task forces, our various
Federal partnerships bear that out categorically. Fentanyl in
Montana is by far our largest public safety issue, and it is,
it's just exploded under this administration. Our seizure
numbers bear that out.
Chairman Green. I am going to go ahead and sort-of
interrupt my own question, because my time is running out. I
know Mr. Bowman mentioned the term great and dangerous threat
to the United States. I will ask the last two of you, do you
feel that the hundreds of thousands who have died to fentanyl
overdose, the crime that has exponentially increased, the
increase in terrorist activity, you know, terrorists coming
across the Southern Border, do you think it is great and
dangerous, Mr. Drummond?
Mr. Drummond. It is great and dangerous. We have collusion
between Chinese and Mexican cartels.
Chairman Green. Mr. Bailey, very quickly.
Mr. Bailey. Yes, absolutely. The Missouri State Highway
Patrol, a single law enforcement agency in the State of
Missouri, last year seized 12,500 grams of fentanyl. That's
enough to kill every Missourian.
Chairman Green. Thank you and I yield.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, I have been on this committee since its
inception and have served as a top Democrat since 2005. During
that time, Democrats and Republicans have engaged in spirited
debate over policy, both with each other and with various
administrations. At the end of the day, however, we always came
together to make the homeland more secure for the American
people. This has been our committee's reputation and as a point
of pride for me and all my Republican counterparts from Chairs
and Ranking Member.
Today marks a dramatic shift from the committee's record of
sensible, bipartisan policy making. We used to come together to
resolve policy disputes, but now Republicans are trying to use
the awesome power of impeachment instead. The Constitution
doesn't let us do that. The Constitution requires high crimes
and misdemeanors.
Professor Bowman, has Secretary Mayorkas, in your opinion,
committed high crimes and misdemeanors to meet that
requirement?
Mr. Bowman. Based on all the information available to me, I
have not found any indication that he's committed high crimes
and misdemeanors, no.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Over the weekend, we observed the
third anniversary of the January 6 insurrection, during which
thousands of angry Trump supporters, who had whipped into a
frenzy by Donald Trump, marched from the White House to the
Capitol to obstruct the democratic process. Let's be clear,
those individuals were acting on the orders of Donald Trump,
who told them, ``We fight like hell, and if you don't fight
like hell, you're going to not have a country anymore.''
That night, most of us were unified in our disgust over the
attack on the Capitol and the democratic process. Almost
immediately, however, that unity eroded. In the end, only 10
Republicans voted to impeach Donald Trump for engaging in high
crimes and misdemeanors by inciting violence against the
Government of the United States.
Professor Bowman, as a Constitutional expert, would you
agree that inciting an insurrection to obstruct the peaceful
transfer of power is an impeachable offense?
Mr. Bowman. I do agree. I think it's notable that not only
did 10 Members of this body vote to impeach Donald Trump, but
when the case went to trial in the Senate, 7 Republican Members
of the Senate voted for that precise proposition. There was
indeed a majority for convicting Mr. Trump of high crimes and
misdemeanors, albeit not the two-thirds majority that is
required under the Constitution.
Mr. Thompson. Yet only 10 Republicans voted to impeach
Donald Trump for conduct that is clearly an impeachable
offense. But today, Republicans are attempting to impeach
Secretary Mayorkas where there are clearly no grounds.
Mr. Chairman, this impeachment is a sham and the height of
hypocrisy on the part of my colleagues across the aisle. I urge
Republicans to put politics aside and get back to the work for
the American people.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, the Chairman of
the Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. McCaul.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
This is a solemn occasion, probably the most serious
obligation we have in this committee, on this committee. The
last time a Cabinet member was impeached was during the
administration of Ulysses S. Grant many years ago.
In my experience, though, as a deputy attorney general for
criminal justice, State of Texas, as a Federal prosecutor
charged with counterterrorism and national security, and as
Chairman of this very committee, I have never seen this border
more out of control. Mayorkas took an oath to support and
defend the Constitution of the United States. In my judgment,
he has violated that oath.
Federal law provides the Government detain and remove
aliens convicted of crimes and those who are issued removal
orders by immigration courts. This is the very issue that my
State took up on appeal to the Supreme Court. He has violated
this. On Day 1, he rescinded Remain in Mexico Migrant
Protection Protocol, direct cause and effect, opening the
floodgates. I marked that provision up in my committee, Foreign
Affairs. It's now part of H.R. 2. But he took that power away
from his law enforcement officers. I have to quote, I don't
quote former Texas Congresswoman Barbara Jordan very often, but
she said, ``For the system to be credible, people actually have
to be deported at the end of the process.''
Let's look at the numbers, they speak for themselves. Eight
million encounters under this administration; 2.3 aliens in the
interior of the United States with no legal status, enough to
fill up 13 States. Just last month, we had over 300,000 trying
to get into the United States. Over 300 on the terror watch
list have gotten into the United States. When I chaired this
committee, that was a big red flag and the FBI director said so
when he testified as well.
Over 200,000 Americans have died from fentanyl. I
personally went to a funeral last Saturday. One of my
children's friends died from Xanax laced with fentanyl. Two
hundred thousand Americans. That is more than triple the number
of Americans who died in the Vietnam War to put that into
perspective.
The Secretary has an emboldened a criminal enterprise and
the biggest human trafficking scheme in my lifetime. He
terminated MPP. Chief Ortiz noted that had a direct cause and
effect. When Mayorkas went down to the border, they turned
their backs on him because, ``Sir, you have turned your back on
us.''
My State has spent almost $14 billion just this cycle. We
have allocated $9.6 billion to Operation Lone Star. My Governor
bussed illegals to sanctuary cities and States around the
country to showcase what we are experiencing and you are as
well in your States every single day. The damage was clear. The
Supreme Court did note the damage, but said that this had to be
resolved outside the courts. In other words, they said that
Congress had to address this either through appropriations
oversight and, in Sam Alito's decision, yes, through
impeachment. This is the legal justification for these
proceedings.
The Founders believed impeachable offenses included corrupt
administration, neglect of duty, and official misconduct. At
the Constitutional Convention, they said this. Alexander
Hamilton asserted abuse or violation of public trust was
impeachable. Justice Story, Supreme Court, public office is a
public trust, and a violation of public trust is sufficient. I
find this to be a profound violation of public trust. Alexander
Hamilton stated in Federalist Paper 65, ``The subjects of
impeachment are a nature which may be denounced political, as
they relate chiefly to injuries done immediately to society
itself.'' My God, what about the injuries done to society that
we have seen?
To our three illustrious attorneys general, please tell me
the injuries done to your societies back home, and do you think
this Secretary merits and that impeachment is warranted in this
case?
Mr. Knudsen. Thank you, Representative. I think the most
powerful statistic I can give you from my State is our
confirmed State crime lab fentanyl overdose death rate. Since
2019, Montana's confirmed fentanyl overdose deaths have
increased 1,700 percent. Congressman, I think that is the
absolute strongest indicator.
We know where these drugs are coming from. It's not a
political statement of mine, it's not an opinion of mine to say
that 100 percent of that fentanyl came from the Mexican drug
cartels. We know that to be true. We get that from our Federal
partners in the DEA. We get that from all of our drug task
forces, all the law enforcement agencies that are under my
purview.
Mr. McCaul. Just real quickly, General Drummond and Bailey,
just very quickly.
Mr. Drummond. We have witnessed a mass collusion between
Chinese nationals coming through the Southern Border in concert
with Mexican cartels.
Mr. Bailey. Fifteen hundred fentanyl deaths, 43 children
dead from accidental poisoning from exposure to fentanyl, $114
million borne by taxpayers in increased health care costs.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ms. Sheila Jackson Lee of Texas, the
gentlelady from Texas, for her 5 minutes of questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, I thank you for yielding. I
almost don't know where to start and certainly will find the 5
minutes to be underwhelming in terms of the time that I need.
I do want to express my solemnity and humbleness and
expression of appreciation for having the honor of serving on
this committee even in the midst of the horrific 9/11. It seems
that this committee always rises to the occasion to be the
problem solvers. I clearly am someone who has lived the
immigration story coming from Texas. I would certainly have a
different view than my friend and colleague who has just spoken
about the actions that have been taken as children and families
have been manipulated as if they are inhuman.
I do think that one of the highest callings of this
committee is, in fact, to do the bidding of solving the
Nation's immigration problems. As a member of the Judiciary
Committee, I have, over the years, introduced comprehensive
immigration reform legislation year after year after year. So I
am certainly willing and able to be part of the solution for
the three attorney generals, which I am a lawyer, certainly
served in capacities to realize the important work that you do.
But I must join in the sadness of this day; the sadness of
this day because it is not Constitutionally grounded, it is not
Constitutionally sound. It is not going to save any lives at
all. There is nothing that you have put forward today that
evidences in any way a impeachable offense by Secretary
Mayorkas, the first immigrant to serve in this position.
A dislike of the President's policy is not--is not--a basis
for impeachment. A basis for impeachment is corruption, abuse
of power, betrayal of the Nation, and that is, of course,
allegations.
You, as witnesses, I am sorry to say, Mr. Chairman, have
borne no testimony that indicates that Secretary Mayorkas has
done any of that. So I thank the Ranking Member for his earlier
eloquent words on this shameful, fraudulent impeachment inquiry
where we are not fixing the immigration issues that my
constituents in Houston need.
At the onset, I am reminded of the words of the
Representative Barbara Jordan, complete difference from what I
heard her quoted before. I know that she did an excellent job
in trying to frame the immigration issues of years past. My
predecessor represented Houston, like I do. She endorsed me;
glad to say a mentor. Like her, my faith in the Constitution is
whole. It is complete. It is total. I am not going to sit here
and be an idle spectator of the diminution, the subversion, the
destruction of the Constitution because the Constitution said
to create a more perfect union, to instill justice. That is
what this inquiry is, a diminution, a subversion, and a
destruction of the Constitution of the United States. I cannot
stand for that.
Mr. Chairman, impeachment is one of the absolute powers
Congress has to ensure against an executive who might, as James
Madison explained at the Constitutional Convention, ``pervert
his administration into a scheme of speculation or
oppression.'' The men present in Philadelphia some 236 years
ago were deliberate. They were intentional. They were exacting
in their draft of the Constitution that has guided us forever.
These are their words and the words of our Constitution, the
legal standard by which we are solemnly consider whether to
exercise this extraordinary power. Article II, section 4,
guides, and I quote, ``The President, Vice President, and all
civil officers of the United States shall be removed from
office on impeachment for the conviction of treason, bribery,
or other high crimes and misdemeanors.'' That is our standard:
treason, bribery, high crimes, and misdemeanors.
Professor Bowman, in your review of Congressman Green's
impeachment resolution, which referred to this committee, and
in your review of the various reports by committee Republicans,
have you identified any actions by Secretary of Mayorkas that
reached the Constitutional threshold of impeachment, treason,
bribery, other high crimes and misdemeanors? Professor.
Mr. Bowman. No.
Ms. Jackson Lee. In all of the reports, have you seen any
evidence of such, the reports you have been able to secure, or
the reports that I brought your attention to?
Mr. Bowman. I've seen lots of reports about arguments about
policy. I've seen nothing that rises the level of an
impeachable offense.
Ms. Jackson Lee. So, Mr. Chairman, the Constitution is to
be our guide. We must end this political stunt that seeks to
impeach an officer of the United States because an extremist
minority of the House of Representatives does not agree with
the policies of this President or that he carries out. Let's
work with these attorney generals to solve the real problems,
to not incarcerate children, to separate them from their
family.
Treason, bribery, and other high crimes and misdemeanors is
our legal standard. It is clear that is the basis from which we
must proceed. That is the Constitutional bar you have failed to
reach. We created this book, as they say, to create a more
perfect union and to establish justice.
Gentlemen, you have law degrees and have taken an oath, as
I have. You have taken an oath to procure the rights of your
citizens. Please sit with us to establish justice for all of
America, for the work you do, and for those who come to seek a
better life, however they come, we may perceive in a different
light, but let us do it in perceiving justice. You hurt me. You
hurt my heart. You hurt what Barbara Jordan stood for. You
diminished this book and these words by sitting here today to
suggest that Secretary Mayorkas must be, in fact, impeached
because of policies that we disagree with. May God continue to
guide us in our work so that we can do what we have been
assigned to do.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Higgins, the gentleman from Louisiana
and the Chair of the subcommittee on the border.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
My, my, my. Mr. Bowman, I wasn't even going to ask you any
questions today, but I am going to give you an opportunity to
clarify for the record. I do believe that according to your
resume, you are a professor of Constitutional law, sir. Is that
correct?
Mr. Bowman. I am an emeritus professor at the Missouri
School of Law.
Mr. Higgins. OK. You are a smart guy. You got alphabet
behind your name on your business card. So, is it your position
that you are taking today as the Democrats' witness, that the
Founders' intent with the term ``high crimes and misdemeanors''
was designed to restrict the power of impeachment to a
violation of specific written statute? Is that your position?
We're listening.
Mr. Bowman. Yes, and----
Mr. Higgins. That is your position. OK. And you are----
Mr. Bowman. Excuse me. Excuse me, Congressman.
Mr. Higgins. You said yes. It is a simple question.
Mr. Bowman. No.
Mr. Higgins. I am going to move on.
Mr. Bowman. Excuse me, Congressman----
Mr. Higgins. It clearly was not.
Mr. Bowman [continuing]. The answer is no.
Mr. Higgins. Reclaiming my time. It clearly was not the
intention of the Founders to limit the power of Congressional
impeachment over the Executive branch, to limit that to
violation of written statutes.
Mr. Bowman. That's quite correct, Congressman. I've written
extensively on it.
Mr. Higgins. Oh, well, thank you. But you just said
something different, but that is all right. We appreciate you
being here today, Mr. Bowman, and representing University of
Missouri. I am sure it is a wonderful law school.
On this committee we have carried out our investigation on
Secretary Mayorkas. I sit here today to tell you we are going
to impeach him. He is going to be impeached, and he should be.
He is the executive in charge of the border policy for
President Biden.
Now, President Biden has a right as the chief executive to
hire men that don't have the skill and then figure that out
down the line and replace them. President Biden also has a
right as a chief executive to have wild policy in mind. But the
executive that sits on his Cabinet, that is in charge of
actually enforcing those policies, that has the law enforcement
experience to know when those policies are going to bring
injury upon our country, that executive has a responsibility to
advise the President that his policies are not only not working
to secure the border, they are actually bringing injury upon
our country.
The United States Constitution is the law of the land that
we swear our oath to. Secretary Mayorkas has brought
generational trauma upon our country. Hundreds of thousands of
American lives destroyed, hundreds of thousands dead. Millions
and millions, wave upon wave of human misery coming across our
Southern Border. We are losing our country down there. My God,
my colleagues, you have got to recognize this. We have got to
stop this arterial bleed.
It is not about money. We spent less money in 2019 than we
did in 2023, a lot less through DHS, and we had the border
under control. It is policy that has changed. Who is driving
that policy? Secretary Mayorkas. So who shall be impeached?
Quite rightfully so, Secretary Mayorkas.
Mr. Knudsen, from your position, sir, and I am sorry for
what you and your people and your community and your State are
going through. Sir, on behalf of this Congress that has been
unable to take action as of yet, I am sorry for what you are
going through. Do you concur with the things that I have spoken
on and shared?
Mr. Knudsen. I absolutely do concur, Congressman. I think
this body is completely within its Constitutional and legal
right to bring impeachment proceedings here.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Drummond.
Mr. Drummond. I also concur.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. I concur. The Secretary has abdicated his
official duties. He's in dereliction of duty and should be held
accountable.
Mr. Higgins. I appreciate all the panelists for being here
today. I thank the Chairman for his leadership on this issue.
He has been calm and patient and judicious in our procedure. We
have laid out the case for the impeachment of Secretary
Mayorkas. We have promised the American people we would fulfill
that somber duty, and we shall.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Payne, the gentleman from New Jersey,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Well, today's hearing would be a joke. Let me just put
something out here in reference to fentanyl. It is something
that is really damaging our country, our young people,
obviously. But I remember in that 1980's when the crack
epidemic was prevalent, the First Lady Nancy Reagan told folks,
you know, just say no. So I think we need to incorporate that
into this epidemic.
Why is fentanyl killing so many of our folks? Because they
are consuming it. We have to look at the demand for it as well.
We know we have a problem in stopping it, and we are all hell-
bent in doing that, but we also have to look at the demand. Or
as Nancy Reagan said, just say no.
But back to the topic at hand. As I stated, this would be a
joke if the stakes weren't so high and serious for the reasons
laid out by my friend Ms. Jackson Lee. I am embarrassed for my
Republican colleagues. They pretend that their fraudulent
impeachment against Secretary Mayorkas is about high crimes and
misdemeanors. That is because they know well, as we do, that
this so-called impeachment is nothing more than an extremist
MAGA takeover of the committee in this Congress.
Just look at who is in the driver's seat of this fraudulent
impeachment. It is not the Chairman of the committee. It is not
even the subcommittee Chair. It is an extreme MAGA-backed
venture, who, proverbially speaking, shoved her leadership out
of the driver's seat and now has the reins of the Congress and
about ready to drive us all off the cliff.
The Chairman can proclaim that he has led this year-long
investigation into Secretary Mayorkas' leadership that led to
today's proceedings, but we all know that this is false. We are
here because a Member of Congress who believes the anti-Semitic
conspiracy that Jewish space lasers coming down to Earth caused
the deadly wildfires in California in 2018; someone who has
called Black people like me slaves to the Democratic Party; a
woman who believes serving this great country in the military
is throwing your life away; someone who supports
insurrectionists who tried to destroy American democracy; who
wants to defund the FBI; and someone who mocked survivors of a
tragic school shooting; a Member of Congress who believes all
that has brought us here. It is not Chairman Green's
impeachment resolution that was referred to. This is committing
to this committee.
Chairman Green has not even introduced an impeachment
resolution. It is not Chairman Green's so-called investigation
into Secretary Mayorkas that got us here. We had an impeachment
resolution before us weeks before the Chairman's alleged
investigation even concluded.
Professor Bowman, do mere policy disputes between Members
of Congress and a Cabinet Secretary constitute impeachable high
crimes and misdemeanors?
Mr. Bowman. Congressman, they do not. I think the
conclusion is universal among those who have studied this
question, has been so since the time of the founding that
policy differences, no matter how severe, no matter how heated,
are simply not grounds for impeachment.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to request unanimous consent to
submit an article from CBS News titled, ``Marjorie Taylor
Greene backs off, forcing vote on second Alejandro Mayorkas
impeachment resolution,'' dated November 30, 2023.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene backs off forcing vote on second Alejandro
Mayorkas impeachment resolution
By Caitlin Yilek, Updated on: November 30, 2023/7:16 PM EST/CBS News
Washington--GOP Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia backed off
plans to force a House vote on a second resolution targeting Homeland
Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas with impeachment, saying she
received assurances from House leaders that an earlier effort will
proceed at the committee level instead.
House lawmakers blocked Greene's first effort to impeach Mayorkas
earlier in November, instead voting to send the resolution to the
Homeland Security Committee. Eight Republicans voted with all Democrats
to send the motion to the panel, which is investigating Mayorkas for
his handling of the situation at the border.
Greene introduced her latest resolution to impeach Mayorkas on
Wednesday as ``privileged,'' setting a 2-day deadline for the House to
act on it. But plans to take up the resolution were shelved Thursday
afternoon. Greene said she was assured by House Speaker Mike Johnson
and Homeland Security Committee Chair Mark Green that the process would
move forward in committee.
``There were members that were upset that we weren't going through
the process. That was upsetting to them, but again, we need to be doing
this, we need to move forward,'' she told reporters at the Capitol.
``And so I got guarantees, so we will move forward with impeachment.''
Greene declined to comment on the timeline for the committee to act
but said, ``It's going to happen very soon.''
Mississippi Rep. Bennie Thompson, the top Democrat on the
committee, called the impeachment effort a ``political stunt.''
``Apparently, their baseless, so-called `investigation' was just a
shell game to justify a pre-determined, evidence-free impeachment over
policy differences rather than any Constitutional grounds,'' he said in
a statement.
The Mayorkas impeachment push
Greene's latest seven-page resolution accused Mayorkas of violating
federal law and the Constitution by failing to ``maintain operational
control of the border'' and prevent an ``invasion.''
Republican Rep. Tom McClintock of California, who voted for the
Democratic-led motion to refer the last resolution to committee, said
Wednesday that Mayorkas is guilty of ``maladministration, malfeasance
and neglect of duties on a truly cosmic scale.''
``But these are not impeachable offenses,'' he said on the House
floor.
If Greene's impeachment push were to succeed, McClintock said he
expected Democrats would move to impeach conservatives on the Supreme
Court and Republican officials the next time they have the House
majority.
``There will be nobody to stop them because Republicans will have
now signed off on this new and unconstitutional abuse of power,'' he
said.
Reps. Darrell Issa of California, Patrick McHenry of North Carolina
and Virginia Foxx of North Carolina--who all voted to refer the last
resolution--said earlier this month that an investigation into Mayorkas
should be allowed to be completed before an impeachment vote.
A spokesperson for the Department of Homeland Security said earlier
this month that Greene's impeachment measure was a ``baseless attack''
that is ``completely without merit and a harmful distraction from our
critical national security priorities.''
``Every day, the men and women of the Department of Homeland
Security work tirelessly to keep America safe. They need Congress to
stop wasting time and do its job by funding the government, reforming
our broken immigration system, reauthorizing vital tools for DHS, and
passing the Administration's supplemental request to properly resource
the Department's critical work to stop fentanyl and further secure our
borders,'' the spokesperson said.
Jaala Brown contributed reporting.

Mr. Payne. In which Representative Greene is quoted as
saying, ``We need to do this. We need to move forward. So I got
guarantees so we will move forward with impeachment.''
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Bishop, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Bowman, it strikes me how much your opinion
has changed in just a few years. I was--pointed out that in
your 2019 book entitled High Crimes and Misdemeanors, A History
of Impeachment for the Age of Trump, you have this passage,
``No Congress since that time,'' referring to the impeachment
of Belknap, the Cabinet person that Grant had dismissed before
his impeachment, but you say, ``No Congress since that time has
either moved fast enough or thought it worthwhile to actually
impeach a subordinate Executive branch official. Nonetheless,
the latent power to do so remains important.'' And here is the
key sentence. ``Not only is it useful as a signal of
legislative displeasure with administration personnel and
policy, but the undoubted authority of Congress to impeach
subordinate officials carries with it the associated powers of
the House to investigate potentially impeachable conduct and of
the Senate to try the allegations in Articles of Impeachment.''
Now, frankly, sir, I agree with you more today and not
then. That is to say, I don't think pure policy differences is
the basis for an impeachment. Neither is that what is happening
here.
It is exceedingly apt for that reason that the Majority
witnesses are three State attorneys general. Gentlemen, I look
forward to joining you in 2025.
But let me point this out. A lot of people would say, well,
American people aren't interested in hearing something about a
legal case. I think they might be.
Last June, two of your colleagues in Texas and in Louisiana
had sued Secretary Mayorkas, saying that guidelines that he
issued to his Department blatantly violated commands of
Congress in statute to detain any criminal who had committed
certain crimes and was released from State custody were
required--the attorney general then, then the Secretary of
Homeland Security later by amendment, required to detain such
persons until they were deported. And persons subject to a
permanent order--a final order of deportation required to be
detained.
Contrary to that order, Secretary Mayorkas dismantled the
detainer process completely. He said that that was going to be
subject to discretion. Only in cases where the Department or he
deems it to imperil our national security or security from
additional crime would it be done. Attorneys general sued. Here
is what the Supreme Court said. You don't have standing. We
can't hear from you. We can't settle this.
Here is what Alito said in dissent, the Congress--to put
the point simply, Congress enacted a law that requires the
apprehension and detention of certain illegal aliens whose
release it thought would endanger public safety. The Secretary
of DHS does not agree with that categorical requirement. He
prefers a more flexible policy.
The Court's answer today is that the Executive's policy
choice prevails unless Congress, by withholding funds, refusing
to confirm Presidential nominees, threatening impeachment and
removal, et cetera, can win a test of strength. In other words,
Alito in defense went on and said, I don't think this is a wise
decision for us to make, but that is the decision the Majority
made, that if you want the law to be followed, you are going to
have to impeach somebody. You are going to have to, as Justice
Alito said, the Congress is going to have to go to war with the
Executive.
Mr. Knudsen, what about that? Isn't that right? Isn't that
what the Congress is put to, to decide whether to do our duty?
As the Supreme Court has said, we can't do it. It is up to the
Congress.
You guys have tried to do it. You have succeeded in other
areas. You are continuing to sue and you are succeeding.
Florida has enjoined some practices. I think the Supreme Court
just granted an emergency relief from the DHS cutting Texas
border barrier.
What about that, Mr. Knudsen? I didn't leave you a lot of
time, but I am sure you can add more wisdom in 30 seconds than
I did in 2.
Mr. Knudsen. I'll be brief, Congressman. Thank you for the
question.
Yes, I absolutely agree not only with Justice Alito's
dissent, but I would point out, also, in that case that the
Majority also pointed out, to your point, that Congress
possesses an array of tools to analyze and influence those
policies, and those are political checks for the political
process. That's exactly what you're dealing with here. You
folks have got an Executive versus Legislative branch war here.
Mr. Bishop. So much of this, Mr. Chairman, isn't about even
policy discretion that is granted to the administration. It is
about square violations of law, and they cannot be remedied in
court. They will either be dealt with by this Congress to
vindicate the rule of law or we will surrender rule of law to a
rule of man.
I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize----
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman? Mr. Chairman, point of order.
Chairman Green. The point of order, you are recognized.
Mr. Thompson. I think we all heard the colleague say he is
running for another office, but that violates the rule XXIII,
and I won't ask that it be taken down. I just ask that if he is
going to run, just go run. Just don't run when the committee is
in session.
Chairman Green. The gentleman has made his point of order.
I now recognize Mr. Swalwell, the gentleman from California
and our Ranking Member on cybersecurity subcommittee, for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Swalwell. I want to thank the attorneys general for
participating today. Thank you for your service to your States.
I was a prosecutor before coming to Congress. I missed that
job. My father was a cop. My brothers are cops. It seems like
we have got a pretty educated group of attorneys general here.
Mr. Knudsen, you went to Montana Law School, right?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes, Representative.
Mr. Swalwell. Pretty good law school. Mr. Bailey,
University of Missouri, is that right?
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. You served our country after September 11, as
well. Thank you for doing that.
Mr. Drummond, you went to Georgetown, is that right?
Mr. Drummond. I did.
Mr. Swalwell. That is a good school. I was rejected there
twice for law school and then as a transfer. That is a very
good school.
I just want to level set where we all are on what is a
crime, what is not a crime, because the three of you have
offered testimony to my Republican colleagues about what is an
impeachable offense, and I just want to go down the list here
of some of the potential impeachable offenses that we have seen
in the history of the Congress.
Bribery, Mr. Knutsen, would you agree that is an
impeachable offense?
Mr. Knudsen. I would, Congressman.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Drummond, would you agree bribery is an
impeachable offense?
Mr. Drummond. I would.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Bailey, would you agree bribery is an
impeachable offense?
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Same as extortion, Mr. Knudsen?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Drummond, extortion?
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. How about obstruction of justice? Would you
agree that is an impeachable offense, Mr. Knudsen?
Mr. Knudsen. If there was a conviction, yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Drummond.
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. How about inciting violence against police
officers? What would you say, Mr. Knudsen?
Mr. Knudsen. Again, if there was a conviction of a criminal
offense, I think that would certainly rise to the level.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Drummond, how about incitement of
violence?
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Bailey, incitement of violence?
Mr. Bailey. Would need more facts to make that legal
determination. I think that's a bereft of sufficient facts.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Knudsen, I just want to drill down a
little bit, because you said if there was a conviction. So are
you saying that Mr. Mayorkas should be convicted criminally
before he could be impeached?
Mr. Knudsen. Congressman, no, I'm simply speaking to your
example of would inciting violence against a police officer
rise to the level of an impeachable offense? My testimony was,
if there was a conviction for that crime, then yes.
Mr. Swalwell. OK. And obstruction of justice, you said the
same thing, right?
Mr. Knudsen. Correct.
Mr. Swalwell. But you think for Mr. Mayorkas, he does not
need a conviction to be impeached?
Mr. Knudsen. Well, as this body has done in its past, I
think there's certainly precedent. No, I do not believe there
has to be a criminal offense. High crimes and misdemeanors, as
it was understood by the Founders, as it was understood in the
English common law, does not necessarily mean there has to be
an actual crime committed.
Mr. Swalwell. In the summer of 2019, former President
Donald Trump used $300 million of taxpayer dollars to ask
President Zelenskyy of Ukraine to get dirt on his potential
primary political opponent, Joe Biden. He was impeached in the
House for that. Should he have been impeached for that, Mr.
Knudsen?
Mr. Knudsen. Mr. Chairman, I'm--excuse me, Mr. Chairman,
Representative, I'm not a Member of this Congress. I'm not
privy to all that information. I certainly haven't seen a lot
of those reports. This body chose to go forward with those
proceedings, as is its purview.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Drummond.
Mr. Drummond. Yes, it's outside my lane. I'm just a simple
attorney general from Oklahoma.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. I believe President Trump was acquitted of all
charges, and that's beyond the purview of my testimony today.
Mr. Swalwell. On January 6th, he incited and aimed a
violent mob at the Capitol and 6 police officers would later
lose their lives. One lost a finger. One lost an eye. The
President was impeached. Ten Republicans voted for that
impeachment.
Mr. Knudsen, should he have been impeached for that, yes or
no?
Mr. Knudsen. Mr. Chairman and Representative, he was.
Mr. Swalwell. OK. Mr. Drummond.
Mr. Drummond. He was impeached for that.
Mr. Swalwell. But should he have been?
Mr. Drummond. I don't have an opinion on that issue.
Mr. Swalwell. OK. Mr. Bailey, what do you think about that?
Mr. Bailey. He was acquitted of those charges.
Mr. Swalwell. OK. So what is interesting to me, again, I
respect that you all are here, is that when you have testified
to Mr. Mayorkas' conduct, and you believe pretty clearly that
he can be impeached for his conduct, but when we go through
pretty egregious conduct of using taxpayer dollars, of inciting
and aiming a mob, having the greatest attack ever on this
Congress, this Capitol, our Constitution, you don't want to
comment on it at all.
I think what we are really seeing from the Majority in all
of this is that they are not interested in finding any solution
on the border. In fact, what we have seen is that there was a
2014 deal in the Senate, bipartisan. They walked away when they
were in the Majority. Speaker Johnson has said that he will
refuse any additional funding for the border. Now we have
witnesses who, again, want to comment only on Mayorkas, but
don't want to comment on President Trump.
Mr. Chairman, respectfully, I just see a party that does
not want to fix, but only wants the fiction.
With that, I will yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Gimenez,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. Thank you very much.
I was fascinated by my colleagues' questioning--line of
questioning. Somewhere I was going to go to, maybe not as quite
as eloquently as him. I am not running for attorney general or
anything.
Mr. Bowman, you say in your testimony, written testimony,
and some of the foundational requirements for impeachable high
crimes and misdemeanors is that they must be ``extraordinarily
serious and ought to be of the type that corrupts or subverts
Governmental processes or the Constitutional order.'' I find
that, you know, I underlined that specifically because I wanted
to ask you, do you believe that the death of 200,000 Americans
from fentanyl overdoses, is that extraordinarily serious?
Mr. Bowman. It's certainly a serious matter and one that
has to be addressed by this body by exercising its
Constitutional legislative powers to work with the Executive
branch to address the policy. The problem that you have that
you're confronting here----
Mr. Gimenez. That is good. I am going to reclaim my time
now. You have answered the question. Thank you very much. OK.
That ``ought to be of the type that corrupts or subverts
Governmental processes or the Constitutional order.'' Now, I am
not a Constitutional scholar, et cetera, but I do believe that
the Constitution was set up to have three distinct branches of
government. You have Legislative, you have Judicial, and then
you have the administrative branch. The Founding Fathers wanted
a balance of power.
Is that what you get from the Constitution and the Founding
Fathers, what they wanted to do, the balance of power, Mr.
Bowman?
Mr. Bowman. Indeed.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. So it is up to the Legislative branch to
actually create the laws, and the will of Congress is supposed
to be then carried out by the Administrative branch. Am I off
on that or is that what the Founding Fathers thought should
have happened?
Mr. Bowman. In general, yes.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. So we have this issue of policy versus
law. If I get you right, you believe that this is a question of
policy, but I don't believe it is a question of policy. I
believe it is actually a question of violating the law. The law
clearly states that people coming into the United States or
people seeking asylum in the United States, two things happen
to them: they are either detained here in country or they are
detained in another country waiting the outcome of their asylum
hearing. That is what the law says.
The law also says that the Executive branch actually has
the right to parole, but on a case-by-case basis, not mass
parole. So the Mayorkas administration, the Biden-Mayorkas
administration, is actually violating both. They are not
detaining people coming in or they are not keeping them in a
third country, and they are not detained in the United States,
and they are also allowing mass parole, which violates the
clear intent of Congress.
Is it your opinion that this is a policy issue and that the
Biden administration has the right to clearly subvert the will
of Congress?
Mr. Bowman. My opinion, Congressman, is that disputes over
the exercise of discretion by the Secretary are difficult.
They're being resolved in the courts. I must say that those
disputes have not yet been finalized. Indeed, the only cases
involving those disputes that have made up to the Supreme Court
have resulted in rulings in favor of the Secretary and of the
President.
Essentially, this is an on-going legal and policy dispute.
It is not, therefore, the kind of thing for which impeachment
should be used.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, I believe that, you know, we are at a
crossroads here because I do believe that we, Congress, have
given way too much leeway to the administrative branch, if that
is the case. This is clearly, the intent of Congress was,
people coming to the border need to either stay in another
country or they need to be detained, and it clearly was that
parole was to be done on a case-by-case basis.
Now, I don't believe that there is an issue of policy. It
is an issue of violating the law. That violation of the law has
actually led to mass suffering in the United States, 200,000
Americans dying because of fentanyl overdose.
I disagree with my colleague on the other side that says it
is a question of voluntarily stopping using drugs. Actually, a
lot of these deaths are caused by people they don't even know
they are taking fentanyl. They are thinking they are taking
something else and it is laced with fentanyl.
So, you know, if we are down to that where every single
time that the administration decides to violate the law that we
have to impeach somebody, I guess then we need to impeach
somebody.
So with that, you know, I yield my time back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I kind-of agree with
Mr. Gimenez and some of the comments he made.
Before I get into my presentation, I would like to present
an article submitted for the record titled, ``2023 Year in
Review: Secretary Mayorkas Champions Departmentwide Efforts to
Save Lives and Prepare for the 21st Century Security
Challenges.''
Chairman Green. Without objection, so moved.
[The information follows:]

2023 Year in Review: Secretary Mayorkas Champions Department-Wide
Efforts to Save Lives and Prepare for 21st Century Security Challenges
Release Date: January 9, 2024
DHS priorities to include efforts to harness artificial intelligence
technology, mitigate cybersecurity threats, and combat targeted
violence and terrorism
WASHINGTON.--Today, Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro N.
Mayorkas and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) reflect on the
progress made in 2023 to improve cohesion, transparency, and innovation
in the work of preventing, preparing for, and responding to the many
and varied threats facing the homeland in 2023. The United States faced
a range of challenges last year, including damaging natural disasters,
strategic competition and aggression from nation-states, historic
growth in global migration, the growing sophistication of transnational
organized crime, large scale cyber intrusions, and an increased threat
of targeted violence--all of which are expected to continue or
intensify in the coming years. DHS's significant investments in its
workforce, innovation, and partnerships throughout 2023 have laid the
groundwork for taking on these challenges of the decades ahead.
``Our communities are safer and more resilient, our economy is more
secure, and our Government is more prepared thanks to the unprecedented
work of the DHS workforce,'' said Secretary of Homeland Security
Alejandro N. Mayorkas. ``From managing a historic level of global
migration, to helping secure travel for a record number of Americans,
rescuing children from on-line sexual exploitation, and leading
operations that kept fentanyl off our streets, DHS took dramatic steps
this past year to enhance the security and readiness of our Nation.
That progress will continue into 2024 as we enhance collaboration with
our partners in and outside of Government and utilize new strategies,
including responsibly harnessing the capabilities of artificial
intelligence, to strengthen our Nation's safety, security, and
resilience.''
In 2023, the DHS workforce:

Enhanced the speed and efficiency of vetting and processing
noncitizens seeking to enter the United States with the same
level of security and integrity of our processing and without
additional resources from Congress. U.S. Customs and Border
Protection (CBP) was able to process 4 to 5 times as many
individuals at select ports of entry in 2023 than we could a
decade ago.

Seized over 43,000 pounds of fentanyl in fiscal year 2023
and 5,500 pounds in the first 2 months of fiscal year 2024,
enough to kill every American 33 times over. DHS stopped more
fentanyl and arrested more drug traffickers in the last 2 years
than the previous 5 years combined.

Helped to identify or rescue over 1,170 child victims of on-
line sexual exploitation or abuse.

Responded to 25 natural disasters that have individually
each accounted for over a billion dollars in damage, the most
billion-dollar disasters in FEMA's (Federal Emergency
Management Agency) history.

Ensured the safety and security of nearly 850 million
travelers amid a record-setting year of air travel and
prevented more than 6,500 firearms from entering the secure
areas of airports and onboard aircraft, more than any previous
year.
In his first State of Homeland Security address delivered at the
Council on Foreign Relations in April 2023, Secretary Mayorkas spoke of
emerging homeland security challenges:

``Revolutionizing technological innovations, growing political and
economic instability, widening wealth inequality, a rapidly changing
climate, increasingly aggressive nation-states, emerging infectious
diseases, and other forces are transforming the global landscape,
challenging and sometimes rendering moot a nation's borders, and
bringing national and international threats to any community's
doorstep.''

In 2023, the Department took steps to address these challenges,
including enhancing efforts to prevent terrorism and targeted violence,
preparing for new security challenges presented by emerging
technologies like AI, and helping communities build resiliency to
prepare for natural disasters and cybersecurity incidents. DHS led
whole-of-Government efforts to combat fentanyl. DHS also took steps to
modernize the application and enforcement of our immigration laws. All
the while, the Department invested in its dedicated workforce to ensure
they have the tools they need to deliver on our critical mission.
protected americans from evolving threats of terrorism and targeted
violence
DHS continues to transform the way it addresses the most pressing
security challenges facing Americans today and for years to come. The
Department is agile and vigilant in addressing the threats of today and
anticipating the challenges we may face in the days ahead.

Released publicly for the first time the annual Homeland
Threat Assessment. This public report on terrorism and targeted
violence threats is giving our partners across State, local,
Tribal, and Territorial governments, along with campuses and
the private and non-profit sectors, important information to
make better-informed decisions to prepare for security
challenges. Going forward, the annual Homeland Threat
Assessment will serve as a regular mechanism for describing the
prevailing terrorism threat level.

Distributed DHS resources and our latest threat assessments
to enhance the security of faith-based organizations across the
country through more than 100 direct engagements with faith
leaders amidst the on-going Middle East conflict. DHS is
regularly communicating with over 2,000 State, local, Tribal,
Territorial, and campus law enforcement officials and with the
leadership of all National-level law enforcement associations
and, through the DHS Center for Faith-Based and Neighborhood
Partnerships, is amplifying security resources to over 65,000
faith partners.

Enhanced security in local communities and at nonprofit
organizations and places of worship through Federal grants. DHS
provided $2 billion to help State, local, Tribal, Territorial,
campus officials, and nonprofit organizations prepare for,
prevent, protect against, and respond to acts of terrorism.
This includes 40 urban areas, including four additional cities
for receiving grants for the first time: Austin, Texas;
Honolulu, Hawaii; Jacksonville, Florida; and Nashville,
Tennessee. This also includes $305 million in Nonprofit
Security Grants to more than 2,200 faith-based and other
nonprofit organizations to support target hardening and other
physical security enhancements.

Helped law enforcement better understand, recognize, prepare
for, prevent, and respond to terrorist activity by increasing
law enforcement terrorism prevention funding within the
Homeland Security Grant Program from 25 percent to 35 percent,
a $103 million increase over the statutory minimum.

Expanded access to Targeted Violence and Terrorism
Prevention (TVTP) grants. The TVTP Grant Program provides
resources to State, local, Tribal, and Territorial governments,
nonprofits, and institutions of higher education to strengthen
or enhance existing capabilities to prevent terrorism or
targeted violence or establish them where they do not exist. In
fiscal year 2023, DHS awarded $20 million to 34 entities. As a
result of extensive outreach efforts, a larger percentage of
applications devoted to underserved populations were accepted
in 2023 (48 percent) versus 2022 (25 percent). Underserved
populations represented in this cohort include Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs), and nongovernmental organizations serving
Native American, LGBTQIA+ individuals, and rural communities.

Equipped over 28,000 State and local law enforcement and
government officials, educators, mental health professionals,
faith-based leaders, and workplace security managers across the
country to more readily identify threats and strengthen public
safety. This was achieved through over 280 trainings and
briefings led by the United States Secret Service's (USSS)
National Threat Assessment Center.

Improved access to Federal resources by launching the
Prevention Resource Finder in March 2023 in collaboration with
more than a dozen Federal partners. The on-line guide is a
comprehensive repository of Federal resources available to help
community leaders understand, mitigate, and protect themselves
from targeted violence and terrorism.

Helped faith-based organizations and communities enhance
their security by releasing the first-ever Physical Security
Performance Goals for Faith-Based Communities. This collection
of cost-effective actions specifically tailored for faith-based
organizations and communities can be implemented to reduce risk
without sacrificing accessibility.

Responded to an increase in bomb threats impacting campuses
and universities, including Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, by providing information, trainings, and
resources. The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security's
(CISA) Office for Bombing Prevention hosted 27 virtual courses,
trained over 1,250 participants, and provided over 1,500 bomb
threat planning and response products. The DHS Office for State
and Local Law Enforcement also increased its efforts to share
of resources and timely, relevant, and actionable information
to campus law enforcement.

Ensured the safety of millions of Americans at significant
events like the Super Bowl and the Formula One Las Vegas Grand
Prix. This included 18 Special Event Assessment Rating (SEAR)
events--including first-ever designations for the Chicago
NASCAR Street Race, the NFL Draft, and the Boston Marathon--and
three National Special Security Events (NSSE). The Federal
Protective Service (FPS) and CBP also worked collaboratively
with law enforcement partners at the Federal, State, and local
level to provide Counter-Unmanned Aircraft Systems (C-UAS)
detection and deterrence at major U.S. events. There was a 22
percent increase in C-UAS coverage at SEAR events in 2023.

Secured unprecedented Presidential visits for President
Biden to Ukraine and Israel in 2023, the first trips a U.S.
President has taken to active war zones not controlled by the
U.S. military. U.S. Secret Service led the planning and
coordination of these high-profile visits of enormous
magnitude, with surgical precision and on a short time line.
During both visits, the U.S. Secret Service along with our
partners played a key role in allowing world leaders to meet
face-to-face despite the dangerous conditions.

Undertook several measures in 2023 to improve security
effectiveness and efficiency as well as to enhance the
passenger experience. Transportation Security Administration's
(TSA) PreCheck
TM
experienced a record-breaking
enrollment year enrolling almost 4 million Americans, bringing
the total enrolled to 18 million or one-third of all U.S.
travelers. The majority of TSA PreCheck
TM
applicants
receive their Known Traveler Number in 3 to 5 days.

Led a year-long investigation through Homeland Security
Investigations' (HSI) Washington, DC Field Office and HSI's War
Crimes Center--with the Department of Justice and FBI--that
resulted in the Justice Department charging 4 Russian soldiers
with war crimes--including torture, inhuman treatment, and
unlawful confinement of a U.S. national in Ukraine following
Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022. These charges
were the first of their kind in U.S. history.

Ensured the safety and security of more than 1 million
Federal employees and visitors to thousands of Federal
facilities across the Nation, including the protection of
individuals participating in First Amendment-protected
activities on or near Federal facilities.

Convened a new Homeland Intelligence Experts Group, whose
members support the Department's vital work to protect our
country by independently providing advice and perspectives on
intelligence and national security efforts to the Office of
Intelligence and Analysis and the Office of Counterterrorism
Coordinator. Members include former senior intelligence
officials, journalists, and prominent human rights and civil
liberties advocates.

Expanded the Visa Waiver Program to include Israel, a step
which further strengthens the security, economic, and people-
to-people ties between the United States and Israel. All
participants in the Visa Waiver Program meet strict
requirements related to counterterrorism, law enforcement,
immigration enforcement, document security, and border
management.
prepared the country for new security challenges presented by emerging
technology
The Department is committed to keeping Americans safe from the
devastating effects of cyber crimes and protecting the Nation's
critical infrastructure from attacks is a core Departmental mission.
This past year, the Department took significant steps both to harness
the benefits and mitigate the risks associated with artificial
intelligence (AI). Central to all this work is strengthening our
partnerships with the private sector, nonprofits, and all levels of
government to ensure they are prepared for the threats they face.

Took steps to improve the cybersecurity of our
infrastructure, leveraging our authorities and partnerships
across the public and private sectors:

Worked in collaboration with representatives from the
cities of San Jose, New York City, Chattanooga, and
Memphis, along with Colorado State University, to issue the
first Connected Community Governance guide to help State,
local, Tribal, and Territorial leaders set a clear vision
for their connected community, define smart service areas,
articulate metrics of performance, and address
cybersecurity risk and privacy needs.

Developed a ransomware notification pilot program that
actively warns vulnerable entities of potential attacks.
The program issued over 1,000 notifications this past year,
including at least 187 to international entities across 24
countries.

Streamlined and harmonized the reporting of cyber
incidents to better protect the Nation's critical
infrastructure and improve the private sector's ability to
report incidents through the Cyber Incident Reporting
Council.

Enhanced transportation security by issuing new
cybersecurity requirements for certain TSA-regulated
airport, air carriers, and air cargo operators that are
increasing the cybersecurity resilience of U.S. critical
infrastructure. TSA also issued performance-based
cybersecurity regulations to pipeline companies and
railroad operators.

Built resiliency across our cyber infrastructure:

Strengthened cybersecurity controls and tools for State
and local governments and civil society organizations
following the Cyber Safety Review Board's review of
vulnerabilities that threat actor groups such as Lapsus$
exploited to infiltrate dozens of well-resourced
organizations. As a result of the CSRB's work, the Federal
Communications Commission issued new rules to combat SIM
swapping.

Awarded nearly $375 million in grant funding to State,
local, Tribal, and Territorial communities to improve their
cyber resilience. DHS doubled funding for this program in
fiscal year 2023.

Launched the ``Shields Ready'' awareness campaign to
encourage the critical infrastructure community to focus on
strengthening resilience. State and local governments as
well as critical infrastructure operators can also use
CISA's new Infrastructure Resilience Planning Framework to
better identify critical infrastructure, assess related
risks, and develop and implement resilience solutions.

Enhanced information sharing and collaboration
internationally to improve our cybersecurity:

Ensured greater collaboration on cybersecurity trainings
and vulnerability scans; workshops on topics such as cyber
hygiene threat mitigation, and public-private partnerships;
aviation and maritime port cybersecurity assessments; cyber
crime and cyber law enforcement trainings; and the
exploration of additional mechanisms for enhanced
information sharing and collaboration across 21 Western
Hemisphere nations. This is the first-ever agreement of its
kind.

Developed Guidelines for Secure AI System Development in
close collaboration with the United Kingdom's National
Cyber Security Centre. This will help developers of any
systems that use AI make informed cybersecurity decisions
at every stage of the development process. The guidelines
were formulated in cooperation with 21 other agencies and
ministries from across the world--including all members of
the Group of 7 (G7) major industrial economies--and are the
first of their kind to be agreed to globally.

Worked with the Japanese Minister of Economy, Trade, and
Industry (METI) signed on an updated Memorandum of
Cooperation on Cybersecurity. Throughout 2023, DHS and METI
engaged on areas identified within the agreement such as
vulnerability management and public-private partnerships.

Harnessed the opportunity of responsible AI use to protect
the homeland:

Established the Department's first AI Task Force and named
its first chief AI officer. The Task Force is working
across the DHS mission to identify areas where AI can
improve its work. For instance, it is working to enhance
the integrity of our supply chains and the broader trade
environment by helping deploy AI to improve cargo
screening, the identification of imported goods produced
with forced labor, and risk management.

The Task Force is also charged with using AI to better
detect fentanyl shipments, identify and interdict the flow
of precursor chemicals around the world, and disrupt key
nodes in criminal networks. Last year alone, machine
learning models that help CBP officers determine which
suspicious vehicles and passengers to refer to secondary
screening have led to 240 seizures, which include thousands
of pounds of cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, and
fentanyl.

Supported law enforcement officers' use of AI to
investigate heinous crimes. DHS successfully completed
Operation Renewed Hope, which focused on protecting
children from sexual abuse on-line. The use of new AI
technology allowed DHS to identify more than 300 victims of
sexual exploitation and also identify perpetrators.

Ensured DHS can deliver on its mission by bolstering our
workforce with the best cybersecurity talent. DHS onboarded
more than 150 DHS Cybersecurity Service employees and will
continue to expand the Cyber Talent Management System to
additional components to improve recruitment and retention in
the cybersecurity workforce.

Protected our elections. CISA worked in close coordination
with the National Association of Secretaries of State and the
National Association of State Election Directors to host
``Tabletop the Vote,'' the Nation's largest annual election
security exercise, to prepare for a range of hypothetical
scenarios affecting election operations. Over 1,300 people from
45 States, 12 Federal agencies, and 13 private-sector partners
worked together to address the exercise scenario. Last year,
CISA established Election Security Advisor positions in CISA's
ten regions to work to strengthen front-line support to the
election community.
helped keep our nation competitive and grow our economy
Securing our critical infrastructure is fundamental to staying
competitive in a 21st Century economy. DHS is committed to supporting
strong economic growth and meeting the labor demand in the United
States, while strengthening worker protections for both American and
foreign workers.

Facilitated lawful international travel and trade at our
Nation's airports, seaports, and land ports of entry. With the
installation of 11 new Non-Intrusive Inspection systems at six
ports of entry, CBP is increasing our ability to scan cargo in
rail and trucks and prevent illicit drugs, unreported currency,
guns and ammunition, and people from being smuggled into the
country.

Took steps to attract and retain talented researchers and
professionals who work on AI and other critical emerging
technologies by streamlining processing times of petitions and
applications for noncitizens who seek to work, study, or
conduct research in the United States. U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS) published a notice of proposed
rulemaking to modernize the H-1B specialty occupation worker
program and clarified guidance on evidence for EB-1
applications.

Helped American businesses that rely on seasonal and
temporary workers better plan for their workforce needs by
providing early notice of doubling the number of H-2B temporary
nonagricultural worker visas available in fiscal year 2024 from
66,000 to 130,000. American businesses in industries such as
hospitality and tourism, landscaping, seafood processing, and
more turn to seasonal or other temporary workers in the H-2B
program to help them meet demand from consumers and allow our
economy to continue to thrive.

Supported communities receiving migrants by speeding
Employment Authorization Document (EAD) processing times from
an average of 90 to 30 days for applicants paroled through new
processes for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans, and Venezuelans or
after scheduling a CBP One appointment. USCIS also announced
that certain categories of EADs would be valid for 5 years, a
tremendous efficiency for individuals and the agency. USCIS
provided intake and biometric collection at sites where States
and cities are assisting certain noncitizens who had not yet
filed a work permit application and sent more than 1.6 million
texts and emails to noncitizens who are work-eligible but who
have yet to apply for an EAD in a first-of-its-kind national
campaign.

Took steps toward eliminating the use of forced labor
practices in the U.S. supply chain by ramping up enforcement of
the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act (UFLPA). CBP stopped
4,033 shipments of goods in fiscal year 2023 valued at
approximately $1.44 billion suspected to have been made wholly
or in part by People's Republic of China (PRC)-based companies
that use forced labor. Ten new PRC-based entities were added to
the list of banned companies in 2023.

Held unscrupulous employers accountable by creating a
streamlined and expedited deferred action request process to
better protect noncitizen workers who are victims of, or
witnesses to, the violation of labor rights. This helps protect
the American labor market, the conditions of the American
worksite, and the dignity of the workers who power our economy.
Over 2,000 case requests have been made since this policy was
put in place.

Took steps to ensure the security of the U.S. supply chain
by establishing the Supply Chain Resilience Center (SCRC). The
SCRC is starting to analyze vulnerabilities and conducting
scenario planning with private-sector stakeholders to help
mitigate supply chain disruptions, ensure reliable and
efficient deliveries of goods and services, and lower costs for
the American people. HSI also established the Government Supply
Chain Investigations Unit, a dedicated unit to facilitate more
comprehensive supply chain risk management with increased
resources to identify, disrupt, and dismantle transnational
criminal organizations infiltrating our supply chain with
counterfeit or substandard goods.

Helped protect U.S. businesses by seizing over 19,000
shipments containing products that infringe on U.S. trademarks
or copyrights, or other intellectual property rights
violations. Those shipments accounted for a total of nearly 23
million counterfeit items. If the seized products were genuine,
their total Manufacturer's Suggested Retail Price would be
valued at $2.4 billion.

Improved security effectiveness and efficiency and enhanced
the passenger experience by deploying new technology at airport
security checkpoints. This includes more than 2,000 Credential
Authentication Technology units to improve identity
verification at over 200 locations and 243 Computed Tomography
X-ray scanners that produce high-quality 3D images of carry-on
baggage while also reducing the need to touch or manually check
bags.
continued to modernize our immigration system by enforcing our laws and
respecting our values
The Biden-Harris administration inherited a badly broken
immigration system that Congress has not fixed in decades. Despite the
challenges, DHS is executing a comprehensive strategy to secure our
borders and manage irregular migration in a safe, orderly, and humane
way, including the transition from the Title 42 public health order to
full processing under Title 8. By expanding lawful pathways,
strengthening enforcement of our immigration laws, and leveraging
innovation and modernization, we are laying the groundwork for a 21st
Century immigration system and providing unprecedented support for our
workforce. We continue to call on Congress to provide the sustained
resources and long-term modernization of the immigration and asylum
system that is needed.

Expanded lawful pathways to reduce irregular migration and
ensure safe, orderly, and humane management of our borders and
our immigration system:

Interviewed over 100,000 refugee applicants in fiscal year
2023--more than double the previous fiscal year--
contributing to the resettlement of over 60,000 refugees
from abroad.

Implemented new humanitarian parole processes for Cubans,
Venezuelans, Nicaraguans, and Haitians that helped reduce
irregular migration, denying smugglers the opportunity to
exploit over 300,000 individuals from these countries.

Established new family reunification parole processes for
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Colombia,
with updated family reunification parole processes for Cuba
and Haiti. Over 3,000 paroles have been granted under this
policy.

Mobilized our partners throughout the hemisphere to work
together under the framework of the Los Angeles Declaration
to expand lawful pathways and reduce irregular migration.
In 2023, that work included expediting refugee processing
times through the establishment of Safe Mobility Offices in
key locations including Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, and
Guatemala. These facilities implement the U.S. Refugee
Admissions Program and provide information and/or referrals
to humanitarian parole, family reunification, and labor
pathways in the United States, Canada, and Spain and
provide an orderly alternative to irregular migration.

Increased our ability to enforce consequences for those who
enter unlawfully and do not qualify for relief:

Expanded expedited removal to process noncitizens who do
not enter the United States through lawful pathways more
quickly and in greater numbers than ever before, including
record numbers of noncitizens receiving credible fear
interviews by USCIS asylum officers.

Removed or returned over 470,000 individuals since May 12,
the vast majority of whom crossed the Southwest Border,
including more than 78,000 individual family members. In 7
months, this nearly exceeds the number removed and returned
in all of fiscal year 2019 and exceeds the number of
removals and returns in each full fiscal year from 2015-
2018. Daily removals and enforcement returns are nearly
double what they were compared to the pre-pandemic average
(2014-2019).

In addition, after the ending of Title 42 in May, through
the end of fiscal year 2023, DHS removed or returned more
noncitizens without a basis to remain in the United States
than in any other 5-month period in the last 10 years.

Expanded a first-of-its kind effort, unprecedented in
scale, to disrupt and dismantle human smuggling networks
that was launched in 2022. To date, this campaign has
resulted in the arrest of over 18,000 smugglers, more than
10,000 disruption actions, and more than $60 million
seized. The campaign has led to more than 2,000 indictments
and more than 1,500 convictions in partnership with U.S.
attorneys. U.S. Border Patrol has also referred close to
10,000 individuals for prosecution.

Provided an unprecedented level of support for the CBP
workforce, with more technology, personnel, and infrastructure
deployed along our borders than ever before, and by securing
the first increase in hiring of U.S. Border Patrol Agents in
over a decade. That includes 300 additional Agents funded in
the fiscal year 2023 budget, an additional 350 requested in the
President's fiscal year 2024 budget, and a further 1,300 agents
requested through the administration's supplemental budget
request. By expanding digital innovation, including the use of
electronic A-Files across the Southwest border, DHS has spared
the equivalent of more than 200 CBP full-time personnel from
paperwork processing so they can focus on operational duties.

Reunited over 770 migrant children with their families who
were separated at the Southwest Border. The Department also
reached an agreement that provides for continued family
reunifications, certain immigration relief, and certain support
services for separated families, and sets forth standards to
limit future separations during an 8-year period.

Leveraged new technologies and other innovative tactics to
increase efficiency and effectiveness of our law enforcement,
including migrant vetting:

Improved processing times and vetting of migrants at the
Southwest Border by launching an appointment scheduling
function on the CBP One mobile app. This enabled CBP to
process 4 to 5 times as many individuals at select ports of
entry than it could a decade ago, strengthening our ability
to screen and vet those seeking to enter the United States.
This orderly process with case-by-case determinations was
utilized by over 360,000 individuals.

Advanced compliance with immigration enforcement processes
by making them more accessible, including through a newly-
launched U.S. Immigration & Customs Enforcement (ICE)
Portal where noncitizens can schedule appointments, update
their address, and check immigration court hearing
information in a consolidated location. This portal is part
of ICE's efforts to modernize, streamline, and encourage
compliance with immigration enforcement processes.

Built partnerships with foreign governments to strengthen
our vetting capabilities. Under the International Biometric
Information Sharing Program, for example, DHS has partnered
with the U.S. Department of State to build the capacity of
partners in the Western Hemisphere to collect and screen
biometric information--including against DHS holdings--to
more effectively manage irregular migration.

CBP performed over 37,000 noncitizen rescues at our
Southwest Border in fiscal year 2023 including of those in
danger of drowning in the Rio Grande or abandoned by
unscrupulous smugglers in harsh and remote terrain without
adequate water or sustenance. Noncitizens rescued are still
subject to U.S. immigration laws, including being placed into
removal proceedings if they do not have a legal basis to
remain.

Provided nearly $800 million in funding for communities
receiving migrants through the Emergency Food and Shelter
Program-Humanitarian and the Shelter and Services Program
established by Congress in December 2022. The Department has
also increased coordination with State and local officials to
share best practices and help connect communities to Federal
resources to shelter migrants.

Decreased the median processing time for naturalization
applicants from 10.5 months to 6.1 months by the end of fiscal
year 2023, achieving the agency's long-standing processing time
goal for most individuals seeking the rights and
responsibilities of U.S. citizenship. USCIS welcomed more than
883,000 new U.S. citizens, completed 964,500 naturalization
applications, and administered the Oath of Allegiance to over
12,000 U.S. military service members.

DHS redesignated and extended Temporary Protected Status
(TPS) for Afghanistan, Cameroon, Haiti, South Sudan, Sudan,
Ukraine, and Venezuela and extended TPS for certain nationals
of El Salvador, Honduras, Nepal, and Nicaragua.
combatted the flow of fentanyl and other synthetic drugs into the
homeland
DHS stopped more fentanyl and arrested more drug traffickers in the
last 2 years than in the previous 5 years combined and continues to
optimize our intelligence and field operations to stop these deadly
substances from hitting our streets. More than 90 percent of seized
fentanyl is smuggled into the United States by transnational criminal
organizations through ports of entry, primarily in vehicles driven by
U.S. citizens. Our strategy is to disrupt the flow of fentanyl and
precursor chemicals coming into the United States by improving our
detection capabilities through personnel surges, advanced technology
deployment, and increased information sharing.

CBP and HSI developed new, comprehensive strategies to
combat fentanyl trafficking. In fiscal year 2023 and the first
2 months of fiscal year 2024, their combined efforts stopped
over 48,500 pounds of fentanyl from hitting our streets, seized
over 5,400 pill presses and more than $16 million in currency,
and concluded investigations that led to over 5,600 arrests.
DHS also surged cross-government efforts to interdict fentanyl
and precursor chemicals:

Operation Blue Lotus surged CBP and HSI resources to
Southwest Border ports of entry and worked with State,
local, Tribal, and Territorial partners to expose networks,
seizing more than 10,000 pounds of fentanyl and more than
10,000 pounds of narcotics like cocaine and
methamphetamine.

CBP's Operations Artemis targeted the fentanyl supply
chain and interdicted items required in the production of
fentanyl, supported by HSI. This operation leveraged
multidisciplined interagency jump teams at strategic
locations with an enhanced focus on disrupting the supply
chain used in the development and movement of fentanyl.

Operation Rolling Wave surged inbound inspections at
Southwest Border checkpoints, covering every sector and
leveraging predictive analysis and intelligence sharing.

Operation Apollo, a new CBP counter-fentanyl joint
operation launched in October 2023, is concentrating law
enforcement efforts on disrupting drug and chemical supply,
collecting and sharing intelligence, and leveraging
valuable partnerships in Southern California.

As of the end of last year, CBP is operating 16 Forward
Operating Laboratories to provide on-site, rapid testing for
fentanyl to front-line personnel. These labs accelerate
processing on the front lines from weeks to seconds and provide
real-time key results for quicker law enforcement intelligence,
actions, and prosecutions.

Tested new AI technology, including machine learning
computer models, to help CBP officers determine which
suspicious vehicles and passengers to refer to secondary
screening, contributing to 240 seizures last year, including
thousands of pounds of cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, and
fentanyl.

Expanded collaboration with partners in the Western
Hemisphere and Asia through 16 Transnational Criminal
Investigative Units. In Mexico, this work resulted in the
seizure of 64,138 pounds of precursor chemicals and more than
59 criminal arrests. DHS participated in the development of a
new Counter Narcotics Working Group with China to disrupt the
flow of illicit fentanyl precursor chemicals, delivering on the
commitments made during President Biden's meeting with
President Xi in November 2023.

Took down leaders of major transnational criminal
organizations. This includes the arrest and extradition of
Ovidio Guzman Lopez, part of the leadership of the Sinaloa
Cartel in Mexico. His arrest is the result of a year-long
investigation led by HSI and ICE and demonstrates the U.S.
Government's commitment to bring justice to those who seek to
profit from international drug trafficking.
helped communities prepare for, respond to, and recover from disasters
DHS helped prepare for, prevent, or respond to 25 disasters that
caused over $1 billion in damage each, more such disasters than any
previous year. DHS is focused on providing our public and the private
sector with the resources they need to reinforce our critical
infrastructure, prepare response plans, and mitigate the impacts of
natural disasters.

Led whole-of-Government responses to more than 90 natural
disasters, including 25 that each caused over $1 billion in
damages. In Maui, for example, more than 300 U.S. Coast Guard
personnel responded to the crisis and led 22 search-and-rescue
missions across nearly 800 square miles, saving at least 17
lives and assisting an additional 40 survivors. FEMA approved
nearly $41 million in assistance for survivors, including over
$19 million in housing assistance and over $19.6 million in
Other Needs Assistance.

Reduced vulnerability to floods, hurricanes, droughts,
wildfires, extreme heat, and other climate-fueled hazards:

Awarded $3 billion in resilience grants. This includes
$1.8 billion for critical projects funded by the Building
Resilient Infrastructure and Communities (BRIC) grants
expanding the program to 23 new States and $642 million for
Flood Mitigation Assistance community-scale flood
mitigation projects. These efforts advance the goal that 40
percent of the overall benefits of certain covered Federal
investments flow to disadvantaged communities that are
marginalized and overburdened by pollution and
underinvestment.

Created a first-of-its-kind resource guide to help State,
local, Tribal, and Territorial officials prepare their
communities to face extreme heat and cold. These practical
guides help save lives and protect critical infrastructure
at risk from increasingly intense weather events due to the
climate crisis and help advance the Biden-Harris
administration's commitment to protecting communities from
extreme weather.

Helped target resources where they are needed most by
announcing the first 483 Community Disaster Resilience
Zones in all 50 States and the District of Columbia. FEMA
used the National Risk Index and other tools to identify
the census tracts across the country at the highest risk
from natural hazards and those most in need and increased
the share of BRIC funding to those areas.

Made grants and disaster relief more easily accessible to
communities who need it most. FEMA launched a new on-line
disaster assistance application designed to reduce the time it
takes for survivors to register for assistance. It also took
steps to more efficiently assess damage to homes, buildings,
and other property after a disaster by using AI technology.
Using machine learning, data from past incidents, and pre-
disaster imagery, FEMA can classify different levels of damage,
allowing FEMA's analysts to process images in days, as opposed
to weeks, and provides assistance to survivors much faster.

Deployed more than 200 prototype wildland fire sensors
across the United States, Canada, Germany, and Peru. The
sensors leverage artificial intelligence for early detection of
particles and smoke and have had promising early results,
including several wildfires identified within 30 to 60 minutes
of ignition. FEMA and the Science and Technology Directorate
prepared efforts to deploy new sensors across the island of
Maui to enhance early warning capabilities and help prevent
future wildfires.

Supported America's 27,182 registered fire departments which
continue to be impacted by the increasing severity and
frequency of natural disasters. To help recruit and train
personnel, DHS awarded over $320 million via the Assistance to
Firefighters Grants through FEMA in fiscal year 2023.
Additionally, in an effort to combat the increasing risk of
wildfires spreading into communities, the National Fire Academy
and the International Association of Fire Fighters collaborated
on a training program for wildfire conflagration for structure
firefighters.

Joined the United States Global Change Research Program
(USGCRP). As the first new member of the interagency USGCRP
body in nearly 2 decades, DHS joined as its 14th member.
USGCRP's membership consists of agencies that conduct global
change research and use it to carry out their mission, creating
opportunities for decision makers to communicate information
needs directly to scientists and for scientists to support
informed decision making. FEMA will have the opportunity to
influence and provide input on climate change research that
will allow the agency to better fulfill its mission, including
es [sic] leading communities in climate resilience.
led federal efforts to combat crimes of exploitation and abuse
In 2023, the Department identified ``Combatting Crimes of
Exploitation and Protecting Victims'' as a sixth mission area for the
first time in its Quadrennial Homeland Security Review and is
dedicating the full weight of its resources toward combatting these
heinous crimes. Increasingly sophisticated transnational criminal
organizations, the misuse of new technologies, economic instability,
and other forces are fueling an alarming increase in human trafficking,
child exploitation, and labor exploitation. In response, the Department
is redoubling its efforts to combat these crimes, support victims, and
stop perpetrators.

Identified or rescued 1,170 child victims through
investigations supported by the HSI Child Exploitation
Investigations Unit.

Used AI and machine learning models to increase the
efficiency of investigations related to child exploitation,
leading to 68 individuals rescued, 47 arrests, 8 life
sentences, and 8 trafficking networks dismantled in just a few
months.

Issued 4,907 notifications to foreign nations regarding
international travel by convicted child sex offenders,
resulting in more than 1,132 denials of entry by foreign
nations, more than fiscal year 2022. DHS also referred 3,624
U.S. passports to the U.S. Department of State for revocation
and reissuance with a registered child sex offender endorsement
through the Department's Angel Watch Program, a joint effort
with CBP and the U.S. Marshals Service.

Increased international collaboration to address these
crimes by establishing a Joint Council on Combating Child
Sexual Exploitation with the Australian government. This
council is leading joint research and development efforts,
shared operations to go after criminals,plementing policy and
legislation, and collaborating on prevention, awareness, and
outreach efforts.

Educated over 74,000 kids, teens, parents, and teachers
about internet safety and how to stay safe from sexual
predators through a revamped iGuardian program. HSI trained
over 390 special agents, and since October 2023, completed
presentations across 22 States and 2 countries.

Increased community education efforts on internet and
personal safety in 27 different States through approximately
736 presentations and outreach events for children hosted by
USSS Childhood Smart Ambassadors. This is a more than 77.7
percent increase over fiscal year 2022.

Delivered 135 training and outreach events on human
trafficking to more than 14,000 participants, including the
second DHS-wide Human Trafficking Seminar and an Advanced Human
Trafficking Training for HSI investigators. The DHS Blue
Campaign, our national anti-human trafficking awareness
campaign, delivered 194 human trafficking awareness
presentations to nearly 20,000 Federal, non-governmental
organizations, law enforcement, and Congressional partners and
acquired 83 new partners.
equipped the dhs workforce to better deliver on our critical missions
DHS has the third-largest workforce of any Federal agency and is
home to more than 80,000 sworn law enforcement officers, the greatest
number of law enforcement officers of any Federal agency. DHS offices
and agencies interact more frequently on a daily basis with the
American public than any other Federal agency, from travelers moving
through air, land, and sea ports of entry, to businesses importing
goods into the country, to immigrants applying for services.

Improved morale and job satisfaction of our 260,000
employees. DHS scores in the Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey
increased from 2022, with those gains either matching or
exceeding those of other departments across the Government. The
DHS Employee Engagement Index is a set of questions focused on
morale, and it increased by 3 percent, from 64 percent to 67
percent, compared to a 1 percent increase Government-wide. The
Global Satisfaction Index measures job, organizational, and pay
satisfaction, and it increased 6 percent, from 54 percent to 60
percent, compared to a 2 percent increase Government-wide. Our
Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility Index increased
from 63 percent to 65 percent.

Made significant strides toward improving customer
experience, including by establishing a Customer Experience
office, the first-of-its-kind in the Federal Government, to
better ensure DHS services that are simple to use, accessible,
equitable, protective, transparent, and responsive. Examples of
improved customer experience across the Department include:

FEMA's redesign of the registration and intake process for
disaster survivors applying for individual assistance on-
line.

ICE's launch of a new portal for noncitizens to have a
central place for managing and tracking their
responsibilities.

TSA's facial recognition technology operational
assessments on CAT-2 scanners for identity verification to
enhance security effectiveness, operational efficiency, and
the passenger experience, while protecting privacy and
civil liberties, currently deployed at nearly 30 airports
Nation-wide.

AskTSA responded directly to 3 million traveler inquiries
questions, typically within 2 minutes, over social media
and via text message.

Partnerships with Apple, Samsung, Google, and American
Airlines are helping passengers use mobile driver's
licenses and ID cards in 7 States (Maryland, Arizona,
Colorado, Georgia, Iowa, Utah, and California).

DHS exceeded its Burden Reduction Initiative goal ahead of
schedule and improved customer experience by reducing
public burden by over 20 million hours annually.

Exceeded our goal for new hires of women in the law
enforcement field at 35 percent, an increase from 23 percent in
early fiscal year 2022. The Department also created a new Women
in Law Enforcement Task Force and hosted a major hiring event
with nearly 2,500 attendees. DHS is committed to keeping these
critical positions staffed by building a diverse, resilient,
and skilled workforce of the highest quality that mirrors and
represents the public that we serve.

Reconstituted the Homeland Security Academic Partnership
Council with 20 new members who are providing strategic and
actionable recommendations to the Secretary on campus safety
and security, improved coordination, research priorities,
hiring, and more. Members represent higher education
associations, campus law enforcement, 2- and 4-year colleges
and universities, Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
Hispanic-Serving Institutions, Tribal Colleges, and Asian
American and Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions.

Met with over 200 local officials to discuss ways DHS can
support their cities. This increased outreach by the DHS Office
of Intergovernmental Affairs allowed us to provide direct
assistance and coordinate DHS component briefings to better
serve these communities.

The Homeland Security Advisory Council produced a record 8
reports in 2023 for the Council on critical topics ranging from
Customer Service to AI. These recommendations led to the
development of new initiatives, like the Supply Chain
Resilience Center, customer experience improvements across
component agencies, and critical AI policy.

Ensured the TSA's workforce is paid comparably with their
colleagues by implementing a new compensation plan in July,
which, for the first time ever puts all TSA employees on the
same pay level as their Federal counterparts on the General
Schedule (GS) pay scale. The agency's attrition numbers have
noticeably dropped, and numbers of applicants continue to
increase.

Championed the workforce through the Department's 20th
Anniversary celebrations, which included 8 ceremonies across
the country recognizing 20,000 employees who served in the
Department since its creation. This included an event in
Washington featuring remarks from President Joseph R. Biden,
Jr., former President George W. Bush, and former Pennsylvania
Governor and the first Secretary of Homeland Security Thomas J.
Ridge. DHS also awarded more than 1,300 employees with
Secretary's Awards, the Department's highest honor, for their
extraordinary accomplishments last year. This was the highest
number of annual award recipients in the Department's history.

Strengthened the transparency of our work by launching the
Office of Homeland Security Statistics (OHSS) in November 2023
to advance the Department's statistical reporting and analysis
capabilities. The OHSS conducts independent statistical
reporting and analysis Department-wide, supports evidence-based
policy making and data-driven decision making, and oversees the
development of enterprise-wide data standards.

Enhanced the Department's work with law enforcement partners
by elevating the Office for State and Local Law Enforcement to
the Office of the Secretary. This ensures that law enforcement
equities are represented throughout the Department during
policy, program, and initiative development; that law
enforcement and terrorism-focused grants are appropriately
centered on terrorism prevention activities; and that DHS
provides maximal information, resources, and operational
support to its law enforcement partners.

Strengthened Department-wide civil liberties protections:

Established the Transparency and Oversight Program Office
in the Office of Intelligence and Analysis to consolidate
oversight functions that were previously dispersed
throughout the organization, creating a stronger voice for
oversight and compliance in all decision making.

Issued the first comprehensive facial recognition guidance
in the Federal Government. The guidance ensures that all
uses of facial recognition and face capture technologies
will be thoroughly tested to ensure there is no bias or
disparate impact in accordance with national standards and
include the right to opt-out of face recognition for
specific, non-law enforcement uses.

Became the largest Federal agency to issue a comprehensive
policy and training program governing the use of commercial
generative AI tools for certain employees. This helps
ensure our use of AI is responsible, advances equity, and
appropriately safeguards privacy, civil rights, and civil
liberties.

Took steps to further consolidate DHS leadership and
agencies to one main headquarters, increasing cohesion and
cross-department collaboration needed to address the threats of
today and tomorrow. DHS launched a new expansion of the DHS St.
Elizabeths campus in Washington, DC that will provide
additional office space for approximately 6,500 personnel, new
offices for CISA and ICE, and a 1,500-space parking garage to
support our employees.

Implemented Executive Order (EO) 14074 on Advancing
Effective, Accountable Policing and Criminal Justice Practices
to Enhance Public Trust and Public Safety. To date, the
Department has implemented 27 of 36 action items from the EO
that included updates to the Department's law enforcement
policies, trainings, and procedures.

Mr. Correa. I want to thank our witnesses for being here
today. I am glad you are here talking about those things that
are important. You spoke passionately about fentanyl, the
damage that has caused to our communities. I am with you on
that one. Back home on Main Street, a lot of deaths, a lot of
pain because of fentanyl.
My investigation of this issue, 90 percent of fentanyl,
more like 95 percent, comes through our ports of entry, and 65
percent comes through one port of entry: the San Ysidro port of
entry. Most of that, the majority, vast majority, is smuggled
by American citizens and green card holders. That is why I
support additional funding for our ports of entry. Technology,
more personnel, more drug-sniffing dogs, more technology.
Mr. Chair, again, I want to thank you for holding this
hearing because homeland security is an important issue for all
Americans, for this Nation. So let's look at the facts here
today.
Let's be clear about what we are looking at today on a
world-wide basis. Some of the nations that are dealing with
this what I would call world-wide refugee challenge: the United
States; Europe; Germany; Italy; Greece; Colombia, Colombia is
holding 3 million Venezuelan refugees right now; Costa Rica;
Mexico. These are among some of the nations looking at this
refugee challenge.
Let's look at some of the causes of this migratory pattern.
COVID-19 and Secretary Mayorkas did not bring up COVID-19.
Secretary Mayorkas is also not responsible for the
robberies, gang violence, extortions in Central America.
Secretary Mayorkas is also not responsible for the government
collapse and violence in Haiti. He is also not responsible for
the challenges, the economic collapse in Venezuela. Secretary
Mayorkas is also not responsible for the human rights
violations, economic collapse in Cuba. He is also not
responsible for the economic collapse, human rights violations
in Nicaragua, Peru, Ecuador; the invasion of Russia of Ukraine;
the economic collapse going on in China today. Secretary
Mayorkas is not responsible for these things.
To the contrary, he is working to manage the challenge and
provide front-line officers with the resources that they need.
Even Senate Republicans get it. Senate Republicans are working
with Democrats right now and the White House to try to address
these challenges.
So in the last minute-and-a-half that I have, I am going to
ask Professor Bowman, is Secretary Mayorkas executing the law
to full extent of his abilities with the limited resources
Congress has given him? Is this an impeachable offense, sir?
Mr. Bowman. No, sir, it is not. I should point out also, in
addition, it's critical to note that if we could impeach
Cabinet officers, or Presidents for that matter, any time there
are legal disputes about the application of the law or their
exercise of discretion, then every President and every Cabinet
officer would be impeachable. In the previous administration,
that of Mr. Trump, there were repeated lawsuits against Mr.
Trump's immigration policy, some of which he won, some of which
he lost. If the mere presence of heated legal disagreements
about the legitimacy of Presidential immigration policy were
impeachable, Mr. Trump would have been impeached for a third
time. To do such a thing would be profoundly anti-
Constitutional and a profound disruption of the Constitutional
separation of powers.
Mr. Correa. So, sir, are we looking essentially at
political public policy debate here as opposed to an
impeachable offense?
Mr. Bowman. That's certainly my interpretation,
Congressman.
Mr. Correa. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Chairman, I have a unanimous consent
motion here.
Chairman Green. Do you want to do it now or wait till your
turn?
Mr. Goldman. I will do it now if I could.
Chairman Green. OK, go ahead.
Mr. Goldman. I want to introduce January 10, 2024,
Washington Post article where the Chairman is quoted as saying
that our investigation made clear that this crisis finds its
foundation in Secretary Mayorkas' decision making. Congressman
Norman talks about needing to impeach Mayorkas because of,
``bad judgment''.
Chairman Green. OK. With no disconsent or disagreement, we
will admit it to the record.
[The information follows:]

House GOP pivots to impeach Mayorkas as talks over border security
languish
House Republicans say Homeland secretary failed to `enforce laws passed
by Congress' and `fulfill his oath of office'
By Jacqueline Alemany and Marianna Sotomayor, January 10, 2024 at 6
o'clock a.m. EST, The Washington Post
As President Biden faces intensifying pressure over a record influx
of migrants last month, House Republicans have ramped up the long-
simmering effort to impeach Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro
Mayorkas heading into the 2024 election.
The renewed focus on the impeachment case against Mayorkas, the
face of one of the country's most intractable issues, also comes as
some far-right Republicans are pressuring House GOP leadership to force
a government shutdown over proposed changes to immigration law. The
first hearing in the impeachment effort, led by the House Homeland
Security Committee, will be held Wednesday.
It's unclear what formal charges will ultimately be brought against
Mayorkas, but an extensive report completed by the GOP-led House
Committee on Homeland Security at the end of last year concluded that
Mayorkas failed to ``enforce laws passed by Congress'' and ``fulfill
his oath of office.''
``Our investigation made clear that this crisis finds it foundation
in Secretary Mayorkas' decision-marking.'' Homeland Security Committee
Chairman Rep. Mark Green (R-Tenn.) said in a statement Monday.
Mayorkas squarely disputed the allegation in remarks delivered in
Eagle Pass, Tex., on Monday during a visit to the southern border,
where he also made the case for additional funding to boost resources,
reduce the immigration court backlog, combat drug smuggling and quicken
the processing, detention and potential deportation of migrants.
Democrats and legal experts have criticized the House GOP's move to
impeach their way through what is largely viewed as a policy dispute.
Immigration experts who testified before Congress over the past
year have also poked holes in the GOP's thesis that Mayorkas has
committed high crimes and misdemeanors by failing to uphold the law,
arguing that insufficient resources at DHS have historically prevented
any administration from completely executing some laws pertaining to
immigration and the border. U.S. agents recorded a record-breaking
250,000 illegal crossings along the southern border in December--the
highest 1-month total ever--according to data released by Customs and
Border Protection.
In an op-ed published ahead of the hearing, Jonathan Turley, a
George Washington University legal scholar who has previously appeared
as a fact witness for Republicans during congressional hearings, argued
that ``being bad at your job is not an impeachable offense'' and that
``there is also no current evidence that [Mayorkas] is corrupt or
committed an impeachable offense.''
``He can be legitimately accused of effectuating an open border
policy, but that is a disagreement on policy that is traced to the
President,'' Turley argued.
Even some Republicans who favor impeaching Mayorkas acknowledged
that it would fail to resolve the broader issues that plague the U.S.
immigration system. Rep. Ralph Norman (R-S.C.) said Tuesday that if
Mayorkas is impeached, Biden is likely to ``put somebody else probably
as worse'' in the job. But that shouldn't stop Republicans from trying
to remove him because of what he said is Mayorkas's ``bad judgment.''
But unlike the parallel impeachment proceedings initiated against
President Biden, even vulnerable Republican lawmakers view the push to
impeach Mayorkas as more politically palatable and have quickly
coalesced around the effort, according to lawmakers and staffers
involved with the latest impeachment target. With a two-vote margin in
the House, support from all factions to impeach Mayorkas suggests the
push could be successful along party lines. Reps. Ken Buck (R-Colo.)
and Tom McClintock (R-Calif.) have previously been critical of the
Mayorkas impeachment attempt, though it's unclear where they currently
stand on the matter.
Senior House GOP staffers predict the proceedings against Mayorkas
will move swiftly and face little resistance in the conference--a
notable contrast with the effort to impeach Biden. While Republicans in
December unanimously voted in favor of authorizing an impeachment
inquiry into Biden, members have been reluctant to proceed with a
formal impeachment vote as committee investigators have struggled to
produce direct evidence that the president benefited financially from
his son's foreign investment deals.
House Republicans campaigned on impeaching Mayorkas during the 2022
midterm elections, with many operatives at the time saying it would be
the lowest-hanging fruit--a surefire win for the GOP majority as
management of the country's southern border remains a galvanizing issue
for the base.
That unity does not apply to the Biden impeachment effort, however,
and some Republican lawmakers and aides have speculated that House
Speaker Mike Johnson (R-La.) has expedited the Mayorkas vote as the
conference enters another consequential election year to appease a far-
right base clamoring for accountability. But a person close to Johnson,
speaking on the condition of anonymity to detail internal discussions,
noted that House Republicans have spent the past year working to build
a case against Mayorkas--it's just received less media attention than
other GOP-led investigations.
Johnson last week led a visit with GOP lawmakers to the U.S.-Mexico
border amid Senate negotiations over $14 billion in additional funding
for border operations and the U.S. immigration court system as a part
of a broader $110 billion package that includes funding for Ukraine,
Israel and other U.S. security priorities.
But House Republicans have pushed for the Senate to take up a bill
passed last May with only GOP support, called H.R. 2, that would
resurrect Trump-era border policies, including restarting the building
of the border wall and restricting the asylum process. It would also
modify the parole system--a program the Biden administration
unilaterally expanded in 2023 to allow migrants temporary residency in
the United States for humanitarian or other urgent reasons.
Hard-liners have suggested that it's worth shutting down the
government in the coming weeks rather than continuing to fund existing
policies that they say have contributed to the influx of migrants. But
Biden officials and Democrats have largely rejected their proposed
changes, instead pushing for increased funding for additional U.S.
Border Patrol agents, asylum officers and immigration judges.
Mayorkas on Monday argued that while additional funding is
necessary to increase the United States' ability to quickly process and
deport migrants who are ineligible to stay in the country, Congress
must act quickly to reform a broken immigration system.
``We now need Congress to do their part and act,'' Mayorkas said.
``Our immigration system is outdated and broken and has been in need of
reform for literally decades. On this, everyone agrees.''
As one side of the Capitol has moved to impeach Mayorkas, he's
worked closely with a bipartisan group of negotiators in the
Democratic-controlled Senate to hash out a deal that would narrow the
pool of people who are eligible for asylum interviews, and essentially
close the border on days it is overwhelmed with people by expelling
migrants and expediting certain types of deportations.
Mayorkas has become a key player in the negotiations, meeting with
the group daily ahead of the Christmas recess. His close involvement in
discussions has continued in the new year, and Republican senators
involved with the negotiations have tacitly acknowledged that the issue
is grounded in policy. If the House ultimately does impeach Mayorkas--
making him the first Cabinet member to be impeached in almost 150
years--he is unlikely to be convicted in a trial in the Senate.
``It's not dereliction of duty if Secretary Mayorkas is actually
trying to negotiate legislation that would address the issues at the
border--it's harder to impeach someone who's actively negotiating to
try to solve the problem that they are trying to impeach him over,''
Rep. Dan Goldman (D-N.Y.) told reporters on Tuesday.
Several GOP State officials are scheduled to appear at the hearing
on Wednesday and are expected to detail how cities across the country
have been impacted by the surge of migrants entering the country
through the U.S.-Mexico border. Professor Frank Bowman, a professor at
the University of Missouri School of Law, is also expected to appear as
a witness on behalf of Democrats on the committee.
Leigh Ann Caldwell, Liz Goodwin and Maria Sacchetti contributed to this
report.

Chairman Green. Now I recognize Mr. Pfluger, the gentleman
from Texas, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It is sad that we are here. Sad that we are in this
position. Earlier, it was said that this is not a legitimate
impeachment. I guess that is something Democrats know a little
bit about and our witness just talked about the impeachment of
Mr. Trump. So I disagree with that, and I take no pleasure in
the significance of this effort.
I have wrestled with the appropriate Constitutional
response to what has become a complete failure to enforce the
law, to adhere to Congressional directives to secure the
homeland. The failure to secure the homeland has been so
significant, so catastrophic, that Congress must use its power
to provide accountability. We must be the check and the balance
against such an extremely egregious breach of public trust, and
that is what this is.
If not this effort, then I asked my Democrat colleagues,
what effort? Where is your answer to accountability? Where is
your Article I authorities to check the Executive branch?
Mr. Goldman. Will the gentleman yield to answer the
question?
Mr. Pfluger. No, The answer from the other side simply
cannot be that we are powerless. I asked rhetorically, if not
this effort, then how do we hold this failure? You will have
your chance to wax poetic on that.
Let's just go through the numbers. Fiscal year 2023, 27,000
pounds of fentanyl was seized. That is what was seized. That is
not all that entered this country.
Mr. Chairman, the Speaker of the House has put together a
document, and it goes step by step for the actions the
administration has taken since January 20, 2021. President
Biden terminated the national emergency at the Southwest
Border. President Biden issued an Executive order further
entrenching DACA program. Biden unveiled the U.S. Citizenship
Act, which would provide amnesty. The administration issued an
Executive order ending limitations and restrictions on
immigration without certain countries associated with
terrorism. Then Secretary Mayorkas delivered remarks,
effectively explaining the border is open for illegal
immigration by stating that DHS's focus would be on processing.
On and on and on.
Mayorkas issued a memorandum prohibiting enforcement of
immigration laws in certain areas, including schools, health
care, and facilities. Mayorkas terminated Migrant Protection
Protocols. Mayorkas issued a memorandum that states the fact
that an individual is a removable alien should not be the sole
basis of an enforcement action.
I want to enter this with the unanimous consent into the
record, Mr. Chairman. I seek unanimous consent.
Chairman Green. So ordered.
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Goldman. Sorry, what is the document?
Mr. Pfluger. As I mentioned, the document is from the
Speaker of the House, a list of actions, if we can pause the
time, please, because this is administrative. This is a list of
actions that the administration has taken step by step since
January 20, 2021. It goes in order chronologically of the
actions that the administration has taken that have weakened
us, including those that Secretary Mayorkas has taken.
Mr. Goldman. But it is created by them.
Chairman Green. The gentleman is not recognized right now.
OK. It is his time.
Mr. Goldman. Well, then I object. I object to the----
Chairman Green. It is his time. OK. You object? Overruled.
Mr. Goldman. No, he is trying to enter it. That is why I am
asking. I object to the entry of this document that was----
Chairman Green. So you dissent. OK. All right. We will vote
on it, I suppose, then? OK.
Are you asking for a vote? Unanimous consent was just
disagreed to. Are we going to vote on this?
Mr. Goldman. Yes.
Chairman Green. OK. All right. We need to clear the
witnesses, get the clerks in here, and we will vote on it.
Mr. Pfluger. Stop the clock, also.
Mr. Thompson. Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. OK. My apologies. It is just objected to
and there is no vote, so my misunderstanding. Thank you. I am
assuming that is what you were going to claim. Thank you,
Ranking Member.
The gentleman is recognized.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Chairman Green. I will make up the time.
Mr. Pfluger. Two minutes and 15 seconds or 2 minutes and 20
seconds.
Chairman Green. You are recognized.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
Earlier this year, Director Wray sat here with Secretary
Mayorkas and told this committee that there were still known
and suspected terrorists at large in the United States, that we
knew had matched the terror watch list that came into this
country illegally, and that we didn't know where they were.
Right next to him sat Secretary Mayorkas. I said, what is the
policy of DHS when you know that somebody matches the terror
watch list? This is the reason we are having this hearing
because he could not explain to this committee that DHS
actually has a policy to detain those people. He couldn't
explain his policy. That is why we are here because there are
people on the terror watch list.
Mr. Drummond, or Attorney General Drummond, can you tell us
the extent of the damages that are being done in Oklahoma as a
result of the illegal immigration, the 8 million people who
have entered this country illegally?
Mr. Drummond. We shut down an illegal grow every day in the
State of Oklahoma, where we detain and arrest upwards of dozens
of people. They're refilled the next day with those who cross
the border from either in a Mexican cartel or a Chinese
syndicated crime organization. It is ceaseless.
Mr. Pfluger. Do you believe that the Department of Homeland
Security under the leadership of Secretary Mayorkas is
upholding the laws that we currently have on the books to stop
illegal immigration into this country?
Mr. Drummond. I think that there is a failure to enforce
the laws on parole, removal requirements, detention, and the
like.
Mr. Pfluger. I couldn't agree more. It was earlier said
that we Republicans are going to the border in polo shirts and
khaki pants, or something to that effect. Well, at least we are
going to the border and at least we are asking the questions
because when you talk to the Border Patrol agents, they will
tell you that there are no consequences. The consequences do
not exist. Deportation doesn't exist. The catch-and-release
policies are allowing people to flood into my community, San
Angelo, Texas, Midland, and Odessa.
The fentanyl deaths alone that have been catastrophic to
this country, over 100,000 people, should be the sole reason
that this committee comes together. I hope that my colleagues
on the other side of the aisle, when given your time, will
examine the facts. The facts are that over 8 million people
have come into this country illegally. The facts are that the
Secretary of Homeland Security has not secured our country
against terrorism, against fentanyl, against criminal gangs,
against traffickers, against sex slavery, against any of it. He
is complicit. In fact, he is willfully complicit, which is why
he needs to be impeached.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize Mr. Thanedar, the gentleman from Michigan,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Green, and thank you to
our witnesses for being here today.
Professor Bowman, would you say that Secretary Mayorkas has
done anything that rise to the level of high crime and
misdemeanor?
Mr. Bowman. No, Congressman.
Mr. Thanedar. Now, we know our immigration system is
broken. For decades there is not much work done to reform our
immigration system. Secretary Mayorkas should not bear the
blame for the inherent flaws within the system he has
inherited.
My appeal to my Republican colleagues here is that rather
than getting bogged down in an impeachment process that seems
needless and devoid of Constitutional authority, let's shift
our focus, working together in fixing our broken immigration
system. Our broken immigration system is causing our Nation a
loss of billions and trillion dollars in economic growth.
When I was 24 years old, living in India, having gotten
admission into a Ph.D. program here, and I made many trips to
the American embassy in Mumbai to get a student visa, and the
embassy kept denying me my student visa. They denied my student
visa for four times, and only on the fifth time I got my visa
approved because the counselor who had denied my visa for the
four times had gone to America for her vacation.
I mean, there is no doubt the system is broken. We are
losing. Businesses keep telling me that they can't find a
qualified, skilled work force that they need to grow the
businesses. Australia and Canada has taken advantage of our
broken immigration system to attract highly-skilled workers
that our businesses need to grow and stay on top of innovation.
We know immigrants are 60 percent less likely to be
incarcerated than their native counterparts.
I just want to take this time to appeal across the aisle to
let us spend our energies and our Constitutional authority to
solve the problems, to fix the broken immigration system that
we have not dealt with for decades. Let's not blame the
Secretary for our broken immigration system, but let's fix it
to help our economy, create jobs, and make things better for
all.
Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr. Garbarino,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
witnesses for being here today.
You know, I have heard a lot of the statements coming from
my colleagues, and they are acting like we have come here on a
whim. We are not here on a whim. You know, we haven't come here
lightly to this hearing today. There have been problems at the
border for years, and now every State of the Nation--every
State in the Nation--is seeing those effects negatively.
I just look at my own State of New York and the costs of
dealing with the crisis at the border, and we have been begging
the administration to do something for years. Nothing has been
done. We are not here on a whim. Something has to be done.
So that is why we--here we are. If leadership can't follow
the laws of the land--follow the laws of the land. It is not
just policy. There are laws. They are written. There are laws
on the books, and they are being ignored right now by the
current administration and the current Secretary. If they can't
follow the laws that are on the books, we need to find someone
who will.
So I think we have taken the time and necessary steps to
arrive here in a proper manner. It has taken a while, and our
country, there has been a disservice because of that, it has
taken so long. But we are here today, and I appreciate you all
being here.
I am going to start with Mr. Attorney General Drummond. You
have described Oklahoma's challenge with the explosion of
unlicensed and illicit drug manufacturing in the State
following the Secretary Mayorkas becoming the leader of
Homeland Security. Can you describe more about the challenges
of Oklahoma law enforcement--that Oklahoma law enforcement
faces in confronting this illegal activity, especially for
rural police and sheriff's departments who have limited
resources?
Mr. Drummond. Let me give you a tangible example,
Representative. One recent drug bust at an illegal grow
operation, our agents were processing those who had committed
felonies and been detained and those that were simply being
trafficked in labor and sex. One of those was identified as an
individual on an HSI detainer for illegal entry. He was
supposed to be in Flushing, New York. He was supposed to have
on an ankle monitor. When we contacted the field representative
in HSI, they said, you know, charge him with a felony, we'll
come pick him up. But he, in fact, had not committed a felony.
Then we were instructed to say, please direct him to turn
himself into the nearest HSI field office. So we did that and
let him go. That happens day-in and day-out across Oklahoma,
where we don't have the resources afforded to detain those that
we know are illegally in the State committing crimes or
complicit in the committing of crimes.
Mr. Garbarino. You would like--in New York, we have laws
that actually direct that they automatically be released and we
see crime after crime after crime be committed by the same
person. In New York, big State like New York, you think we
would have the ability--we do have the ability to keep people
in prison and stop crimes from happening. Our laws direct us
not to. But at least in Oklahoma, you would like to be able to
make sure that these criminals are not released back out.
Mr. Drummond. Now New York has one fewer. We have him.
Mr. Garbarino. Good. Another crisis, Mr. Attorney General,
that has resulted from the unprecedented chaos at the Southwest
Southern Border is the explosion of fentanyl poisonings in this
country. We have seen many, far too many, in New York.
From 2018 to 2022, Oklahoma experienced a 735 percent
increase in fentanyl deaths, according to the Oklahoma Bureau
of Narcotics. Oklahoma has a unique status, sitting just north
of Texas and right along major routes, routes away from the
Southwest Border for both drug and human smuggling. Can you
talk about how the fentanyl crisis over the past few years has
impacted your State?
Mr. Drummond. So with the legalization of marijuana in
Oklahoma, it's not become the drug of choice to cross the
border. Fentanyl is now the drug of choice.
I take exception with the representative who said it is
just to say no. It is a crisis in which we find fentanyl laced
in many drugs, such that we instruct our young children to test
every pill. If you think you're taking a pain pill, it's
probably laced with fentanyl. We can trace those back to the
porous border through which the fentanyl product comes in
concert with the Mexican cartels and the Chinese syndicated
organizations.
Mr. Garbarino. This is for any of the attorney generals. We
get a lot of unaccompanied alien children in New York. Have you
witnessed in your State these children being used for purposes
of sex trafficking or other forms of exploitation? Anyone can
jump in and grab it.
Mr. Drummond. I will jump in quickly with an example. We
busted a grow in northwest Oklahoma City and in which there
were two minor young women from China that were being sex
trafficked. We have intercepted communication in mainland China
where they're effectively posting jobs to come to Oklahoma,
``as massage spa,'' ``able to endure hardships,'' ``good
hygiene''. Yet these young women are being exploited, and we
don't have a remedy to take care of them.
Mr. Garbarino. Quickly.
Mr. Bailey. I know Missouri now ranks fourth on the list of
the States with the highest rates of human trafficking. In
2021, there were 1,100 reported cases, detected, cases of human
trafficking in the State of Missouri; 327 victims identified.
Mr. Knudsen. Congressman, human trafficking has increased
in my State multiple hundred percent since 2019. I think that
answers your question.
Mr. Garbarino. Yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Rhode Island, Mr.
Magaziner.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman. I have been listening
to all of my Republican colleagues throughout this hearing, and
I am still struggling to understand what high crime they
believe the Secretary has committed. I have heard that he
hasn't achieved operational control, defined as not a single
person crossing the border illegally. No administration has met
that standard.
I have heard them say that he has failed to detain everyone
who is undocumented, who has come across the border. No
administration has.
Under the Biden administration, Secretary Mayorkas has
removed 3 million undocumented people from this country. So
when I hear my colleagues say that deportation does not exist,
I can think of 3 million people who would disagree with that.
He has continued construction of a border wall that many of
us question the effectiveness of. When the Secretary and the
President were asked, do you think the wall works, they say,
no, we don't think it works, but we are building it because the
law requires us to do it. They are following the law.
We face difficult challenges at the Southern Border. There
is no question instability in other countries has driven people
to come to the United States, and it has created a chaotic
situation. But, unfortunately, rather than working with us and
the President and the Secretary to address these challenges,
too many of my Republican colleagues are focused more on
partisan grandstanding and campaigning, including this
impeachment theater.
So here is the real truth. President Biden and Secretary
Mayorkas have taken steps to try to secure the borders, but
House Republicans have tried to obstruct them every step of the
way because they want a campaign issue more than they want to
fix the problem.
Here are the facts. In 2022, Democrats passed and the
President signed $86 billion for enhanced border security: more
personnel, more funding for ICE, additional technology. Two
hundred House Republicans voted against that funding, including
every single Republican Member of this committee who was in
office at the time.
This year, in 2023, House Republicans passed their so-
called Limit, Save, Grow Act, which would have cut the
Department of Homeland Security's budget by 22 percent,
eliminating 2,400 CBP officers. Every Republican Member of the
House voted for that bill, a 22 percent cut. The Republican
Limit, Save, Grow Act, I guess, is to limit Border Patrol and
grow chaos.
This year, this past year, President Biden requested $84
million in his budget to help States and cities with the costs
associated with incoming migrants. House Republicans proposed
cutting that funding to zero.
So to the State officials who are here, who are coming from
States that are having challenges with the migrant crisis, I
have got bad news for you. Our Republican colleagues are trying
to zero out the line item in the budget to help States and
cities. I am a former State treasurer myself, and that is
deeply, deeply distressing.
Of course, most recently, in October, President Biden
requested $14 billion in supplemental funding for border
enforcement. That would add 1,300 Border Patrol agents, 1,000
CBP officers. But House Republicans have not called a vote on
this funding. They will say, well, there are other things in it
that we don't like.
You know, there is a growing pro-Putin wing in the House
Republican Caucus that doesn't like Ukraine funding. They don't
want more asylum judges, even though that is part of how we
solve the problem at the border. Fine. Call a vote on the parts
that you do like, the CBP agents, Border Patrol. You have been
sitting on it for 3 months. If you really, truly cared about
solving the problem, you would call a vote. Instead, they have
been sitting on it for 3 months, then went on vacation for a
month, while Secretary Mayorkas was meeting with Senate
Republicans and Senate Democrats to try to come up with a
border plan, and House Republicans were MIA.
I know what my colleagues are going to say. They are going
to say, well, we did H.R. 2. We are trying to do something.
Don't forget what is in H.R. 2. All right. H.R. 2 would require
nonprofit organizations to verify the citizenship of the people
they were serving or else they would risk losing their Federal
funding. It would request coffee shops all across the country,
small businesses, to do citizenship checks of their employees.
Zero out the funding for legal assistance for minors, so that
once again, we would have 5-year-olds going into court and
standing in front of judges with no lawyers.
We tried to negotiate with them. We tried to put in
amendments to make that bill better, but, of course, they
wouldn't work with us.
So let's not forget what is really going on here. The
Secretary is trying to do his job. House Republicans have been
obstructing him every step of the way and are now trying to
impeach him. Because this is about politics for many of them,
it is not about solving the problem at the border, which is
what we should be doing.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Georgia, Ms. Greene,
for her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like to bring up that nothing spells impeachment
theater unlike the--or, you know, the last impeachment of our
former President of the United States, Donald J. Trump. That
was quite a political sham impeachment. But today we are
talking about a real impeachment that needs to take place.
There have been over 20 occasions that Secretary Mayorkas
has claimed that the border is either closed or secure,
starting even back in 2021, when he is on record stating the
border is secure. The border is closed. Again, the border is
closed. The border is secure. He stated to FOX News Peter
Doocy, the border is closed.
Then he stated again to Congressman Pfluger here on this
committee. Congressman Pfluger asked him, he said the border is
secure. We are executing our plan, as he stated to Congressman
Pfluger. Secretary Mayorkas said, I have been very clear and
unequivocal in that regard, Congressman. The border is no less
secure than it was previously.
He also stated to Congressman Michael Guest on our
committee when he was asked by Congressman Guest, ``Do you
maintain today, in light of the statements made by Chief Ortiz,
that the border is secure?'' Secretary Mayorkas replied,
``Congressman, I stand by my prior assessment because, indeed,
I define it as maximizing the resources we have to deliver the
most effective results.''
His results have been quite effective. Here are some of
Secretary Mayorkas' effective results. Approximately 10 million
illegal border crossers from over 160 countries have invaded
the United States since President Biden took office and
Secretary Mayorkas started his job. This is a number combined
with over 8 million encounters and over 1.8 million gotaways.
In September 2023, over 341,000 illegal border crossers
invaded our country, surpassing all national records. Secretary
Mayorkas is bringing the results.
In fiscal year 2023, there were over 3 million illegals who
invaded the border, the highest number of yearly illegal alien
encounters in U.S. history. That far surpasses those that were
supposedly deported.
There have been approximately 73,000 special interest
aliens arrested at our border. Those are the ones that we know
of, ladies and gentlemen. There is over 1.8 million gotaways,
and we have no idea how many in that 1.8 million or more are
terrorists are from terrorist nations. We don't know where they
are, what they are doing, and what their plans are for the
United States of America, including the States that you are
working very hard to protect. These are some impressive
results.
Most impressive for American taxpayers is the total Federal
expenditures, and this is just in 2023, stands at
66,449,136,000. But let's talk about total State and local
expenditures, stands at 115,608,730,000. The total national
expenditures for border crossers for 2023 stands at
182,057,865,000. That is an unbelievable expense for the
American people and the American taxpayers.
What are the results from Secretary Mayorkas' job
performance? He has violated the Secure Fence Act of 2006 by
not maintaining operational control of our border. He has
violated the Immigration and Nationality Act. He has violated
the INI by implementing catch-and-release policies when Federal
law specifically mandates the detention and removal of
inadmissible aliens. He has violated the INI. He has violated
the guarantee clause set forth in Article IV, section 4 of the
Constitution, which requires the Federal Government to protect
States against invasion.
I would like to just finish with asking each one of you, in
your position and your experience and the problems that each of
you were dealing with, do you believe that Secretary Mayorkas'
actions and refusal to enforce the laws warrant impeachment?
Mr. Knudsen. Absolutely, Congresswoman.
Mr. Drummond. He has failed to perform and is culpably
inefficient, yes.
Mr. Bailey. The Secretary is acting in violation of the law
and Constitutional order.
Ms. Greene. Thank you very much.
I yield back my time, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mrs. Ramirez from Illinois for her 5
minutes of questioning.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman.
After a year in this room, after more than 15 hearings and
approximately 45 hours of talking and talking and talking about
the border, we come back to committee not to address 30 years
of failed border policy and political inaction that has created
humanitarian crisis on our borders, but to pursue a baseless
impeachment. Today marks the 16th wasted hearing on the border.
Mr. Bowman, give me a yes or no. Based on your knowledge
and expertise on impeachments, do you agree that, historically,
impeachments have been an important tool to ensure
accountability in our democratic institutions? Yes or no?
Mr. Bowman. Yes.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you. Mr. Bowman, if you could be
concise with just one sentence, are you aware of any Federal
offense Secretary Mayorkas has committed that could amount to
an impeachable offense?
Mr. Bowman. No.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you. For the record, because I think
you have had to answer this a couple of times, yes or no, in
your expert opinion, is there a legitimate basis for this
impeachment?
Mr. Bowman. No.
Mrs. Ramirez. In your opinion, in today's hearing, is this
an effective use of committee resources? Yes or no?
Mr. Bowman. I don't know that's a question I'm an expert in
answering. I think that's a question for the committee.
Mrs. Ramirez. Well, let me answer that. I believe it is not
the right use of our time here because I think that we should
be here identifying ways to address solutions.
So these impeachment proceedings demonstrate that some of
my Republican colleagues take them seriously. They are willing
to take impeachment, an important tool for accountability, and
make a mockery of it for political gain.
This is how I know that they are not taking the
humanitarian crisis within our border seriously, because
impeachment will not make our borders any safer for our
communities or for asylum seekers. It will not address the
conditions across Latin America that motivate families to
migrate across jungles and deserts to our Southern Border. So
if they were serious, they would be taking up any of the topics
on this list of 16--16--possible policy solutions and 16
legislative actions that require us, Congresspeople, to
advance, including today, we have wasted 16 hearings on
political theater that could have been better served
considering policies on 16 actions right here behind me. Let me
read them for the record.
We could be expanding work permits. We could be increasing
border personnel to expand assistance to new arrivals. We could
be modernizing legal pathways to citizenship. We could be
granting immigration parole instead of fighting it. We could be
addressing and preparing for climate migration. We could be
investing in economic development of Latin American
communities. We can end the Monroe Doctrine. We can allocate
resettlement funding for displaced populations. We can lift and
reform time-based immigration bars. We can modernize
definitions, standards in our antiquated system. We can
establish humanitarian standards. We can improve upon
adjudicatory processing capacity. We can increase personnel to
reduce USCIS backlogs. We can implement Federal coordination of
resettlement to interior cities.
Let me take a breath. Now let me go to the 15th. We can
strengthen democracy and combat corruption in Latin America. We
can pass H.R. 16, the American Dream and Promise Act. Because
fentanyl is, in fact, an issue in this country, let me add a
17th one, since if we wanted to work, we can actually get
things done. We could actually fund technological resources to
prevent fentanyl from being smuggled through our ports of entry
by U.S. Americans.
So let me say to you, as a proud daughter of immigrants,
the wife of a dreamer, and a Representative of Illinois 3, I am
here to get things done. We have to get serious about
addressing every policy opportunity listed behind me today.
We could start by expediting work permits. Because let's
just be honest. To me, Congress, this institution, this chamber
represents a sacred responsibility to come together to realize
the solutions and problems impacting our constituents.
Let me tell you, the persecution of immigrants and
Secretary Mayorkas is not going to change the price of milk in
your district. It is not going to address the shrinking tax
base in your district. It is not going to fill the vacant
positions of industries in your local businesses. Action will.
Action will address the historic labor shortage. It will
increase our revenue through taxes. It will reduce supply and
distribution chain challenges, and it will grow our GDP by 1.7
trillion over the next decade.
So if we are serious to address this border issue, then
let's actually get to do the work that addresses border policy,
because policy in action speaks louder than the 16 hearings and
the 48 hours of talk and talk and soundbites and photo ops at
the border. I have been to the border. My mother crossed it. I
was there with her. I am serious about the work we can do here.
Are you?
Thank you, Chairman. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize the Vice Chair of the committee, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Guest, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I begin my question, I have something I would like
to submit for the record.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to submit for the record a post
from January 15, 2019, titled, ``The Case for Impeachment of
Donald Trump, Part 3,'' written by Mr. Bowman, one of our
witnesses today, in which he takes a very highly--a view of
impeachment in which he says that then-President Donald Trump
could be impeached over foreign policy differences. I quote
from that article. It said, ``Surely we can impeach a President
for needless shattering a basket of good treaties and entire
intricate web of foreign relations they support. Consider Mr.
Trump's rolling destruction of America's foreign policy,'' and
goes on to say, ``There is powerful evidence that the Framers
included conducts damaging to the U.S. policy a category of
impeachable behavior.''
I think that that contradicts the testimony that we have
heard here today, Mr. Chairman, from Mr. Bowman. So I would
like to submit this article for the record.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Impeachable Offenses?--The Use & Abuse of Impeachment in the 21st
Century
the case for impeachment of donald trump, part 3 (foreign policy)
15 Tuesday--Jan 2019
POSTED BY IMPEACHABLE OFFENSES IN UNCATEGORIZED
By Frank Bowman
Among the most persistent misconceptions about impeachment under
the United States constitution is that indictable criminal conduct is a
prerequisite for impeachment. The prevalence of this error is easy to
understand inasmuch as the textual standard for impeachable conduct is
``Treason, Bribery, or other other high Crimes and Misdemeanors''--a
phrase that sounds like it refers to crime of the customary sort.
However, as has been repeatedly discussed on this blog and as virtually
all serious students of impeachment recognize, the phrase ``high Crimes
and Misdemeanors'' was adopted by the Framers from British and early
American impeachment practice and extended to a wide variety of non-
criminal official ineptitude or misbehavior. There is powerful evidence
that the Framers included conduct severely damaging to U.S. foreign
policy interests in the category of impeachable behavior.
During the Constitutional Convention of 1787, the delegates decided
that Presidents and other Federal officers could be impeached, but they
wrestled over what conduct should be impeachable. Various formulations
were advanced. As the convention rounded into the home stretch, the
phrase that had taken hold was ``treason or bribery.''
George Mason objected because he thought ``treason and bribery''
far too narrow. Mason was a student of British impeachment and had
authored the post-revolutionary impeachment provisions of the Virginia
State constitution. He wanted a Federal impeachment remedy analogous to
British practice at least in the conduct it covered, even if not in the
sorts of brutal personal punishments Parliament could impose.
``Treason,'' Mason said, ``will not reach many great and dangerous
offences. Hastings is not guilty of treason.'' He was referring to the
impeachment trial of Warren Hastings, Governor General India, just
about to start in England. Mason wanted American impeachments to reach
beyond the two indictable crimes of treason and bribery to important
breaches of public trust in both the domestic and foreign sphere, the
kinds of offenses charged against Hastings.
Mason's solution was to add the word ``maladministration'' after
bribery. But James Madison rose to object, saying, ``So vague a term
will be equivalent to a tenure during pleasure of the Senate.''
Mason thought the matter over and came back with a compromise. Omit
``maladministration'' but add to treason and bribery ``other high
crimes and misdemeanors.'' The new language passed 8 States to 3.
Mason's choice of ``high crimes and misdemeanors'' was not
whimsical. Rather, he lifted it from British practice where, beginning
in the 1600's, Parliament increasingly (though not invariably) used
this phrase to describe conduct it charged as impeachable. My study of
British and American impeachments convinces me that ``high crimes and
misdemeanors'' does not limit Congressional impeachment power to the
necessarily idiosyncratic and antique list of misdeeds Parliament had
addressed by 1787. Both Parliament and the Framers were acutely
conscious that the sorts of dangerous public misconduct for which
impeachment is a necessary remedy could not easily be described in
advance. However, the Framers' choice of ``high crimes and
misdemeanors'' does set the baseline minimum for the scope of American
impeachments. In other words, American officials are properly
impeachable for at least the range of conduct covered by British
practice.
A persistent theme in British impeachments was the charge that the
impeached minister had pursued a policy at odds with the nation's basic
foreign policy interests. Impeachments on this ground were a constant
beginning with the charges against William de la Pole in 1450 for his
role in arranging the marriage of Henry VI to Margaret of Anjou. The
Duke of Buckingham was impeached in 1626 in part for loaning English
ships to the French to employ against the Protestant Huguenots at
Rochelle. In 1678, the Earl of Danby was impeached for assisting King
Charles in negotiations with France for British neutrality in the
Franco-Dutch War. Lords Oxford, Bolingbroke, and Strafford were
impeached in 1715 for their advocacy of the Treaty of Utrecht, which
was widely despised as selling out Britain's Dutch allies in favor of
making accommodations with Britain's traditional enemy France. And
Warren Hastings' 1787 impeachment, so central to George Mason's
thinking, centered on fundamental disagreements about the proper
relationship of Great Britain to its Indian possessions and the states
that abutted them.
Over and over again; Parliament employed impeachment to assert an
authority independent of the royal executive to define the nation's
true foreign policy interests. That Congress has believed itself to
have similar authority is demonstrated by the first impeachment in
American history, that of Senator William Blount, charged in 1797 with
conspiring to assist the British in acquiring Spanish territory in
Florida. Blount was acquitted, but only because there were doubts that
senators are ``civil officers'' subject to impeachment and because he
had already resigned.
During the 1788 ratification debates on the Federal constitution,
James Madison insisted that a President who made a treaty that
``violated the interest of the nation'' and convinced the Senate to
ratify it could be impeached. 3 Jonathan Elliot, The Debates in Several
State Conventions of the Adoption of the Federal Constitution 500
(1827). If, in the considered opinion of the architect of the American
Constitution, a President can be impeached for inveigling the Senate
into one bad treaty, we surely can impeach a President for heedlessly
shattering a basket of good treaties and the entire intricate web of
foreign relationships they support without so much as a by-your-leave.
Consider Mr. Trump's rolling destruction of American foreign
policy. (And assume that his actions flow merely from caprice or bad
judgment, and are not, bizarre though it seems to say such a thing, the
result of his having been compromised by Russia.)
To summarize, in the seventy-odd years since the Second World War,
generations of American Presidents, legislators, soldiers, and
diplomats have labored to create a world order of multilateral
institutions and agreements with the United States at its center. That
order has averted nuclear annihilation, prevented conventional war
between the major powers, secured a stable, democratic Europe and an
increasingly prosperous and stable East Asia, managed the fall of
Soviet communism, and overseen a fairly universal rise in human
material welfare, all while maintaining the United States as the single
indispensable world power. All has not been wine and roses for
everybody, of course. Humanity is on the verge of destroying the
world's ecosystem through climate change, pollution, and habitat
destruction. And global overpopulation and income inequality pose
continuing threats to individual well-being and regional peace.
However, the looming existential crises of the age can only be
addressed (if they can be at all) through increased collaboration and
cooperation across borders. Most importantly for present purposes,
whatever else one may think about the post-World War II world order, it
has been hugely advantageous for the United States, placing this
country at the center of all important decisions about international
trade, finance, technology, and security.
Since his election, Mr. Trump has moved steadily in the direction
of unilaterally dismantling the United States' foreign policy, trade,
and security architecture by formally abandoning or denigrating every
form of multilateral engagement from the Paris Climate Accords, to the
Trans-Pacific Partnership, to the Iran Nuclear Accord, to the World
Trade Organization, to a nuclear weapons treaty with Russia, to the
United Nations, not to speak of our most fundamental military alliance,
NATO. [He has consistently quarreled with our oldest democratic allies,
while cozying up to autocracies across the globe: Duterte's
Philippines, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman's Saudi Arabia, Viktor
Orban's Hungary, Recep Erdogan's Turkey, and, of course, Vladimir
Putin's Russia. The result is that, if allowed to continue, Trump will,
singlehandedly, transform America's position among the nations, from
being the leader (however imperfect) of the free world and
indispensable fulcrum in every realm of hard and soft power to a
diminished, cranky, ungenerous, avowedly self-absorbed friend of
tyrants and oligarchs.
It is of particular moment that Trump is taking the country down
this path singlehandedly. The policies he is pursuing are not the
policies of the party under whose banner he ran. They are not the
policies recommended to him by the vast bulk of civilian and military
leaders and experts in his administration. Indeed, as recently
demonstrated by the resignation of Secretary of Defense Mattis
following Trump's sudden decision to withdraw entirely from Syria and
partially from Afghanistan, they are often undertaken against the
explicit opposition of those persons. They do not emerge from any
process of study or consultation. They proceed from his personal whims
(or, though I shudder to to contemplate it, perhaps from directions or
suggestions provided by Vladimir Putin), abetted by a very small
coterie of courtiers. In the case of the Syrian withdrawal, the
decision apparently occurred literally in the middle of a phone
conversation between Trump and Turkish President Erdogan. Trump's
position on foreign policy is ``l'etat c'est moi.'' That is not the
design of the United States Constitution.
President Trump can do these things in part because Congress has,
quite unwisely, acquiesced in the doubtful doctrine that, while two-
thirds of the Senate must vote to ratify a treaty, a President may
withdraw from it without consent of Congress or anyone else. As
pernicious as this legislative timidity has been in principle, one
could excuse it on the ground that Congress has assumed with some
justice that Presidents would be cautious, judicious, and consultative
before taking so drastic a step. While that confidence has not always
been justified, it generally has.
However, in Mr. Trump, the country has for the first time a
President who combines a near-complete lack of understanding of
history, finance, trade, military affairs, or diplomacy with supreme
confidence that he, and no one else, knows exactly how to arrange
matters in all these arenas. In short, the electoral system has placed
in the White House the ignorant demagogue that the Framers feared at a
time when the system of institutional checks they installed to deal
with such an eventuality has atrophied so far as to be nearly useless.
Catastrophe looms unless Congress recognizes the danger and reasserts
the powers the Constitution gave it.
Some of the foreign policy damage Trump is doing could be prevented
or at least ameliorated if Congress woke up and employed the tools
short of impeachment at its disposal. That said, there is little
question that the Constitutional impeachment power includes a situation
in which a President is inflicting irreparable harm on the Nation's
position in the world and will not be dissuaded.
About impeachableoffenses
Frank Bowman is the Floyd R. Gibson Missouri Endowed Professor at the
University of Missouri School of Law. He is a former Federal and State
prosecutor, sometime criminal defense attorney, and author of ``High
Crimes & Misdemeanors: A History of Impeachment for the Age of Trump''
(Cambridge University Press 2019).

Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To our witnesses, thank
you for being here today.
We see the numbers on the Southwest Border continue to grow
exponentially each and every day. As our attorney generals
know, you are more aware of these numbers than we are because
you deal with the after-effects. Those 300,000 that came across
the border just last month, many of those will end up in your
communities. Your testimonies, as I have read them, say that
your communities, your States, your cities, that you will be
responsible for housing, for feeding, for educating, for health
care.
You talk about the strain that this is going to be placing
on the criminal justice system. Then you also talk about the
total lack of response from our Federal Government.
So first, I want to apologize to you that you are not
getting the help that you need from the Federal Government. The
help that you need is not us sending you money after these
immigrants have come into your community. The help that you
need is us stopping the immigrants from coming across the
border. What we saw is we need policies similar to what we saw
under the previous administration, where we were able to stop
immigrants from coming across the border.
The last two witnesses on the other side try to place blame
on this, on the Republican Party, that we need to be doing
more. I know that our attorney generals know, and I hope those
watching on television know that this Republican Party has done
our part. We have passed H.R. 2, the most comprehensive
immigration package that has been made through at least the
House of Representatives in decades would substantially
overhaul the crisis that we see.
In addition to that, we passed our House appropriations
bill dealing with homeland security. In that House
appropriations bill, we added additional Border Patrol agents.
We added merit pay bonuses for those agents who had been there
for a while. We put money in the budget for technology. We even
said, hey, we got to get back to building the wall, something
that I think many of us will agree has to be part of that
comprehensive package.
So for my friends across the aisle who want to place a
blame on Republicans that we haven't done anything, look at our
bills that are sitting over there on Chuck Schumer's desk, that
he is not taking up in the Senate. As they continue to sit
there, as they continue to fiddle, Rome burns, and you are
having to deal with the aftermath of that.
So I have a question for you, and Marjorie Taylor Greene
talked a little bit about this. We have repeatedly had the
Secretary here, he has come here time and time and time again.
Every time that he has been asked a question by me and my
colleagues, he has repeatedly said that our Southwest Border is
secure. Regardless of the facts and figures and anything
statistically you show him where that is not the case, that is
what he continues to hang his hat on, that this border is
secure and that there is no crisis. Well, we know there is a
crisis because you see it.
So my question here in the last, just 30 seconds that I
have and I'm going to ask all four of our witnesses a very
simple yes or no question. Do you believe that there is a
crisis at the Southern Border and is the border secure?
So I guess I am going to ask each of you two questions. Is
the border secure? We will start there. The second one is, do
you believe that there is a crisis?
Attorney General Knudsen, we will begin with you.
Mr. Knudsen. Congressman, the Southern Border is absolutely
not secure, and this is far beyond a crisis at this point.
Mr. Drummond. Similarly, it is not secure and we have a
crisis.
Mr. Guest. General Bowman--General Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. The border is not secure in the crisis of
historically epic proportion.
Mr. Guest. Mr. Bowman.
Mr. Bowman. As I said at the outset, I'm not an expert on
immigration policy. I don't have any opinion on this question.
Mr. Guest. What is your personal opinion?
Mr. Bowman. My personal opinion is that there is, as there
has been for decades and indeed probably a century-and-a-half
in this country, a lot of controversy about immigration policy.
There's controversy about the way in which immigration policy
is being administered to the Southern Border. I think at the
moment we seem to have more problems in that area than we've
had in some past eras. Yes.
Mr. Guest. Thank you for your very politically correct
answer.
So with that, I yield back.
Mr. Brecheen [presiding]. Thank you. The Chair now
recognizes Mr. Ivey of Maryland for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank all of
you all for coming today.
Just briefly, I wanted to respond to the comment about
legislation sitting on Senator Schumer's desk. You know, with
respect to H.R. 2, I think it was clear before it was passed,
frankly, as we came through the committee here, Democrats
offered amendments, all of which were rejected. Republicans put
in poison pill language, especially with respect to not only
abortion on some of these bills, but cutting off Federal
funding to agencies and, you know, social support groups, like
Red Cross, Catholic Church, and the like. So, the fact that you
sent it over there knowing it was DOA, I think, is not much to
praise for the effort.
But more importantly, although Speaker Johnson sent all of
us home 3 weeks early, the Senate stayed, and the Democrats and
Republicans were actually working on bipartisan legislation to
try and address the border crisis, working with the White House
and, yes, Secretary Mayorkas to try and find an agreement.
Meanwhile, the House Republicans, instead of working with that
group and joining in those negotiations, did a road trip to
Texas for a photo op opportunity to talk about the issues at
the border.
So, if we want to get serious about it--oh, and by the way,
President Biden sent supplemental legislation, and I think it
was in September, for additional funding. No response from the
Republican colleagues.
So, you know, part of that, that is one of the minor things
addressed in this article behind me, ``Worst Congress Ever.''
That goes to the ineffectiveness of this Congress under the
House Republican leadership to get anything done that is
critical.
We have probably gone through the issues of pending
legislation, Israel, Ukraine, FISA, all the things that haven't
got done that need to get done. The border is another one. I
hope my Republican colleagues will get busy on that.
With respect to the actual issue of impeachment from a
legal standpoint, I went through the testimony that the
generals provided. I only saw two paragraphs in all three of
your testimonies with respect to that, and none of it actually
spoke to the language in the Constitution with respect to
treason, bribery, high crimes, and misdemeanors. I thought that
was interesting.
You know, Professor Turley, who is not necessarily my
favorite, but Republicans seem to like him, he testifies a lot.
In fact, at the opening hearing for the impeachment hearings
against Joseph Biden, the Oversight Committee leadership called
three experts to testify. Turley was one of the three. One of
the things Turley said, like he is saying here, is that there
is no basis for impeachment. He has taken this position with
respect to Secretary Mayorkas. You know, the fact that none of
the witnesses that have been called today by the Republicans
actually have that kind of experience with respect to
impeachment and expertise in it, I thought was interesting.
I will add this, too. You can put it down. We want to add
to the record a couple of documents. One is the Turley letter,
which I will offer in a moment. But the second is a letter, an
op-ed that was written by Joshua Metz and Norm Eisen, who are
Members--who were former Members of the House Judiciary
Committee, who have actually worked on impeachment hearings
before. They talked about the absence of evidence to support
impeachment here on a couple of respects that I think are
important that we go through.
One is the issue of maladministration. So the Framers, when
they put the provision in, and they went through different
iterations of it, but they ended up with the language they have
got but excluded a term like ``maladministration'' so that we
wouldn't have impeachment hearings for policy differences.
Because, and this is James Madison, if we did that, the Senate
could be picking and choosing and throwing out people just on
policy disagreements where really that we should leave that to
the President. The President gets to make a selection, pick his
Cabinet or her Cabinet, hopefully one day, and make the
decisions on who should be ruling there.
The issue here, and that is pointed out in the Eisen
letter, and with respect to the group of professors led by
Laurence Tribe and others who point this out, this is just a
maladministration dispute. My colleagues over here talking
about the border has run amok and all of that, and, you know, I
hear that point, but that is just a policy difference. In the
testimony that was given, points about bribery, treason, high
crimes, and misdemeanors don't seem to have been made. There is
no legal violation. There is no criminal act. There is no basis
that the Framers were looking for to remove a Cabinet member
from office. That is a very serious step.
By the way, I got a printout of all of the impeachment
legislation that my colleagues had put together. I think Ms.
Taylor Greene alone just has 8 impeachment resolutions in this
Congress. Eight. Three, I think, against Secretary Mayorkas.
So if we are going to be serious about this, let's try and
get to the issues with respect to the actual legal piece.
I apologize, Mr. Chairman, but I will conclude there. I
look forward to actually having a debate and experts who can
speak to this from expertise or scholarship on the issue of the
standards for impeachment.
Mr. Brecheen. The gentleman yields.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
LaLota, for his 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. LaLota. More than any other Cabinet Secretary in
America's history, Secretary Mayorkas is failing America. But
don't take my word for it. Sixty-eight percent of Americans
disapprove of the Biden administration's handling of the
Southern Border. Sixty-eight percent. Seventy-five percent of
Americans see the border situation as either a crisis or a
serious problem. Seventy-five percent. So while our country is
divided on so many policy issues, there is overwhelming support
from across America for Secretary Mayorkas to finally secure
our Southern Border, 68 percent and 75 percent.
Yet the administration and my colleagues from the other
side of the aisle won't change their border policies. Secretary
Mayorkas won't change his policies or approach. The
administration won't reinstate Remain in Mexico and blue cities
won't repeal their sanctuary city policies. Secretary Mayorkas
won't change his border policies, all while tens of thousands
of Americans are dying from the fentanyl being smuggled across
his open border. Secretary Mayorkas won't and can't properly
vet the tens of thousands of migrants he is paroling into our
country from nations with whom America is adversarial. So here
we are.
So what do we in this Congress do when somewhere around 75
percent of our constituents, and, by the way, from blue
districts and red districts and purple districts, want
accountability? Seventy-five percent. What do we do when tens
of thousands of Americans are dying? What do we do when
potentially hundreds of terrorist sleeper cells are being
hatched every day inside of America's borders? What do we do?
Do we do nothing? Do we wrap ourselves in some sort of
bureaucracy and find some sort of legal reasoning not to do
anything or do we act?
Let me state quite clearly that I do not take impeachment
lightly. Impeachment is meant for the most serious, grave
circumstances when there is a true failure and willful
dereliction of duty has occurred. In this case, Secretary
Mayorkas has committed three specific violations which warrant
impeachment. He has neglected his duty to secure our border. He
has abused his power to exercise proper discretion over
America's immigration process. Secretary Mayorkas has breached
America's public trust.
No matter what the Secretary or the President say, the
numbers speak for themselves. Since President Biden has been in
office there have been 4.5 million migrant encounters at the
Southwest Border, in addition to over 1.2 million gotaways who
evaded U.S. Border Patrol agents in the last 2 years. Those
numbers are larger than the population of Los Angeles, the
second-largest city in the United States.
Let me be abundantly clear, this is not the failure of the
hardworking men and women who are out there every day in the
front line of this crisis. This is a failure of leadership at
the highest levels, right up to Secretary Mayorkas and
President Biden.
While there are at least three criteria which merit
Secretary Mayorkas' impeachment and removal, today I would like
to focus on just one of them: Secretary Mayorkas neglecting his
duty to secure the border.
Attorney General Knudsen, good to be with you here today,
sir, and thanks for your hard work keeping your residents in
Montana safe. In October, sir, you joined a coalition of 27
State attorneys general in a petition urging Secretary Mayorkas
to end his policy of mass catch-and-release. I was hoping that
you could define, sir, for Americans who may be watching from
home today and maybe not so familiar with this topic, what
catch-and-release means, sir.
Mr. Knudsen. Thank you, Congressman. I can.
So, generally speaking, Congressman, under 8 U.S.C. 1225,
the law is very clear. The Secretary has a duty to detain every
single alien that enters the country, period, hard stop. Shall
be detained. There is one exception. There is a case-by-case
exception listed under section 1182, which allows, on a case-
by-case, individual temporary basis for either humanitarian or
for public justice reasons, an exception.
Under Secretary Mayorkas' direction that basically has been
turned into not a case-by-case analysis, but rather a mass
catch-and-release where those individuals are no longer given
an individual investigation, an individual notice to appear in
front of a judge. They were given a notice to report. That
appears nowhere in the Federal Register, that appears nowhere
in Federal law, and was basically used as a mass catch-and-
release program. So that is what we are talking about.
Mr. LaLota. So, would you agree that the mass catch-and-
release that is not done on a case-by-case basis is
inconsistent with the laws passed by Congress and signed into
law by Presidents of both parties?
Mr. Knudsen. Absolutely, Congressman. There is no legal
authority anywhere in Federal code for mass release of
immigrants into this country.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. I am out of time. I yield back.
Mr. Brecheen. The gentleman yields.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Menendez, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am frustrated that Republicans on this committee have
chosen to engage in this political exercise and are proceeding
to willfully misinterpret the U.S. Constitution and every
precedent from the past 250 years by impeaching Secretary
Mayorkas. Last week, one of our Republican colleagues said he
was not likely to support any compromised border bill because,
``I'm not willing to do too damn much right now to help a
Democrat and to help Joe Biden's approval rating. I will not
help the Democrats try to improve this man's dismal approval
ratings. I'm not going to do it. Why would I?''
Why would he? Because we need to work together to address
the critical issues that our committee has jurisdiction over,
because we owe it to our constituents and our communities to
meet this moment. But that is not what this hearing is about.
Because when you talk about approval ratings and not wanting to
help Democrats, not wanting to help this administration, not
wanting to help our President, you undermine the seriousness of
what is being discussed today, and you make clear what this has
always been a political pursuit.
Speaking of politics, I have a few yes or no questions for
the three attorney generals here today. You are all elected
officials, is that correct?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes.
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Bailey. I was appointed to my office subject to
election by the people.
Mr. Menendez. Understood. You are all Republicans, is that
correct?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes, sir.
Mr. Menendez. Last, in 2016 and 2020, President Trump won
in the States that you serve as attorney general of?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes.
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Menendez. So it is fair to conclude that it is
politically beneficial for you to be supportive of the former
President and his policies and oppose President Biden's
policies, as is the case for all of our Republican colleagues
here on this committee. But Constitutional law is clear on this
point. Policy, political differences are not appropriate
grounds for impeachment.
Mr. Bowman, is that correct, yes or no?
Mr. Bowman. It is.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you. House Republicans have said they
will not support ``another dime'' for DHS until the enactment
of H.R. 2, their extreme anti-immigrant border bill that would
severely restrict our legal immigration system, a bill that
would endanger migrant lives by denying asylum seekers their
legal right to seek protection in the United States, and
reinstating dangerous policies that force migrants to remain in
unsafe conditions, such as Remain in Mexico. But Republicans
know that H.R. 2 is so cruel and unworkable that it will never
become law. But that is what they use to say, we are doing
something here. That is what we are doing on this committee in
this Congress.
Instead, Republicans could support President Biden's
request for funding for more CBP officers and fentanyl
detection technology to increase CBP's capacity to identify bad
actors and drugs at our Southern Border. But no, they won't
support this funding or any solution that would help this
administration carry out border security efforts because it
would weaken their political talking points. That has been
their strategy this entire administration.
In this committee, we have real opportunities to work on
substantive issues together across the aisle. Instead my
Republican colleagues are distorting this committee and its
mandate to safeguard our Nation's homeland security into a
vehicle for false narratives about migrants and the border.
Professor Bowman, let me ask you a question. Is it
appropriate to impeach Secretary Mayorkas because of policy
disagreements?
Mr. Bowman. No.
Mr. Menendez. Is it appropriate to impeach Secretary
Mayorkas because Republicans refuse to properly fund DHS and
allow him to do his job?
Mr. Bowman. Well, I don't want to characterize the actions
of the Republicans, but certainly you don't impeach a person--
--
Mr. Menendez. We will take your first part of the answer.
Mr. Bowman [continuing]. Based on politics.
Mr. Menendez. Professor Bowman, is it appropriate to
impeach Secretary Mayorkas because Republicans would rather
narrate a crisis to score political points than work with the
administration to strengthen the security of our border?
Mr. Bowman. It's certainly not appropriate to impeach a
Cabinet officer over political or policy disagreements.
Mr. Menendez. I agree. Attorney General Drummond, thank you
for your testimony, your written testimony. I went through it.
I appreciate it. In this day and age, we deal a lot with
sourcing and citations. I noticed there was a single source in
yours, and it was to the Federation for American Immigration
Reform. Are you aware that the Southern Poverty Law Center has
designated the Federation for American Immigration Reform as a
hate group whose leaders have ties to White nationalists?
Mr. Drummond. I am not.
Mr. Menendez. Yes, completely understandable. I will just
let you know that a lot of the sources that have been used in
all these investigative materials and reports have been put
forth by the Majority have relied on far-right anti-immigrant
think tanks and groups that are not aligned with what I believe
our country's morals and values are. That is a problem with a
lot of the reports that this hearing, that this impeachment
process and procedure has been based on. That is where this all
falls apart for me.
I really wish we were engaging in a thoughtful exercise. I
really wish we were trying to solve some of the challenges that
we are facing, but that is not what today is about.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
Mr. Thompson. Yes. Mr. Goldman referenced two articles,
Turley and Eisen, and the clerk has already collected them, but
it was just a unanimous consent to implement the record.
Actually, Mr. Ivey.
Chairman Green. Yes, I think I was watching back there. I
saw it was Mr. Ivey. Yes, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Homeland Security Chief Alejandro Mayorkas' Failures Are Not
Impeachable
January 9, 2024, Jonathan Turley, The Daily Beast
https://www.thedailybeast.com/homeland-security-chief-alejandro-
mayorkas-failures-are-not-impeachable
He's bad at his job and is enforcing wrongheaded Biden
administration border policies, but there is no current evidence he is
corrupt or committed an impeachable offense.
Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas has been
denounced as dishonest, duplicitous, and derelict by his critics. In my
view, all of those things are manifestly true. It is also true, in my
opinion, that none of those things amount to high crimes and
misdemeanors warranting his impeachment.
The Republican push to impeach Mayorkas has been gaining steam as
record numbers of undocumented migrants pour over our Southern border.
Even many Democrats are now alarmed by the numbers and the threat that
they pose to our national security and to our economy. Sanctuary cities
from Chicago to New York are actively trying to prevent new migrants
from seeking sanctuary within their own borders.
At the center of all of this is Mayorkas, who has long been viewed
as an enabling figure for illegal migrations. He is also accused of
implementing Biden policy changes that removed barriers to migrants,
including rescinding the ``Stay in Mexico'' rule.
Some of us have also questioned his integrity, particularly in
controversies like the false claims that border agents whipped migrants
in Texas.
Mayorkas knew the allegations against his own personnel were
debunked, but showed little concern or compassion for agents,
particularly after President Joe Biden promised they would be punished
before any investigation had even begun.
However, being a bad person is not impeachable--or many cabinets
would be largely empty.
Moreover, being bad at your job is not an impeachable offense. Even
really bad. Even Mayorkas' level of bad; If that were the case, he
would be only the latest in a long line of cabinet officers frog-
marched into Congress for constitutional termination.
In history, there has only been one cabinet member impeached. That
was Secretary of War William Belknap in 1876. That alone should
concentrate the mind of members. Despite decades of controversial
cabinet members accused of flaunting the law or abusing their
positions, Congress has only crossed this Rubicon once. There has
existed a certain detente between the parties; an understanding that
policy-based impeachments could open up endless tit-for-tat impeachment
politics.
The charges against Belknap were serious, in that he had allegedly
``disregarded his duty as Secretary of War, and basely prostituted his
high office to his lust for private gain.'' The alleged bribes in
contracts in the Indian territories would have constituted impeachable
offenses, but Belknap had already left office. His case raised the
question of retroactive impeachments for former Federal officers.
The jurisdictional concerns made the difference for Belknap. The
final vote on the closest article was 37 to 25 in favor of
impeachment--four votes short of the number needed for conviction.
There is no jurisdictional question for Mayorkas, but there is also
no current evidence that he is corrupt or committed an impeachable
offense. He can be legitimately accused of effectuating an open border
policy, but that is a disagreement on policy that is traced to the
President.
In fairness to the GOP, they allege that Mayorkas is violating
Federal law in releasing what he now reportedly admits is over 85
percent of illegal migrants into the country as well as alleged false
statements to Congress. Such releases, however, occurred in prior
administrations and the merits of these claims are still being argued
in court.
The courts have long recognized that presidents are allowed to
establish priorities in the enforcement of Federal laws, even when
those priorities tend to lower enforcement for certain groups or areas.
It is a matter of discretion.
Indeed, even under the Federal Tort Claims Act (FTCA) which holds
the government liable for civil damages, there is a discretionary
function exception codified under 28 U.S.C.  2680(a) for policy-based
judgments.
Immigration has long been an area of intense policy disagreements.
Trump policies were denounced by critics as draconian or even racist.
Biden's policies have been denounced as fueling illegal crossings and
frustrating efforts to curtail the flow, particularly by border States.
In my view, Biden has been dead wrong on immigration, but voters
will soon have an opportunity to render a judgment on those policies in
the election. Mayorkas has carried out those policies. What has not
been known is conduct by the secretary that could be viewed as criminal
or impeachable.
If Mayorkas is violating Federal law, he can be brought to court to
enjoin his actions. A prior case seeking to prevent the termination of
the ``Stay in Mexico'' policy resulted in a win for the Biden
administration in Biden v. Texas, when the Supreme Court ruled the
president had the authority to revoke the Migrant Protection Protocols.
During the Constitutional Convention, there was a debate over the
grounds for impeachment with George Mason arguing for a broad scope of
offenses that could ``subvert the Constitution.'' His view was
rejected. Most notably, there was a rejection of ``maladministration''
as a basis for impeachment.
An English trial of Warren Hastings weighed heavily on the forging
of the impeachment standard. The former Governor of India was charged
with various offenses including ``mismanagement and misgovernment . . .
and mistreatment of various provinces.'' While figures like Mason saw
the need for the adoption of a similarly broad definition, his
suggestion of maladministration was rejected as too broad.
What Mayorkas is guilty of is maladministration. He has failed to
secure the Southern border and has long denied the gravity of this
crisis, including refusing to call it a crisis even as daily and
monthly crossings reached unprecedented levels.
None of this means that a cabinet member cannot be impeached.
However, not like this. Not for maladministration.
I hold no brief for Alejandro Mayorkas. However, I hold the
Constitution more dearly than I despise his tenure. Absent some new
evidence, I cannot see the limiting principle that would allow the
House to impeach Mayorkas without potentially making any policy
disagreement with a cabinet member a high crime and misdemeanor. That
is a slippery slope that we would be wise to avoid. Indeed, it is
precisely the temptation that the Framers thought they had avoided by
rejecting standards like maladministration.
That is why the case has not been made to impeach Alejandro
Mayorkas.
______

Opinion: Impeaching Alejandro Mayorkas would be unconstitutional
washingtonpost.com/opinions/2024/01/09/impeachment-alejandro-mayorkas-
unconstitutional-border-security
Joshua Matz, Norman Eisen, January 9, 2024 at 6:19 p.m. EST
Joshua Matz, a partner at Kaplan Hecker & Fink LLP, served as counsel
to the House Judiciary Committee for both impeachments and trials of
President Donald Trump. Norm Eisen was special counsel to President
Barack Obama and special counsel to the House Judiciary Committee for
the first Trump impeachment and trial.
opinion why impeaching mayorkas would violate the constitution
House Republicans appear poised to rush through a partisan
impeachment of Alejandro Mayorkas, the secretary of Homeland Security.
They do not allege corrupt, abusive or criminal conduct; they accuse
him merely of poor judgment, believing he could better use his legal
authority and enforcement discretion to safeguard the southern border.
Whatever the wisdom of Mayorkas's policy decisions, the claim that
he should be impeached is indefensible as a matter of constitutional
law.
In designing the U.S. Constitution, the framers adapted the
impeachment power from England, but made several key changes.
Parliament had historically impeached royal ministers for
``maladministration''--for bad policy or poor performance in office.
The framers rejected that vision. For impeachments of ``the President,
Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States,'' they
instead required proof of egregious malfeasance: ``Treason, Bribery, or
other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.''
This decision was fundamental to the separation of powers. Congress
has many tools it can use to shape public policy and express
disagreement with the executive. Impeachment, however, is not one of
them. To ensure that the president could govern--and that he could
select a Cabinet to execute his vision--the framers forbade impeachment
over policy disagreements, no matter how fierce or consequential.
That understanding has endured throughout American history. Despite
centuries of heated policy disagreements between Congress and the
executive, there has been only a single impeachment of a Cabinet
official. In 1876, War Secretary William Belknap was impeached for a
corrupt kickback scheme; although he resigned minutes before the House
vote, that did not deter House members from impeaching him anyway.
Of course, not all executive branch officials are angels. But in
practice, miscreant Cabinet officials are not corralled through
congressional impeachment. They are fired by the president, or they
simply resign.
No official who maintained the president's support has ever been
impeached for carrying out policy in ways the House found
objectionable. Impeaching Mayorkas on that basis would offend the
Constitution and unbalance the separation of powers. Future Cabinet
officials would be unduly chilled in doing their job, and presidents
would fear that heated policy disputes might engulf their most senior
officials in an impeachment quagmire.
This concern applies with full force in the homeland security
setting. The rule that we do not impeach over policy disagreements has
had its strongest expression in disputes over immigration enforcement.
There are two illuminating precedents.
The first occurred in 1920, when the House considered impeaching
Assistant Secretary of Labor Louis Post. Over the previous year,
Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmer had carried out his infamous
``Palmer Raids,'' indiscriminately rounding up suspected radicals,
anarchists and communists for deportation. When those deportation
orders reached Post's desk (the Labor Department then oversaw
immigration matters), he canceled more than 1,000 of them, citing the
absence of evidence justifying removal.
The response was explosive. A New York Times editorial claimed that
Post ``let loose on the country these public enemies, some of them
fugitives from justice.'' Rep. Homer Hoch, a Republican from Kansas,
put forward an impeachment resolution, which was referred to the House
Rules Committee.
Post was outraged. He viewed an initial report accusing him of
misconduct as ``mental dullness at high tension.'' As Post later wrote,
``I had offended by deporting such aliens as were proved guilty and
releasing the others, instead of pitching all of them out of the
country indiscriminately.''
Post's ensuing testimony before the Rules Committee was electric.
As one observer remarked, the committee ``had very much the aspect of a
group of gentlemen who had picked up a very hot poker and were looking
for some place to cool it.'' The drive to impeach collapsed.
A similar tale unfolded less than two decades later. In 1938,
Martin Dies Jr., the chairman of the House Un-American Activities
Committee accused Labor Secretary Frances Perkins of wrongly failing to
deport an accused communist. As Dies escalated his attacks against
Perkins's immigration policies, she bitingly responded: ``It is not
usual for the legislative branch which has so many duties to attempt to
usurp the functions and duties of the administrative branch.''
Undeterred, another member of Dies's committee introduced an
impeachment resolution. Among other things, and reminiscent of the
latest attacks against Mayorkas, it accused Perkins of ``having failed,
neglected, and refused to enforce the . . . immigration laws of the
United States.''
Perkins was shaken. But she maintained support from President
Franklin D. Roosevelt and vigorously defended her handling of
immigration matters, including in closed-door testimony before the
House Judiciary Committee.
Ultimately, the committee concluded that ``sufficient facts have
not been presented or adduced to warrant the interposition of the
constitutional powers of impeachment by the House.'' The decision was
unanimous. With respect to Perkins's handling of a particularly
controversial deportation decision, it found that her decision
``involved a question of judgment, and there is no evidence that it was
not exercised in good faith.''
As these cases confirm, disagreement over a Cabinet official's
good-faith exercise of enforcement discretion is not a valid basis for
impeachment. In launching an impeachment attack against Mayorkas, House
Republicans not only violate the Constitution but also defy long-
standing precedents. They should step back from the brink.

Chairman Green. I now recognize Mr. Ezell.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for being
here today and providing this important testimony.
Let's be clear about this. The Biden administration and
Secretary Mayorkas did not inherit the crisis at the border.
They created it. Ignoring the desperate pleas from affected and
scared families Nation-wide Secretary Mayorkas has
intentionally disregarded the law, leaving the border open to
an endless stream of migrants, drugs, and cartel members.
My time as a sheriff, and if I was neglecting my duties to
enforce the law, it would have cost me my job. The Secretary
should be held to the same standard.
Mr. Drummond, your story about the illegal Chinese national
who executed the three men, that has really stuck with me. The
reports are clear that terrorist organizations are exploiting
the vulnerability of our Nation's border. It is simply
irresponsible that Secretary Mayorkas continues to ignore the
significant threat to our national security.
Do you believe Secretary Mayorkas' actions have emboldened
terrorists around the world? Is it fair to say he has
intentionally ignoring our Nation's current laws that should
make it harder to enter our country illegally?
Mr. Drummond. I think that it is indisputable that we have
terrorist organizations invading my State. We've identified
numerous gangs, numerous syndicated crime organizations, and
they only grow on a daily basis.
Mr. Ezell. Mr. Knudsen and Mr. Bailey, would you care to
comment on this as well?
Mr. Bailey. I would point out that the two lawsuits that we
have pending right now dealing with the parole process, the
abuse of the parole process, Secretary Mayorkas' violation of
the plain text of the statute as it relates to parole and his
promulgation of the circumvention rule have been described as
engaging in a child trafficking delivery service. So it's not
just that he's emboldening the enemies of the United States,
he's actually actively participating in some of the harms by
using support networks to allow for illegal immigration that
used to be considered unlawful through the stroke of his pen,
without Congressional authority.
Mr. Knudsen. Congressman, I wholeheartedly agree. I can
tell you the increased gang activity in my State. I can tell
you the increase in firearm crime in my State, increase in
officer-involved shootings. We can tie this all directly to the
cartel drug problems that is flooding my State.
We've seen fentanyl seizures in my State rise, by some
measurements, up from 11,000 percent in my State just since
2019. Those are numbers that we were not seeing prior to this
administration change. I think that's pretty staggering.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you. Mr. Drummond, in your State and many
others, we have had taken steps to safeguard our communities
because we cannot rely on this administration to protect us.
For example, Mississippi, my home State, has set up a fentanyl
strike force to tackle the influx of drugs. I noticed that the
State of Oklahoma has also formed a similar task force. Can you
elaborate on some of the findings of that task force?
Mr. Drummond. Yes. We have created an organized crime task
force with the explicit purpose of coordinating with other
State agencies to tackle this endemic of illegal immigration in
the State of Oklahoma and the drugs and the detriment that they
drag into the State. It's come at an extremely high cost for
the State. We've allocated an additional $3 million from my
office just to staff that. The toll on human, it's just
remarkable.
Mr. Ezell. Are there any recommendations, the task force
findings, that you could recommend to the Congress to consider
implementing on a Federal level?
Mr. Drummond. It would be very helpful if the terrorism
category, if cartels would be listed as foreign terrorist
organizations. Right now they fall outside that immigration
inadmissibility definition, and if they were designated as
such, it would give us strength in deportation.
Mr. Ezell. Also, in your testimony you pointed out that
smaller law enforcement departments are outmanned, outgunned,
and ill-equipped to address the threats coming across our
border, particularly the threats from the Mexican and Chinese
drug syndicates. I can sympathize with this and certainly
understand the stress that is placed on our rural law
enforcement officers when dealing with such a rise in crime. As
departments are forced and stressed their resources addressing
pressing issues, can you talk a little bit about the ripple
effects and the gaps it leaves in our critical areas of law
enforcement and safety for our communities?
Mr. Drummond. It has truly taken the attention of all law
enforcement in the State of Oklahoma toward this issue, where
we have, you know, a shell owner buying a piece of property,
pushing up berms of dirt with bulldozers, manning those with
semiautomatic weapons at the top, very intimidating for our
local law enforcement. They're outgunned, outmanned, and our
resources are stretched in the State.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Drummond, and to the other
witnesses as well, for your input today.
Once again, the committee has shown that Secretary Mayorkas
bears direct responsibility for the chaos at the border. I will
not tolerate the overlooking of real threats that are
jeopardizing innocent lives. His failures demand swift
accountability.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Nevada, Ms. Titus, for
her 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Titus. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
the witnesses.
You know, often I see my colleagues across the aisle
brandishing the Constitution like a sword. You love to quote
it. You love to cite it. You love to talk about what the
Founding Fathers intended, that original intent. But it is kind
of like Shakespeare and the Bible. Those who talk about it the
most have seldom read it and really may not understand what is
in there.
You know, if you talk about original intent, you are saying
what the Founding Fathers intended. Now, that is a smaller
country, smaller population, smaller budget. We had no AI. We
had no drones. How do we know what they intended?
Well, often we don't, but in this case, we know exactly
what they intended. All you have to do is look at some of the
notes from the convention of the Constitution by Madison, who
did not want to include the maladministration because it was
too broad and policy-oriented. Look at Federalist Paper 65 by
Hamilton, a conservative at the time who did not want to
include this broader interpretation of impeachment.
Now, you have also heard Mr. Bowman's arguments, a
respected scholar who you have demeaned his expertise by
insinuating, oh, he is just a Democratic witness. But he is not
alone in this position. Mr. Turley's letter was mentioned.
There is an article in The Hill about another letter from legal
scholars. This is a group of legal scholars who wrote a letter
to our Chairman and the leadership of the House, Speaker
Johnson, that says, ``Their proposed grounds for impeaching
Mayorkas are the stuff of ordinary policy disagreement in the
field of immigration enforcement.''
They go on to say that this is inappropriate. They admit
they have varying views on the wisdom and success of Mayorkas'
work on the immigration policy, but, they say, you cannot have
impeachment based on this policy. It is a, and I quote, ``stark
departure from the Constitution.''
Now, these legal scholars included in this letter are
Donald Ayer, who served as U.S. deputy attorney general under
George H.W. Bush; Stuart Gerson, who served as acting U.S.
attorney general during Clinton and also served in the Justice
Department under Bush. You have Mr. Turley also included in
this. There is even a quote by Dershowitz, who says that this
is inappropriate use of impeachment. So, Mr. Bowman, with his
expertise, does not stand alone in condemning this use of
impeachment for political reasons.
Now, look at this resolution that we are supposed to be
considering that was offered by Ms. Taylor Greene. Aside from
the fact that it has got some punctuation and grammatical
errors, it lists some ways that the Secretary has been
effective in the amount of fentanyl that has been seized at the
border, the number of people who were caught on the terrorist
watch list before they came into the country, those are all
evidence that he is carrying out his duty.
What I don't see anywhere in this resolution, nor have I
heard from any of my colleagues, nor any of our attorneys
general, is how impeaching the Secretary is going to solve all
these problems. How is it going to get rid of these illegal
grow places in Oklahoma? How is it going to get rid of all the
terrorists who are coming into Missouri? How is it going to
solve the fentanyl problem in these other--whatever other
State, oh, Montana, because we have gotten rid of Mr. Mayorkas?
If anybody can add that and tell us how getting rid of him is
going to make a difference, I would like to hear it.
We hear over in the Senate, Mr. Lankford, Senator Lankford,
who is a Republican, saying, well, you can just switch one
Secretary for another. It is not going to make any difference.
So perhaps we could talk about how getting rid of Mr.
Mayorkas through this impeachment process is going to make a
difference. I hear nothing.
Chairman Green. Does the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Titus. No, I am not going to yield.
Chairman Green. OK. All right.
Ms. Titus. So, since I----
Chairman Green. I would gladly answer the question.
Ms. Titus. I gave you an opportunity. OK, I will yield.
Chairman Green. OK. All right. Well, in my previous
testimony, I have shared that the policies that he has
implemented has allowed the cartel--Merrick Garland agreed with
this, that they are flooding the crossing sites, tying up the
Border Patrol, causing them to concentrate, and then the
fentanyl and the other things are coming across the border
outside.
Now, I get that the argument that is often made about what
is captured is mostly captured at the crossing site----
Ms. Titus. You are not answering. I can take my time back.
Chairman Green. OK. All right.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You are not answering
my question, how getting rid of Mayorkas is going to solve
these problems. What you really want to do is get rid of
President Biden. You want to get rid of President Biden, and
then perhaps you can put your own Secretary in there that will
come up with different policy. But just impeaching Mayorkas, we
will have another appointment of another Secretary who follows
the policy of the administration, and you won't like that
either.
So thank you, Mr. Bowman, for your expertise, and I yield
back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
D'Esposito, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is clear that
the disapproval of the policies of Joe Biden and Secretary
Mayorkas are not just specific to Republicans or conservatives.
The numbers that were shared by my good friend from New York,
Mr. LaLota, 75 percent of people have said that the border is
the biggest issue facing this country.
You talk about numbers. Fiscal year 2021--since fiscal year
2021, 8,542,000 people have come across our borders; over 3
million in fiscal year 2023; in November, 308,000 and change;
242,000 at our Southern Border; 312 terrorists who have come
across on our terror watch list in fiscal year 2021; 1.8
million gotaways that we know about and many more that we
don't.
It has cost cities and States throughout this country $451
billion with a B. There has been over 70,000 Americans killed
by fentanyl that have come across from cartels.
We have been asked the question, is this about policy or is
this about the things that Mayorkas has committed? Well, if you
ask me, all those numbers is a complete betrayal to this
country.
We talk and has been mentioned by colleagues that, again,
this is political theater. This is Republicans, conservatives
using the border as a narrative as we go toward an election.
This isn't a narrative. It is not one created by the
Republicans.
I will take us back to my home State of New York, where you
have Democrats. Our Governor has said flat out, there is no
room left in New York. There is no room at the inn. Don't send
migrants here anymore. We have heard a Democrat city mayor,
Mayor Adams, who I disagree with virtually everything about,
but this I actually agree with, he has said that the migrant
issue in New York City will destroy New York.
So this doesn't seem like it is political theater. It
doesn't seem like it is a narrative that has been created by
Republicans and conservatives because you now have Democrats in
these blue States and sanctuary States and cities who agree
with us.
Just last night, we had children told in New York City that
they can no longer attend school in person. They have to do it
virtually because their school is now being used to house
migrants. Now just think about that for a second.
We want to talk about the failed policies. This isn't just
a policy. This is intent. Mayorkas has intentionally betrayed
this country.
People are claiming that they want to come here for a
better way of life, for democracy, for a chance at that
American dream, for a better education. Yet children who came
here correctly, children who were born here, last night were
told that they cannot go to school because there is no room for
them because it is being used by migrants. That is the height
of hypocrisy. If you ask me, it is a betrayal of this country.
Mr. Gentner Drummond, in your testimony, you talked about
how smaller law enforcement agencies feel that they are ill-
equipped to handle the threats stemming from the border crisis.
Can you talk about how the border crisis impacts the resources
of smaller police agencies and what the officers in those
departments are feeling?
Mr. Drummond. Well, certainly. It strains the resources and
it is wildly intimidating to our local law enforcement where
they have maybe a police force of 3 or 4 in a community of
2,000, and yet they have 4 or 5 illegal grows that are
populated by illegal immigrants, Mexican cartel members,
Chinese syndicated crime organization members with
semiautomatic rifles abundant, and they are unwilling to go in.
Mr. D'Esposito. I know the answer to this, but I want to
ask it so it is on the record because I think it is another
clear indicator of Mayorkas' failure of his oath and the fact
that he has betrayed this country. Do you know or have you
experienced law enforcement agencies, to your knowledge, that
have said that they have lacked notification and information
and intelligence sharing from Federal partners when it comes to
migrants?
Mr. Drummond. I would say the cooperation with our Federal
agencies is high in Oklahoma. We have an excellent working
relationship. So I commend the Federal agencies working with
Oklahoma. I think it goes at a higher level, and that's the
implementation of the laws of the United States.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right. Mr. Knudsen, you want to comment on
that?
Mr. Knudsen. Only to--I completely agree with my colleague
here that the level of cooperation with Federal DEA, with our
U.S. Attorney's Office in Montana has been very, very high and
very excellent. Customs and Border Patrol, I might add. We're a
northern-tier State and we work with them a lot.
But certainly the message has come down from Secretary
Mayorkas and from on high that we are going to just flagrantly
ignore portions of Federal law.
Mr. D'Esposito. That is really the point that I was trying
to make. He has made it very clear that he wants to ignore
Federal law. There are--you are lucky in your States to have
great communications, but there has been, and there have been
testimonies in this very committee of people who led local law
enforcement agencies who have said, I mean, take for example,
the airport and JFK, where they were housing migrants, where
there was zero communications between law enforcement agencies
because they just didn't want to share the information.
With that, my time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize Mr. Goldman, the gentleman from New York,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I find it really difficult to sit here listening to my
colleagues on the other side of the aisle slander personally a
Cabinet Secretary who has committed much of his life to this
Government and our public service. He was a U.S. attorney. He
has worked multiple stints in the Department of Homeland
Security. You are certainly welcome to disagree with how he
executes his job. You are welcome to criticize him. You are
welcome to make the case to the American people as to why
Secretary Mayorkas, in executing President Joe Biden's
immigration policy, should be removed from office at the ballot
box. But to come in here over and over and over again and to
personally attack and slander without any evidence a Cabinet
Secretary who has committed so much of his life to this
country, who himself comes from a Cuban family escaping
difficult circumstances in his country, who is an immigrant and
immigrant family himself, you should be ashamed of yourself. It
is enough.
You want to talk policy? Let's talk policy. I agree. We
have problems at the border. Let's talk about how we can solve
them. But instead of actually going over to the Senate, this
committee, which has the committee of jurisdiction over border
policy that is being negotiated right now by a bipartisan group
in the Senate with Secretary Mayorkas, instead of actually
engaging in those substantive negotiations to reach some sort
of a bipartisan agreement to address the problems, we are
sitting here with a charade of a sham impeachment hearing with
expert impeachment witnesses who are Republican officials,
political officials suing the Department of Homeland Security.
Another hearing. It is the same hearing we have had 10, 12
times. Same pig, different lipstick, because we are now going
to call it an impeachment hearing.
So who do we have here? I am sure all three of you are
excellent attorneys general, but I have never heard your names
mentioned in the category of Mr. Bowman, who is a legal expert
on impeachment. As far as I can tell, none of your States
actually are on the border. So I don't understand why we are
sitting here in a ``impeachment'' hearing with three attorneys
general from different States who are Republican officials and
have absolutely no expertise on impeachment. The reason is
because the last time the Republicans did that and they brought
in their so-called experts on impeachment for the first and
only oversight public hearing, they were embarrassed because
their own experts acknowledged that there is insufficient
evidence to impeach President Biden.
So who do we have here? We have attorneys general who are
suing Secretary Mayorkas and the Government to stop him from
implementing his policy to address the issues at the border.
That is right. So one rule that the Department has implemented
was the asylum processing rule, which would allow asylum
officers, rather than immigration courts, to decide asylum
applications for those placed in expedited removal to
significantly expedite the process. That might reduce the
backlog. That might create a disincentive to come. That is
something that Secretary Mayorkas did to address the border.
No, you sued him to stop him from doing that.
How about the circumvention rule? That is the
circumvention. Excuse me. How about the asylum circumvention
rule, which says that you have to either appear at a port of
entry or have first sought asylum from a neighboring country?
That would reduce the people who could apply for asylum. No,
you sued them. You sued them to stop them from doing that.
How about trying to address the parole decisions to allow
some people to come in and be able to actually have work
authorizations so that they are not just sitting on the dole?
No, you sued them.
So this is what we have. We have Republicans suing
Secretary Mayorkas to stop him from implementing his policy to
address the issues at the border. Now we are going to impeach
him because you say he is not addressing the issues at the
border. Which do you want?
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ms. Lee, the gentlelady from Florida, for 5
minutes of testimony.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Much has been said today
by our colleagues across the aisle about this hearing and the
purposes for it. It has been called a waste of time. It has
been called a charade. It has been suggested that it is
repetitive or unnecessary. To suggest that this hearing is any
of those things or to suggest that this hearing is tantamount
than nothing more than a discussion of policy differences is to
fundamentally deny the seriousness, the scope, the scale of the
catastrophe at our Southern Border, and the testimony of these
witnesses who are here today and every witness that has come
before them to testify in front of this committee about the
seriousness of this crisis.
We are here today because Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas has
intentionally gone around and subverted the immigration laws of
the United States of America. We are here today because
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas has repeatedly defied orders from
courts directing him to cease and desist certain policies which
he continues to utilize. We are here today because the
Department of Homeland Security has defied inquiries from
Congress trying to get to the bottom of the scope and the scale
of this crisis. We are here today because Secretary Mayorkas
has defied Congressional directives related to spending,
Congressional directives as to how money was supposed to be
spent. We are here because there is an unchecked flood of
illegal immigration in our Southern Border that is destroying
not just border communities, but communities around our
country.
Today alone, we have heard extraordinary and compelling
testimony about the utter lawlessness that is occurring in this
administration. Attorney General Knudsen shared with us that he
perceives a refusal to faithfully execute the laws of the
United States and shared stories from his State about human
trafficking and fentanyl trafficking and the devastation that
has occurred because of our wide-open Southern Border.
Attorney General Drummond commented on the failure to
enforce our laws and how that has affected his State. He also
shared the extraordinary cost that it incurs at his State
because we are not enforcing our laws in our border.
Attorney General Bailey touched on the issue of parole,
which has become an absolute farce and workaround for following
our laws. He said, perverting the plain text of the law and,
indeed, that is exactly what is happening. In my State,
Florida, we, too, have been forced to sue the Department of
Homeland Security to attempt to achieve any semblance of lawful
behavior and policy.
United States District Court Judge Kent Wetherall, in an
order directing that Secretary Mayorkas vacate the parole
program, said, ``Secretary Mayorkas has turned the Southern
Border into a meaningless line in the sand and little more than
a speed bump for aliens flooding into the country.''
With that backdrop, Attorney General Bailey, I would like
to turn your attention specifically to the question of parole
authority. On July 26, 2023, before the House Judiciary
Committee, Secretary Mayorkas testified the Department of
Homeland Security has used our parole authority consistent with
the law and consistent with past practices of different
administrations. He also claimed that his Department is using
the parole authority consistent with the law.
Still, in your opinion, is Secretary Mayorkas'
implementation of the parole statute lawful, and is his
implementation of this policy affecting the security of the
United States?
Mr. Bailey. His policy implementation is unlawful, in
violation of the plain text of the statute, thereby forcing a
lawsuit from several like-minded State attorneys general
because of the drastic, terrible harm that's occurring on the
streets in our communities.
Ms. Lee. Attorney General Drummond, you shared some of the
devastating effects that failure to secure our border is having
on your State. In your opinion, are these policies affecting
the security and safety of your State and of our country?
Mr. Drummond. The laws of the Immigration and Nationality
Act are clear and unequivocal, and they are not being upheld.
Ms. Lee. Attorney General Knudsen, would you share your
perspective on the harm to your State and our country that is
being posed by failure to follow our laws?
Mr. Knudsen. Seventeen hundred percent increase in fentanyl
deaths, confirmed State crime lab fentanyl deaths since 2019,
Congresswoman; 11,000 percent increase in fentanyl seizures;
multiple-hundred percent increase in human trafficking
investigations since 2019. Those numbers speak for themselves.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Garcia. Are you ready or you want to go
ahead with somebody else? OK. Recognize Mr. Garcia for his 5
minutes of testimony.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want to just
reiterate that, I think this has been said this very many times
today by our colleagues here on the House side, on the
Democratic side, that we all know that this impeachment
inquiry, this effort to try to impeach the Secretary, is a
complete political stunt and sham. I just want to reiterate
that. We all know it is a political ploy that is not grounded
in the facts, truth, and has been conjured up for just one
simple purpose, and that is to score cheap political points
against the Biden administration.
We also know that we have had articles from the New York
Times and other publications just really laying out that this
is all about this pursuit of impeaching Mayorkas. It is about
this kind-of effort that has been started, quite frankly, by
even a Member of this committee for many, many, many months.
That is all just really about hurting the President.
Now, Professor Bowman, Republican leaders have been quoted
promising donors that they would impeach Secretary Mayorkas in
fundraisers back in April 2023. Do you believe this committee
has uncovered any evidence of high crimes or misdemeanors since
that time?
Mr. Bowman. Not that I'm aware of.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Let's be clear. What we are moving
ahead with today is because extremists, including some folks
that are in this committee, have demanded it over and over
again.
Now, I want to give a couple quotes from some Members of
the House. Congressman Andy Biggs told Newsmax that Republicans
``have nothing to campaign on.'' Andy said that he was
embarrassed by this.
Now, Congressman Chip Roy has said, and I want to quote,
``I want my Republican colleagues to give me one thing, one,
that I can go to campaign on to say that we did. Just one.'' In
fact, this last Monday, he went on TV to call the Republican
conference, and I quote, ``a continued failure theater.''
So I understand that we are trying to throw red meat to an
extremist base, but we are wasting the public's time and we
know that the Senate will laugh off all of these charges.
Let's remember the bigger picture. Some of my friends on
the other side of the aisle don't want to really govern. They
are not serious about solutions that could actually become law,
and they are obstructing $14 billion in emergency supplemental
funding. They voted against hiring hundreds of additional
Border Patrol agents and of our ports of entry, and they have
opposed the incredible resources that we have been trying to
send around technology, supporting organizations on the ground,
support for Border Patrol agents, and many other types of
funding.
I also want to remind the committee and the public that
President Biden, on his first day in office, sent a
comprehensive immigration plan to Congress, which Republicans
have refused to act on. I also want to note that Secretary
Mayorkas has continued to try to negotiate a bipartisan,
sensible, and humane approach to actually fixing our
immigration system and trying to actually address the issues
that remain along the border, because Democrats agree there are
issues and challenges along the border, and we want to see
those fixed.
As an immigrant myself, I also have always believed this is
a Nation of immigrants. We should never forget that this
country was based on so much hard work and labor of immigrants
that now live all across this country. Our immigration system
won't be fixed by this impeachment process, and it certainly
won't be fixed by their proposal, which is H.R. 2.
Let's set the record straight about H.R. 2. The bill would
end health and human services funding for legal representation
of unaccompanied children in immigration proceedings. It would
essentially send children to detention camps. The bill subjects
all unaccompanied children to an accelerated removal process,
as we know, in horrible conditions at these facilities that we
have seen over the last few years. Quite frankly, we know this
is not just not a solution, but it is inhumane and cruel to
demonize some of the most vulnerable people that are coming to
our country.
We want to address the root causes of migration. We want to
ensure that legal pathways are followed. We want to make sure
that folks receive the support they need back in their home
countries. We certainly don't want to defund organizations like
Catholic Charities that would rip away aid to communities and
to migrants across our country and along our border.
The idea that our border problems, which have needed a
bipartisan solution for decades, would be solved by H.R. 2 is
just not true. It is an anti-immigrant policy, and we should
reject it.
Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Luttrell, the gentleman from Texas, for
his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
coming here today.
Mr. Bowman, I appreciate and respect your opening
statements, or it is probably the most educated I have been
on--when it comes Constitutional law and the process that we
are in right now. So thank you for that education.
My first question for you, sir, is, can you give me the
definition of a high crime and misdemeanor?
Mr. Bowman. I think no single definition is satisfactory in
every case, but I think Charles Black's is a pretty good
general statement. That is to say, high crimes and misdemeanors
should be extremely serious offenses in the way that serious
crimes, like treason and bribery, are.
Mr. Luttrell. It is extremely serious.
Mr. Bowman. Second, it should in some way----
Mr. Luttrell. From that--let me go up with that one, sir.
That is a great point. Is the selling of fentanyl inside the
United States causing hundreds of thousands of deaths over the
past years considered a high crime, in your opinion?
Mr. Bowman. I'm unaware that the Secretary has sold any
fentanyl.
Mr. Luttrell. No, no, I am not directing that to the
Secretary. I am asking you, is the selling of fentanyl inside
the United States, killing hundreds of thousands of Americans
over the years, would that be considered a high crime?
Mr. Bowman. If you could establish an officer----
Mr. Luttrell. Boy, that is a yes answer all day long. You
don't say yes, that's bad.
Mr. Bowman. If you could establish an officer actually did
that, possibly.
Mr. Luttrell. All right, so let me ask you this.
Mr. Bowman. I'm aware of no evidence that that ever
happened.
Mr. Luttrell. There is no evidence that hundreds of
thousands of people over the past few years have died from
fentanyl overdose?
Mr. Bowman. I'm unaware of any evidence that Secretary
Mayorkas has ever sold----
Mr. Luttrell. I am not talking about Secretary Mayorkas. I
am talking about fentanyl deaths.
Mr. Bowman. That's what we're here to talk about, are we
not, Congressman? Secretary Mayorkas.
Mr. Luttrell. If you will allow me to finish, if you will
answer my question, I am getting to my point.
Chairman Green. It is your time, so you can with--you know.
Mr. Luttrell. All right. So let me ask you this since we
are unhinged on the fentanyl deaths, do you consider slavery a
high crime?
Mr. Bowman. Is there any evidence that Secretary Mayorkas
has enslaved anyone?
Mr. Luttrell. This is getting a little bit more complicated
than I thought it was going to be. I want to know if I am
supposed to go back to the folks in my district and tell them
that the individual responsible for securing the American
borders is falling short because the United States is one of
the top countries on the planet for sex slaves. We lose 100,000
people a year to fentanyl overdoses. The individual responsible
for protecting us is Mr. Mayorkas. That is where I am going
with that. The fact that you didn't jump on top of and say that
those things were absolutely involuntary, the worst things
ever, is graphically disturbing to me. I pitched that one up as
a softball, buddy, and you failed miserably.
I am from Texas. I feel this every day. My colleagues and
I, we have our disagreements. I went down to the border with
the other Republicans. I didn't have a polo on. I didn't get
behind the podium. I talked to everybody down there that works
down there. I talked to the ranchers, the citizens, and they
tell me every single day that we are overwhelmed.
Ms. Titus brought up an amazing point. Yes, if we remove
Mr. Mayorkas, Mr. Biden will put another Democratic member in
that spot. We know that. I am here for this reason. I am
sending a message that my people can no longer take it. We are
dying by the droves. Every year, I have to look at the mothers.
I look the mothers and fathers that lost their kids to
fentanyl. I look at them every single day when I am out in the
district, and it is all coming across our Southern Border
through the ports of entry. Yes, I got it. But if you are
responsible for securing our borders, then you better act like
it. This individual is not. That is the problem, sir, period,
end of discussion.
These atrocities that we are seeing, you can't explain.
Forty million people are enslaved on the planet. Forty million.
America is leading up top with that problem. You ask where they
come from. They come across our Southern Border and our
Northern Border. That, sir, is the responsibility of the
Secretary. Since he has failed to conduct his job for the past
few years, we need somebody else now.
Now, I am not--I met Mr. Mayorkas. I have chatted him up.
He is a family man. He is a good man. I am going to be
crucified going back home and saying that. I spoke to him face
to face, and I bet he adamantly would disagree on the fact
that, yes, slavery is horrible. The fentanyl deaths are
horrible.
But there was a mother sitting in front of this committee
months ago last year that sat there and looked at every single
one of us. She lost her mother and her daughter to a coyote
running through town, killed them both. She had to stand there
in the emergency room while her daughter died. She looked us
all in the faces, said you guys are absolutely doing nothing.
You are doing nothing.
So when we go to Mr. Mayorkas to say, hey, we need to act
on this, and nothing is happening, sir, that is an absolute
problem.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize Ms. Clarke from New York, the gentlelady
from New York, for her 5 minutes of testimony.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon.
Let me first start by thanking our witnesses for joining us
this afternoon, today. You know, it is clear that MAGA
Republican attempts to impeach Secretary Mayorkas have nothing
to do with his performance and everything to do with the
loyalty oath most of my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle have sworn to Donald Trump. After the House twice
impeached Donald Trump, once for attempting to bribe an ally to
investigate his political opponent and interfere in U.S.
elections and again for inciting an insurrection against the
Capitol to steal an election, some of my Republican colleagues
want to settle the score by impeaching someone, anyone, in the
Biden administration.
Secretary Mayorkas was sworn in on February 2, 2022. Less
than 6 weeks later, Senator Lindsey Graham floated the
Secretary should resign during an appearance on FOX News. In
May 2021, Congressman Biggs appeared on the 1st and said that
Secretary Mayorkas has got to go, and introduced Articles of
Impeachment of the Secretary in August of that year. The
Secretary had not yet served 6 months. Other Republicans piled
on that call in the months that followed. In April, Chairman
Green fundraised off his planned impeachment efforts, telling
his donors to, ``Get out the popcorn.''
But Secretary Mayorkas is hardly the only member of the
Biden administration Republicans have disagreed with and then
tried to impeach. Congressman Perry filed Articles of
Impeachment against Attorney General Garland in October 2021.
Congresswoman Taylor Greene filed articles to impeach the
attorney general in August 2022, FBI Director Christopher Wray
in May 2022, and filed multiple Articles of Impeachment against
President Biden, sometimes more than one time in the same day.
Congressman Norman filed Articles of Impeachment against
Secretary Blinken in August 2021, and Congressman Mills filed
Articles of Impeachment against Secretary Austin in August
2023.
Meanwhile, Republicans have filed multiple resolutions to
expunge the impeachments of Donald Trump. I am concerned that
my Republican colleagues fail to understand the gravity of
impeachment.
So, Professor Bowman, the Founders engaged in robust debate
when defining the criteria for impeachment. In your view, did
the Founders intend for impeachment to be a frequently-used
process to coerce the Executive branch into policy decisions,
or a rarely used tool reserved for extraordinary behavior that
meets the definition of high crimes and misdemeanors?
Mr. Bowman. Certainly the second, Congresswoman. I mean,
the key point here is not only that impeaching Secretary
Mayorkas will affect absolutely no change in border policy or
border legislation. But even if impeaching a Cabinet Secretary
could really accomplish something consequential, it would be
terrible for the country because it would overthrow the basic
principle of separation of powers on which the Constitution and
our system of government are actually based.
Congress and the Executive are supposed to work together to
solve the country's problems. They're often going to disagree
about how to do that. But in our system, the solution is the
hard work of legislation, of negotiation, of compromise, of
coalition building. Impeachment is not and never has been the
answer and it is quite clear that the Framers intended it not
for that purpose whatsoever. They intended it for the most
extraordinary circumstances, and simply to resolve, you know, a
partisan political debate or to change policy, is not it.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you for your response.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Strong. For the committee room, Mr.
Strong will be the last. Then we will go vote and come back at
2:15. So, Mr. Strong, you are recognized.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Attorney General Knudsen, I was glad to see you mention in
your testimony that Secretary Mayorkas has regularly hidden
behind the concept of prosecutorial discretion. I like how you
said that, because that right there is one of the big issues.
Today, specifically, we have talked about Secretary Mayorkas'
abuse of prosecutorial discretion in the enforcement and
removal of illegal aliens in the United States.
I want to highlight again Secretary Mayorkas' 2021 memo in
which he stated the fact that an individual is a removable
alien, therefore, should not alone be the basis of an
enforcement action against them. He went on to list factors
that ICE agents should weigh when deciding whether to pursue
enforcement and removal or not.
Attorney General Knudsen, as a former prosecutor yourself,
does it make any sense to give credence to mitigating factors
when considering whether to prosecute someone that has already
been proven to have broken the law when they crossed our border
illegally?
Mr. Knudsen. Congressman, certainly not, especially when
there's specific directive in Federal law that requires that
person be detained and be prosecuted. The idea that individual
prosecutorial discretion suddenly means you have the right to
blanket, en masse, pardon people or parole them into the
heartland of the country that simply does not exist in statute.
I agree with the concept generally of prosecutorial
discretion on a case-by-case basis, and indeed, that's what the
Federal law allows. But that's not what's being done here. It's
being just implemented on a mass scale, wide open, en masse,
and that is simply not justified anywhere in Federal code.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I must say I was disappointed to see
that the factors in favor of removal didn't include this
significant financial and human cost to American citizens. Our
hospitals are inundated with illegals. Schools are overrun with
non-English speaking, setting other students back, and now New
York has sent teachers and American students home and turning
public schools into bunker houses for illegal aliens. This is
totally unacceptable.
Attorney General Bailey and Knudsen, you both specifically
mentioned in your testimony that you do not view the crisis at
the Southern Border as a resource issue. In other words, you
both--each explain to the committee why this is the case.
Mr. Bailey. Certainly. That's what our lawsuit's about, his
refusal to build the border wall, is all about. He is flaunting
the commands of this body. He is nullifying your Constitutional
authority over the power of the purse. When that authority is
no longer effective, impeachment is the last option.
I would point out that what we have here is not a policy
disagreement. It's a willful violation to carry out an explicit
directive of this body and an abdication of his official
duties.
Mr. Knudsen. Mr. Chairman, Congressman, I would add that,
you know, resources are being moved down there regularly. I
mentioned I'm a Northern Border State. We have nearly 600 miles
of border with Canada in my State. There's a large Customs and
Border Control contingent in Montana. Most of those individuals
have told me they've been cycled down to the Southern Border.
The problem is not the number of agents down there. The
problem is they are being instructed by Secretary Mayorkas to
stand down and to not follow Federal law. That's the issue
here.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. On September 6, 2023, the DHS Office
of Inspector General released its report titled, ``DHS Does Not
Have Assurance That All Migrants Can Be Located Once Released
Into the United States.'' That title alone should concern every
single person in America. This investigation reviewed nearly 1
million migrant records and found that addresses for more than
177,000 migrants were either missing, invalid for delivery, or
not legitimate residential locations. That is nearly 20 percent
if you look at this, and that right there is totally
unacceptable.
We talk about leadership by the Secretary of Homeland
Security. Well, you think about this. The first thing that I
saw at the Southern Border on one of my many visits is I
noticed 20,288 border wall panels in storage. I came back to
the District of Columbia and found out that those 20,288 panels
being stored in 3 different States, costing the American
taxpayer more than $300 million. This is how they solve or try
to work to solve the problem at the Southern Border. This is
totally unacceptable and this is another reason that we are
here.
Mr. Bowman, you are a Constitutional law expert. Should
President Trump have been impeached for a Russian hoax where
the Steele dossier was created and paid for by the Clinton
campaign? What do you think about that? Should that have
happened? What were you teaching in your classroom?
Chairman Green. Go ahead and answer the question and then
we will--that will----
Mr. Strong. Mr. Chairman, I will yield to you because I
know he doesn't want to answer that question.
Chairman Green. Do you not want the gentleman--OK.
All right. The gentleman yields. We will recess now until
2:15. We have two votes. I need to chat real quick with the
witnesses just to make sure that you guys can stay. We are in
recess, 2:15.
[Recess.]
Chairman Green. I now recognize the gentleman from
Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thanks to
the witnesses for being here, especially you have got somebody
that traveled all the way from Oklahoma to be here.
I just want to reiterate after the break, just for the
American people to know, it is important that we follow the
rule of law. I love, you know, commonly said now, to be the
rule of law team. It requires discipline, it requires focus. It
requires that, you know, we don't turn ourselves into a banana
republic.
Article II, section 4, says, ``The President, Vice
President, and all civil officers of the United States shall be
removed from office on impeachment for conviction of treason,
bribery, or other high crimes and misdemeanors.'' The
Constitution absolutely gives authority to impeach and remove
the President, Vice President, and all civil officers for
treason, bribery, high crimes, and misdemeanors.
This tool was inherited from English practice in which
Parliament impeached and convicted ministers in favorites of
the Crown in a struggle to rein in abuse of power. That is the
historical precedent on this. Let me back that up, OK.
So it has been talked about this morning, Federalist 65 has
some admonitions, has some warnings, and it says the subjects--
within the context of impeachment, in Federalist 65, written by
Alexander Hamilton, it says, ``The subjects of its
jurisdiction,'' talking about impeachment, ``are those offenses
in which proceed from the misconduct of public men or, in other
words, from the abuse or violation of some public trust.'' It
goes on to say that, ``The model from which the instrument
impeachment,'' the idea of this institution has been borrowed,
pointed out the course to be the convention in Great Britain,
``it is the province of the House of Commons to prefer the
impeachment and the House of Lords to decide upon it.'' Two
parts, just like we have employed in our Constitution.
``Several of the State constitutions have followed this
example, as well as the latter, as the former seem to have
regard the practice of impeachment as the bridle in the hands
of the legislative body upon the executive servants of
government.''
You know why I love that? I grew up in the performance
horse industry, and I learned three stage stops from a father
who trained cutting horses professionally. You sit down, they
feel the pressure of that. Then you say, whoa. Then a well-
trained, well-disciplined animal learns that when they feel the
three-stage stop coming, they are going to park it without
having to lift the 4 ounces of the reins of the bridle.
The problem is we have got men and women who serve in
positions of authority, and the definition, according to AQHA,
of a reining horse, I love this is ``willfully guided,
willfully controlled.'' The problem is when you have men and
women in influence who aren't willfully guided and willfully
controlled by the Constitution, the Constitution as stated by
Alexander Hamilton, the job of the legislative body is to grab
the reins and say, whoa. We have an out-of-place, out-of-their-
floodplain bureaucracy within Homeland Security that is doing
what they want to, not following the rule of law.
So with that said, the question is before us, are there
instances of fact where Mayorkas has flippantly disregarded the
laws enacted by Congress? Point No. 1, parole, section
212(d)(5)(A) of the Immigration Nationality Act says parole
shall only be granted on a case-by-case basis, only for urgent
humanitarian reasons, or significant public benefit. Mayorkas
has not done that. He's created broad parole programs for
30,000 aliens per month, Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela,
without evidence of humanitarian reasons or without significant
public benefit.
Point No. 2, resources in fiscal year 2020, Congress
explicitly appropriated funds for constructions of barrier
systems, as our AG has talked about from Missouri, part of your
lawsuit was over this. Barrier systems along the Southwest
Border, Mayorkas refused to comply with Congress'
appropriation, refused to build barrier systems, as Congress
said, as a will of the people. The power of the purse.
Point No. 3, detention, section 235(b)(1) of Immigration
and Nationality Act outlines the procedures by which aliens
attempting to enter the United States without a visa or proper
immigration papers are to be detained and removed. Mayorkas has
not done this. His agency has released several million illegal
aliens who should have been detained and deported.
Question, Mr. Bowman, you have been invited by the
Democrats to provide your advice as a professor, and you said
that the impeachment of Mayorkas needs to be based on not
policy differences, but it has to be, quote, ``has to be
subversion of the Constitution,'' another quote from you, ``for
illegal ends or serious offenses.'' Is that correct, yes or no?
That you said those statements, ``has to be subversion of the
Constitution for illegal ends or serious offenses.'' Yes or no?
Mr. Bowman. I'm sorry. Could you repeat that? You're
speaking----
Mr. Brecheen. You said it. It is on record. I need to kind-
of watch my time and move on through this. To the attorney
generals in the room, is not administering the laws of the land
a serious offense for illegal ends? Does it rise the level of
high crimes and misdemeanors? Please, each of you, please
answer that question.
Mr. Knudsen. Absolutely, Congressman.
Mr. Drummond. It does rise.
Mr. Bailey. Unequivocally, yes.
Mr. Brecheen. We have got three attorney generals who say
that the violation of these laws is a violation of the
enforcement of the law and is grounds of high crimes and
misdemeanors, which the Constitution clearly lays out is high
crimes and misdemeanors as a reason for impeachment. What we
tolerate, we empower. Congress has to do its job and send a
strong signal. If you don't follow the law, you are going to be
out.
Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Arizona, Mr. Crane, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, guys, for
showing up.
You guys aren't exactly attorney generals of Southern
Border States, are you? But even you guys are feeling the
effects of what is coming across that Southern Border. Is that
true?
Mr. Knudsen. Absolutely.
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Crane. Gentlemen, how long, roughly, did it take you to
become attorney general? Go ahead, Mr. Knudsen.
Mr. Knudsen. Well, roughly how long? I mean, I campaigned
for the better part of a year.
Mr. Crane. No, entire career. Just like 20 years, 15 years,
how long did it----
Mr. Knudsen. Oh, roughly, 15 years.
Mr. Crane. What about you, Mr. Drummond?
Mr. Drummond. Forty.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Bailey. Been practicing law for 10 years.
Mr. Crane. Yes. So you guys just didn't wake up one day and
say, I want to be attorney general, and snap, that happened,
right? I noticed that some of my colleagues on the other side
of the aisle have been trying to diminish, you know, your
qualifications.
What is the primary responsibility of the Federal
Government, Mr. Knudsen?
Mr. Knudsen. Primary responsibility of the Federal
Government is to carry out and execute the laws of the
Congress.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Is it to protect our unalienable God-given
rights, as well?
Mr. Knudsen. Absolutely.
Mr. Crane. What about, does our Government have a
responsibility to protect its citizens, Mr. Bailey?
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Crane. Are any of you guys familiar with Article IV,
section 4 of our Constitution, often called the invasion
clause? Anybody?
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Crane. I am going to read it real quick. ``The United
States shall guarantee to every State in the Union a Republican
form of government and shall protect each of them against
invasion.''
Now, there's arguments right now about whether or not this
is an invasion, but it is tough to argue when you have the
equivalent of a combat division size of illegals coming across
our Southern Border. For those of you that don't know, that is
10,000 individuals every single day in invasion.
We have talked about what comes with those individuals from
crime, you know, the economic burdens on our citizens, the
families being destroyed of fentanyl. You guys are all familiar
with that. You guys see them every single day in your own
States, is that correct?
Mr. Knudsen. Yes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you. Are you guys aware of the job title
of Alejandro Mayorkas, Mr. Knudsen?
Mr. Knudsen. His specific job title is Secretary of the
Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Crane. Secretary of Homeland Security. Now, I am no
Constitutional scholar, Mr. Drummond, but just from that job
title alone, would you assess that maybe his job might be to
secure and protect the homeland?
Mr. Drummond. He has the duty to control and guard our
homeland.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Bailey, is Secretary Mayorkas doing that?
Mr. Bailey. He has abdicated his official legal
responsibilities and his moral and ethical responsibilities to
this Nation.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Knudsen, is he doing that?
Mr. Knudsen. He absolutely is not. He is derelict in many
of those duties.
Mr. Crane. One of my colleagues talked about the difference
between individuals crossing on the terror watch list between
the Biden administration, Secretary Mayorkas, and the former
administration. Those numbers were a stark contrast. Under the
last administration, 14 individuals on the terror watch list
came through, were encountered at that Southern Border. Under
this administration, and we still have several months to go in
this new year, already 300 individuals on the terror watch
list.
Are you gentlemen aware of how many individuals it took to
pull off 9/11?
Mr. Knudsen. Not 300.
Mr. Crane. Yep. It was about 19. Does it concern you guys,
as folks that are concerned with the security of citizens in
your State, that something like that might happen in the United
States of America or your State?
Mr. Knudsen. Absolutely.
Mr. Drummond. Yes.
Mr. Bailey. Yes.
Mr. Crane. You guys talked about it all day long, and I
find it interesting that my colleagues on the other side of the
aisle kept saying that we are grandstanding here or we are just
campaigning, you know, or these are political differences. But
you guys, all three of you, and we went over how long it took
you to get in your positions, you guys are like the highest law
enforcement officials in your State. You guys all went over not
just the policy differences, but the different laws that this
Secretary is in violation of.
Mr. Knudsen, can you go over some of those really quick?
Mr. Knudsen. I absolutely can. I think the Secretary is
clearly in violation of U.S.C. 8, section 1225. He's clearly
violated section 1182 by granting mass parole. The Immigration
and Naturalization Act makes it very clear that that is not to
be granted on a mass bass. That's to be granted on a case-by-
case, individual basis.
Mr. Crane. Yep. Thank you, sir.
Ms. Jackson and Mr. Bowman both said that betrayal of a
nation is one of the criteria necessary for impeachment. If
allowing the equivalent of an army division of illegals coming
across the Southern Border on a daily basis, causing the deaths
of hundreds of thousands due to fentanyl every single--about
100,000 every year, enabling the sex trade in this country,
along with the importation of thousands of MS-13 gang members,
causing the encounters of individuals on the terror watch list
to go from 14 under the last administration to 300 on this
administration, lying to Congress about having operational
control, costing the American taxpayers hundreds of billions of
dollars for housing and care for these illegals, and more than
24,000 people from the Republic of China coming across our
Southern Border in this last year alone, if those aren't
betrayal to a nation, I don't know what is.
Thank you, gentlemen, for your time. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for 5 minutes for his
closing arguments.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Let me thank our
witnesses for being here today.
This hearing has confirmed what we already know over 4
hours ago. This so-called impeachment is nothing more than a
thinly-veiled political stunt. My Republican colleagues have
failed to make a case for impeachment, failed to understand the
Constitution, and failed to do anything to address challenges
at the border. This hearing has been more Republican rehash.
Attempting to impeach the Secretary over policy differences
instead of working with Democrats on immigration and border
policy reform demonstrates that Republicans are not only
interested in using border security as a political talking
point. This impeachment scheme is simply more distraction from
a do-nothing Republican Congress.
They talk about H.R. 2, a disastrous bill they wrote in
secret without any opportunity for Democratic input, knowing
very well that it was dead on arrival in the Senate. The so-
called investigation that Chairman Green has launched has been
conducted with a predetermined outcome from the start. Now our
Republican colleagues are trying to pretend that this effort
isn't political.
Mr. Chairman, the American people will see through such an
incredibly obvious sham. No matter how many times my Republican
colleagues twist the facts to suit their narrative, there is
absolutely no evidence that Secretary Mayorkas has committed an
impeachable offense. No amount of yelling, finger-pointing,
false righteousness, indignation can change that fact.
We heard today from Professor Bowman the consensus from
Constitutional scholars is clear: Republicans have not made a
case for impeachment. Even Republicans' favorite Constitutional
scholar, Jonathan Turley, has come out against this
impeachment, not just because it is baseless, but because it is
what a dangerous precedent it would set. As Professor Turley
explained, impeaching Secretary Mayorkas ``is a slippery slope
that we would be wise to avoid.'' Indeed, it is precisely the
temptation the Framers thought that they had avoided by
rejecting standards for maladministration.
It is no accident that Democrats invited a legal scholar to
this hearing, while Republicans invited three partisan
politicians. The Republican witnesses have no expertise in
impeachment. One of the witnesses is facing 41 ethics charges.
Another witness, the State Supreme Court, unanimously found he
failed to perform the plain, unequivocal, and ministerial
duties of approving information for a ballot initiative. But
again, no expertise on impeachment. All we learned today from
the Majority witnesses is that some Republican politicians
don't like a Democratic Cabinet Secretary.
Republicans are pretending to provide accountability, just
like they pretended to legislate these past months. In his
opening, the Chairman said there was no reasonable alternative
to pursuing impeachment. Let me suggest some alternatives.
Republicans could have supported funding increases for
border security operations instead of voting against them.
Republicans could provide additional resources requested by
CBP. They could engage with the administration on immigration.
They have not. Republicans have failed to act at every turn.
Instead of working with Democrats, they have wasted a year
chasing a baseless impeachment to satisfy their most extreme
right-wing members.
But as what we have heard today, impeachment was never
intended to be used that way. The Constitution's Framers
expressly did not include mismanagement, misgovernment, or
maladministration as a basis for impeaching a Cabinet
Secretary. My Republican colleagues may disagree with this
administration's border policy, and that is their right. But to
use impeachment to settle such differences is unconstitutional.
Mr. Chairman, I understand the last year has been a tough
one for Republicans and that your party would like to deflect
attention elsewhere. This is the very kind-of thing that the
Framers worked to avoid when establishing grounds for
impeachment.
Three years ago, Mr. Chairman, you wrote, ``Unity can be
only achieved by focusing on where we find common ground
instead of drawing new battle lines, and that every one of us
has a role in bridging the divide.''
When Chairman Green is ready to listen to his own words, I
want to be clear, Democrats will be here waiting to work on
responsible and effective policies to strengthen our border
security using the levers of power that the Constitution
actually gives Congress. But until then, we will continue
calling this sham impeachment for what it is, a political
stunt.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
Before I start my closing statement, I just want to make an
observation. It is very interesting that we point out that Mr.
Bishop can't talk political stuff about running for election,
but all the testimony from the left has been about politics,
about running for office, and about--so I just find it
fascinating.
But anyway, I recognize myself for my closing statement.
Today we have heard powerful testimonies from the attorneys
general of three States who are dealing with the consequences
of Secretary Mayorkas' border crisis. I want to thank you all
for being here and for your testimony and, of course, I will
thank Mr. Bowman for being here, as well.
As our witnesses made it abundantly clear, every State is
now a border State. Why are we here? We are here because
Secretary Mayorkas' policies were exploited by the drug cartels
and have done incredible damage to the United States. Those
policies were in violation of the laws passed by this Congress.
The Congress said the INA detain, parole is an exception based
on extreme circumstances, not 85 percent, as the Secretary
says, is now just being released into the country willy nilly.
It is a violation of law.
Interestingly enough, so he has disregarded the Congress.
He has also disregarded the Judiciary branch. Four court
rulings said cease and desist because you are breaking the law.
I am sorry. I took the oath at age 17 to defend the
Constitution against all enemies, foreign and domestic. The
oath wasn't to the American people. It wasn't to defend the
landmass or the flag. It was to defend the Constitution. This
Secretary took the same oath to defend the Constitution. Well,
I am sorry, but I think the Constitution of the United States
says we write the laws and not him get to pick and choose
whatever the heck he wants to when he is the Executive branch
and gets to execute the laws. He is to execute the laws as
written. That is the Constitution he took an oath to.
Four court orders, cease and desist because you are
breaking the law, and he disregards the Judiciary branch and
continues his policy. In fact, he doubles down, creating more
policies that do even more catch-and-release, which is why I
think it is intentional. He is abusing his position to force
his woke immigration policies on the United States of America,
despite the fact that Congress is supposed to fix those
immigration laws.
On top of that, back on script now, on top of that,
Secretary Mayorkas knows full well the consequences of these
policies, but instead, he is reversing course, he is doubling
down. It is worse. He has been to the border. He has seen the
numbers. He has seen the fentanyl seizures. He has met with the
grieving families. He knows about the cartels. He knows about
the human trafficking and the child exploitation. Yet he
doesn't change a thing. In fact, as I said, he admitted to the
Border Patrol the other day in a closed meeting, 85 percent are
being released.
Despite the intentionality behind this open border,
Secretary Mayorkas is attempting to skirt the consequences of
his actions. He has continuously tried to deflect, blaming
climate change, wars in Latin America, nonexistent DHS budget
cuts. There have been no budget cuts.
What is the cost of Secretary Mayorkas' border crisis?
Fentanyl poisoning is killing thousands of young people every
year. We learned from Attorney General Bailey that a total of
43 Missouri children died from unintentional--unintentional--
accidental, they didn't have a choice. We had testimony over
here, if Americans would just stop using drugs. Those little
babies didn't have a choice. That baby on a VRBO in Florida
certainly didn't have a choice. She wasn't able to just say no.
My heart breaks for this baby and her parents.
Because of this border crisis, thousands of mothers won't
get to see their kids graduate. Thousands of fathers won't be
able to walk their daughters down the aisle at those weddings.
As a parent myself, that breaks my heart. That is the human
cost.
Apparently I need to explain to my colleagues, while it is
accurate that most of the fentanyl is seized at the CBP, you
know, intercepted at the official points of entry, this is
because those facilities are equipped for that purpose. Yet we
also know that drugs are coming across between ports of entry.
It simply isn't being caught. This is because Border Patrol
agents are tied up processing people at the crossing sites. It
is not like we can put the entire border as an X-ray machine or
a CT scanner.
While my Democrat colleagues may not believe me, I hope
that they will believe those on the front lines. Border Patrol
agents have told us that drugs coming between the ports of
entry is a key driver of the rising fentanyl crisis. Why else
has fentanyl gone on the street from 98 bucks a hit to 25 bucks
a hit after this Secretary came into office? It is because of
the simple supply and demand of coming across the Southern
Border.
We have also heard that Federal officials--from Federal
officials that they believe they only apprehend roughly 5 to 10
percent of the fentanyl coming in. That is from the border.
They are only catching 5 to 10 percent.
What really matters here isn't how much fentanyl is caught,
but how much fentanyl is flooding the neighborhoods. We got 3
guys here from 3 States just discredited by the Ranking Member,
but they are here to testify what is happening in their States.
You know what? Some of us heard you. Some of us heard you.
People are dying because of this.
Because of Secretary Mayorkas' border crisis, cities and
States Nation-wide struggle to pay first responders while
health care and education systems falter. In fact, medical care
for undocumented aliens will cost $7 billion this year.
We also heard from Attorney General Drummond about the
organized criminal operations and that some illegal aliens run
once they arrive. He shared that in Oklahoma alone, the AG
office prosecuted 50 complex, multijurisdictional criminal
cases, most of them involving Mexican and Chinese drug cartels
coming across the Southern Border. Make no mistake, these human
trafficking and drug trafficking rings are sophisticated, and
they have taken a foothold in the United States because of our
open border.
Finally, we can't negate the credible threat this open
border poses to our national security. With emboldened Islamic
terrorist groups and an increasingly aggressive Communist
Chinese Party, we have to wonder how many bad actors are in
that 1.8 million known gotaways and how many are in the unknown
gotaways? Well, we won't know until something tragic happens.
When we embarked on this investigation almost a year ago,
we knew there would be roadblocks and that it would be a
formidable challenge. No matter how hard this process gets,
Homeland Republicans will not back down. The American people
deserve answers, accountability, and ultimately, an end to the
border crisis.
Look, if you have a Secretary, a Cabinet Secretary, who
breaks the laws or refuses to obey the laws of Congress,
refuses to adhere to the rulings of a judiciary, cease-and-
desist orders from a judge, I mean, that is lawlessness on his
own part. If it were me, a Republican, I would expect to be
impeached. You can't have Cabinet Secretaries that just decide
to do whatever the heck they want to do.
The Committee on Homeland Security has made every effort to
ensure that this investigation was thorough. We do not take
this lightly. The Homeland Security Committee spent almost a
year, countless hours. We held 10 hearings, we heard from two
dozen witnesses, released 5 reports totaling 300 pages. We
conducted numerous transcribed interviews, border chiefs,
multiple visits to the border to see for ourselves.
I don't hold any personal animosity toward Secretary
Mayorkas, but I sure as hell don't want to see him continue as
Secretary of Homeland Security, not after the pain and turmoil
and chaos his policies have inflicted on the American people.
When Congressional oversight demonstrates beyond a shadow of a
doubt that Executive branches are neglecting their duty,
overstepping their authority, ignoring laws passed by Congress,
it is our duty to act to defend this institution, to defend the
Constitution.
Also, just to be clear, this is the responsibility of
Congress. The Supreme Court made it clear in United States v.
Texas, according to the Court, and I quote, ``Even though the
Federal Courts lack Article 3 jurisdiction over the suit, other
forums remain open for examining the Executive branch's arrest
policies. For example, Congress poses an array of tools to
analyze and influence these policies. Those are political
checks for a political process.''
So, no. So not only do these proceedings have the support
of the House, the Supreme Court has pointed to impeachment as a
source of relief for States suffering a border crisis put
together, orchestrated by a Secretary who is violating the laws
passed by Congress and disregarding the court's orders.
Now, before I end, I would like to address a few things
that--other things my Democrat colleagues have said. Let me
start with saying I am very disappointed in the Ranking Member
for misquoting me. He claimed that I wrote that I will not
support another dime to DHS. This is inaccurate. What I wrote
was, I will not support another dime to DHS until the policies
of H.R. 2 are signed into law and enforced by the
administration. We are talking about the supplemental. So we
are not talking about the budget, which has already gone
through and passed the House. We are talking about additional
dollars in a supplemental.
To suggest that I would defund the Department of Homeland
Security is disingenuous at best. I can tell you there have
been a lot of Democrats who have said defund ICE and defund the
police. I never said defund Homeland Security.
I would also like to address the claim that Secretary
Mayorkas isn't at fault here, that he isn't to blame for the
economic crisis in Latin America. I agree. But poverty in Latin
America is nothing too new. Actually, poverty rates in Latin
America have stayed flat from last administration to this one.
Further, I would like to reiterate, the Democrats sent
these Articles of Impeachment to our committee in November.
They sent it to this committee. The Homeland Security Committee
has the authority of the House to conduct these impeachment
proceedings, and that is exactly what we are going to do.
Democrats can bring up a New York Times popcorn story all
they want to. They keep talking about MAGA Republicans and
former President Trump this and that. But it is clear these are
deflections because they have no answers for the piss-poor
performance of Secretary Mayorkas and his policies.
Let me just point out, my Democrat colleagues are quick to
talk about kids in cages under Trump, but did a single one of
them mention the 85,000 missing UACs under President Biden? Of
course not. The hypocrisy in this room is palpable.
Of course, our guide should always be the intent of the
Framers of our Constitution, the Founding Fathers, regarding
how the Constitution was intended to be understood. But too
often in political debates, people can fall into inconsistency
for possibly partisan reasons. I get that.
For example, Professor Bowman wrote a book on impeachment
in 2019 called ``High Crimes and Misdemeanors: A History of
Impeachment for the Age of Trump''. In it, he states, the power
of the House to impeach Cabinet Secretaries, ``remains
important as a signal of legislative displeasure with
administrative personnel and policy.'' Yet today, he has
testified on multiple occasions that policy alone isn't enough
for an impeachment. That is what Professor Bowman wrote when
Donald Trump was President. But now in his written testimony at
page 3, he writes that impeachment, and I quote, ``should not
be attempted based on simple policy disagreements between
Congress and the Executive branch.'' I guess that was then and
this is now.
But let me be clear, no one is supporting impeachment of
Secretary Mayorkas over policy differences. The impeachable
offenses relate to violations of the law. Insisting on
enforcing the law as written by Congress is not a policy
difference. It is a fundamental requirement of the
Constitution.
Last, I got to tell you, I was appalled from someone on the
left who said--suggested this has all been a waste of time. We
are here today because it is our duty to provide oversight and
hold the Executive branch accountable. Yes, this includes the
option to impeach. We cannot allow a Cabinet Secretary to
violate the laws, disregard the Constitutional structure, lie
to Congress under oath, all to massive harm to the Americans,
and do nothing about it. If a Republican were head of DHS and
committing these same acts, I can assure you we wouldn't
tolerate it from them either.
It is the Homeland Security Committee's responsibility to
provide oversight of DHS. This is what we were elected to do.
This is what we were appointed to this committee for. Now, this
might not be how you want to spend your time, but it certainly
is how we must be spending our time.
I ask the Members here today, is fighting to stop the
needless death of children to fentanyl poisoning a waste of
time? Is it a waste of time to try to protect those kids? Is
trying to stop criminal cartels from wreaking havoc on the
country a waste of time? It is not. The insinuation is
appalling.
What has been a waste of time? What has been a waste? The
amount of taxpayer dollars this border crisis has cost. The
amount of people who have died as a result of fentanyl flowing
across our Southern Border, the amount of migrants who have
lost their lives making the dangerous journey, the amount of
money State and local governments have had to spend cleaning up
Secretary Mayorkas' mess, this is where the real waste has
been, not these official proceedings. As we continue these
proceedings in the coming days, it is important that the
American people remember the facts, that this body once again
embraces our Constitutional responsibilities.
When I took that oath as a young boy on the plane at West
Point, it meant something to me. When I took it when the people
of Tennessee sent me up here, it meant just as much, if not
more. We will support the basic tenets of that document. That
is Congress writes the laws, the President executes those laws,
the Judiciary interprets those laws, and they have a
responsibility to do their duty and we do, also.
Without objection, that ends my closing statement. Without
objection, the committee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 2:56 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Letter From Constitutional Law Experts Submitted For the Record by Hon.
Glenn Ivey
January 10, 2024.
Speaker Mike Johnson,
H-232, The Capitol, Washington, DC 20515.
Chairman Mark Green,
2446 Rayburn House Office Building, Washington, DC 20515.
Constitutional Law Experts on the Impeachment Proceedings Against
Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro Mayorkas
Senior Republicans in the House of Representatives--including
Speaker of the House Mike Johnson and Chairman Mark Green of the
Committee on Homeland Security--have stated that they intend to pursue
an impeachment of Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. This
proceeding will apparently occur in the Committee on Homeland Security
on an accelerated timeframe. As scholars of the Constitution,
considering the facts currently known and the charges publicly
described, we hereby express our view that an impeachment of Secretary
Mayorkas would be utterly unjustified as a matter of constitutional
law.
Although House Republicans have offered various justifications for
an impeachment, the underlying basis appears to be their view that
Secretary Mayorkas's policy decisions have degraded border security and
involved objectionable uses of enforcement discretion. House
Republicans have also publicly asserted that Secretary Mayorkas
testified falsely in stating that he is enforcing existing Federal law
and that the southern border is closed and secure.
When the Framers designed the Constitution's impeachment
provisions, they made a conscious choice not to allow impeachment for
mere ``maladministration''--in other words, for incompetence, poor
judgment, or bad policy. Instead, they provided that impeachment could
be justified only by truly extraordinary misconduct: ``Treason,
Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.'' U.S. Const., art. II,
4. Thus, as Charles L. Black, Jr. noted in his influential handbook,
impeachment is not permitted for ``mere inefficient administration, or
administration that [does] not accord with Congress's view of good
policy:'' Simply put, the Constitution forbids impeachment based on
policy disagreements between the House and the executive branch, no
matter how intense or high stakes those differences of opinion.
Yet that is exactly what House Republicans appear poised to
undertake. The charges they have publicly described come nowhere close
to meeting the constitutional threshold for impeachment. Their proposed
grounds for impeaching Secretary Mayorkas are the stuff of ordinary
(albeit impassioned) policy disagreement in the field of immigration
enforcement. If allegations like this were sufficient to justify
impeachment, the separation of powers would be permanently
destabilized. It is telling that there is absolutely no historical
precedent for the impeachment charges that House Republicans have
articulated. To the contrary, on the rare occasions that Members of the
House have proposed impeaching executive officials for their handling
of immigration matters, the House has properly retreated from that
grave step.
We hold a wide range of views on the wisdom and success of
Secretary Mayorkas's approach to immigration policy. But we are in
agreement that impeaching him based on the charges set forth by House
Republicans would be a stark departure from the Constitution.
Of course, our institutional affiliations are listed for
identification purposes only, and our signatures reflect our personal
capacity, not any position on behalf of our employers.
Sincerely,
Laurence H. Tribe,
Carl M. Loeb University Professor, Emeritus,
Harvard University.
Joshua Matz,
Partner/Kaplan Hecker & Fink LLP,
Adjunct Professor of Law/Georgetown Law School.
Donald Ayer,
Adjunct Professor of Law,
Georgetown Law School.
Philip C. Bobbitt,
Herbert Wechsler Professor of Federal Jurisprudence,
Columbia Law School.
Corey Brettschneider,
Professor of Political Science,
Brown University.
Erwin Chemerinsky,
Dean and Jesse H. Choper Distinguished Professor of Law,
Berkeley Law.
Gabriel J. Chin,
Edward L. Barrett Jr. Chair of Law,
Martin Luther King Jr. Professor of Law,
Director of Clinical Legal Education,
UC Davis School of Law.
Rosalind Dixon,
Professor of Law,
University of New South Wales.
Michael Dorf,
Robert S. Stevens Professor of Law,
Cornell Law School.
Amanda Frost,
John A. Ewald Jr. Research Professor of Law,
University of Virginia School of Law.
Michael Gerhardt,
Burton Craige Distinguished Professor of Jurisprudence,
UNC School of Law.
Stuart Gerson,
Trustee,
Society for the Rule of Law.
Aziz Huq,
Frank and Bernice J. Greenberg Professor of Law,
University of Chicago Law School.
Kevin R. Johnson,
Dean and Mabie-Apallas Professor of Public Interest Law and
Chicana/o Studies,
UC Davis School of Law.
Pamela S. Karlan,
Kenneth and Harle Montgomery Professor of Public Interest Law,
Stanford Law School.
Jon D. Michaels,
Professor of Law,
UCLA School of Law.
Timothy Naftali,
Senior Research Scholar,
Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs.
Victoria Nourse,
Ralph V. Whitworth Professor in Law,
Georgetown Law School.
Deborah Pearlstein,
Director, Princeton Program on Law and Public Policy,
Charles and Marie Robertson Visiting Professor of Law and Public
Affairs,
Princeton University.
Robert Post,
Sterling Professor of Law,
Yale Law School.
Cristina Rodriguez,
Leighton Homer Surbeck Professor of Law,
Yale Law School.
Jack Rakove,
William Robertson Coe Professor of History and American Studies,
Professor of Political Science, Emeritus,
Stanford University.
Kermit Roosevelt,
David Berger Professor for the Administration of Justice,
Penn Carey Law School.
Peter Shane,
Professor and Jacob E. Davis and Jacob E. Davis II Chair in Law
Emeritus,
The Ohio State University Moritz College of Law.
David A. Strauss,
Gerald Ratner Distinguished Service Professor of Law,
Faculty Director, Supreme Court and Appellate Clinic,
University of Chicago Law School.

A P P E N D I X  I I

----------

Questions From Hon. August Pfluger for Austin Knudsen
Question 1. The Speaker of the House recently released a memorandum
detailing the exact Biden administration actions that have undermined
border security and encouraged illegal immigration.
In January of 2021, the administration issued an Executive Action
ending limitations and restrictions against immigration from certain
countries associated with terrorism. This dangerous call served as an
invitation to adversaries and foreign threats, nearly welcoming them to
our backyards.
Despite being so far from the Southern Border, do you believe
suspected terrorists have successfully avoided Border Patrol and law
enforcement, and may be residing in Montana?
Answer. More than 280 people on the terrorist watch list have been
identified at the Southwest Border by Border Patrol during the Biden
administration, including 169 in fiscal year 2023.\1\ The horrific
Hamas attacks on Israel shine even more light on the risks the open
border has created. Last year, a leaked CBP document recognized that
``foreign fighters'' from terrorist organizations like Hamas and
Hezbollah ``may attempt to travel to or from the area of hostilities in
the Middle East via circuitous transit across the Southwest
Border.''\2\ It is reasonable to assume that many ``foreign fighters''
who are enemies of the United States and people on the terrorist watch
list have slipped through the cracks and may be residing in Montana.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/cbp-enforcement-statistics.
\2\ https://www.foxnews.com/politics/cbp-memo-sounds-alarm-hamas-
hezbollah-fighters-potentially-using-southern-border-enter-us.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 1b. How is State and local law enforcement preparing for
this possibility?
Answer. Montana law enforcement prepares for terrorism-related
issues by strengthening collaboration and information sharing between
all levels of law enforcement. Timely and relevant information on
threats related to domestic violent extremism and terrorism issues is
shared with partners through Montana's fusion center. Additionally,
State law enforcement continues to build relationships with Canadian
partners to strengthen information sharing related to border issues and
threats of extremism.
Question 1c. Has the crisis at our Southern Border pulled resources
from our Northern Border, therefore creating vulnerabilities there as
well?
Answer. Yes, as noted in my written testimony, the Northern Border
is also a grave concern to me. Border Patrol agents from Montana have
rotated to assist with the crisis at the Southern Border, leaving 545
miles of border between Montana and Canada open to additional
vulnerabilities with less staffing by the Federal Government. So far,
during fiscal year 2024, CBP has reported 54 encounters at the Havre
Sector of the Northern Border. During the same time during fiscal year
2023, there had been 18 encounters and 28 encounters in 2022.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/nationwide-encounters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Questions From Hon. August Pfluger for Andrew Bailey
Question 1a. The Speaker of the House recently released a
memorandum detailing the exact Biden administration actions that have
undermined border security and encouraged illegal immigration.
In January of 2021, the administration issued an Executive Action
ending limitations and restrictions against immigration from certain
countries associated with terrorism. This dangerous call served as an
invitation to adversaries and foreign threats, nearly welcoming them to
our backyards.
Mr. Bailey: First of all, thank you for your service. Having
combatted terrorism overseas, how have you seen a shift in the demands
and approaches to public safety in your own State since the threats of
an open border have picked up?
Question 1b. Do you believe your State is equipped to handle the
increase in potential threats of terrorism or malign activity?
Answer. Recently, the Daily Caller reported that Federal
authorities caught an Al-Shabaab terrorist at the Southern Border and
released him into the country, where he roamed freely for a year before
being arrested in Minnesota. This was one of many on the terrorist
watch list that Secretary Mayorkas failed to apprehend due to his
neglect of his Constitutional and statutory mandates to secure the
border. This does not include the 264 known individuals on the
terrorist watch list who attempted to illegally enter our Nation
because Secretary Mayorkas has effectively posted a ``Come In, We're
Open'' sign at the Southern Border. I did not serve in the United
States Army during the War on Terror just to sit idly by as known or
suspected terrorists enter our Nation without issue because Secretary
Mayorkas refuses to do his job.
As an armored cavalry officer deployed to Iraq, my unit was tasked
with the same duty as Secretary Mayorkas: secure a Nation's border to
protect its inhabitants from bad actors. I am proud to say that, unlike
the Secretary, my unit was successful in this mission. When suspected
terrorists were placed in our custody, they stayed there. The same
cannot be said under Mayorkas. Rather than working to diligently
protect Americans within our Nation's sovereign borders, he has
knowingly turned a blind eye to suspected terrorists illegally entering
our country.
Mayorkas' inaction has placed an undue burden on the States,
especially Missouri given its location in both the geographic and
population centers of the country. Outfitted with interstate systems
like the I-35, I-70 and I-44 corridors, Missouri serves as the
crossroads of America and contains the fifth-most interstate miles
nationally, far more than comparably-sized States. Thus, as a flood of
illegal immigrants, drugs, and traffickers enter our State, we see
first-hand the catastrophic toll an unsecured, open border takes on
entire communities.
Much of the harm of Secretary Mayorkas' failure to protect our
citizens must be measured in the human toll from dangerous illegal
drugs flowing into our country. Nearly 12,500 grams fentanyl were
seized by the Missouri State Highway Patrol in 2023. It takes only 2
milligrams of fentanyl to cause an overdose death. To put this in
perspective, with a population of more than 6 million people, 12,500
grams of fentanyl could kill Missouri's entire population twice over.
There has also been a 500 percent surge in child fentanyl exposure
deaths, a nearly 75 percent increase in fentanyl overdoses in Missouri
between 2019 and 2023, and a total of 43 Missouri children died from
unintentional fentanyl poisonings in 2022. And let's not forget that a
significant amount of the toxic fentanyl poisoning in our communities
comes from our global adversaries in China who are increasingly taking
advantage of our open border.
Missouri ranks fourth on the list of the States with the highest
human trafficking rate in the United States, with 4.30 per 100,000
citizens. In large part, this is due to the three key interstates
flowing through our major cities directly from the Southern Border. In
2021, the National Human Trafficking Hotline Database recorded 1,100
human trafficking tips in our State. Missouri law enforcement was able
to rescue 327 victims from those tips. Most cases revolved around sex
trafficking, with the NHTH recording 210 sex trafficking cases. Fifteen
were labor trafficking-related.
Across Missouri, law enforcement has been forced to adapt their
tactics to combat these threats. From hiring specific overdose
investigators, to debating a change in the way our criminal code treats
drug traffickers, to creating a State-wide anti-human trafficking task
force, Missouri has stepped up to protect its citizens in the face of
Secretary Mayorkas' failures. My office is doing everything we can
within the court system to force Secretary Mayorkas and his
administration to secure the border, including pushing the three
separate and distinct lawsuits described in my earlier testimony.
However, no single State is properly equipped to face the impacts
of our open border. That is precisely why our Founders prescribed a
duty on the Federal Government to protect Americans against foreign
threats. While the States can act as a stop-gap--and that is what many
of us are attempting to do through lawsuits and increased prosecution--
this functionality is hindered when faced with the administration's
unlawful and orchestrated refusal to enforce Federal immigration law.
Secretary Mayorkas has abdicated his official responsibilities under
the law, and Missouri communities are being ravaged as a result. He
must be held accountable.
I applaud the House of Representatives for pursuing the impeachment
and removal of Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. The Senate must follow
suit.
Questions From Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
for Frank O. Bowman, III
Question 1. Republicans have portrayed your previous academic
writing as confirming their position that mere policy differences may
be a ground for impeachment. In particular, that ``displeasure with
administration personnel and policy'' may be sufficient to warrant
impeachment. Is that correct?
Answer. I have never written that mere policy differences would be
an adequate ground for impeachment. To the contrary, I join with the
consensus view of Constitutional scholars that ordinary policy
differences are not a proper ground for impeachment. Indeed, this
general principle is particularly applicable to a disagreement on
policy between a Presidential administration and a political party
controlling only one house of Congress, and that by the very narrowest
of margins.
The quotation to which the question alludes, one mentioned by
Chairman Green and Rep. Bishop, occurs in the final paragraph of
Chapter 4 of the second edition of my book, High Crimes & Misdemeanors:
A History of Impeachment for the Age of Trump (Cambridge Univ. Press
2023). Both Congressmen take the snippet of text they quote entirely
out of context.
In the referenced section of Chapter 4, I discuss the only prior
impeachment of a U.S. Cabinet officer, President Ulysses Grant's
Secretary of War, William Belknap. Prior to the quoted passage, I
explained why no Cabinet officer before or after Belknap has been
impeached. The primary, and obvious, reason is that, as I wrote, any
Cabinet officer ``whose behavior veered anywhere near an impeachable
zone'' was simply removed by the President.\1\ Which is what happened
to Belknap. He took a bribe. When President Grant found out, he fired
Belknap. But the House, controlled by Democrats for the first time
since the Civil War, impeached the Secretary anyway as a means of
politically damaging President Grant and by extension the Republicans
in the upcoming 1876 election.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ FRANK O. BOWMAN, III, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS: A HISTORY OF
IMPEACHMENT FOR THE AGE OF TRUMP (2d ed.) 120 (Cambridge Univ. Press
2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In the final paragraph of Chapter 4, I was, of course, not saying
that mere ``displeasure'' with either a person or a policy is a
Constitutionally-acceptable ground for impeachment. Rather, when a
subordinate official has actually committed ``treason, bribery, or
other high crimes and misdemeanors'' (as Secretary of War Belknap
incontestably did), Congress might elect to proceed with impeachment to
signal its displeasure.
Secretary Mayorkas has not committed any impeachable offense.
Impeaching a Cabinet officer innocent of ``treason, bribery, or other
high crimes and misdemeanors'' to indicate displeasure with
administration policy or the officer's administration of that policy
would be a profoundly anti-Constitutional act.
Question 2. In the past, you have written that impeachable ``high
crimes and misdemeanors'' can be interpreted to include ``serious
executive misconduct, including . . . betrayal of the Nation's foreign
policy interests'' such as when a President subordinates the Nation's
interests to foreign interests. Republican Rep. Guest suggested that
you have written in the past about foreign policy differences as
grounds for the first impeachment of President Trump--what you describe
as Trump's ``rolling destruction of American foreign policy''--and that
your past writing contradicts your testimony at the January 10, 2024,
hearing. Are foreign policy differences an impeachable offense, and how
do foreign policy differences differ from ordinary policy differences?
Answer. I have written that one of the accepted historical
categories of impeachable conduct, in both the pre-1787 United Kingdom
and in the United States, has been ``betrayal of the nation's foreign
policy interests.''\2\ However, in saying this, I was obviously not
saying that ordinary policy differences between a Presidential
administration and the opposing political party become impeachable
simply because the subject matter of the disagreement is foreign,
rather than domestic, policy.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS, supra note 1, at 39, 102;
Frank O. Bowman, III, The Constitutional Case for Impeaching Donald
Trump (Again), JUST SECURITY (Jan. 9, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To the contrary, long precedent establishes that, in the U.S.
impeachment context, ``betrayal of the Nation's foreign policy
interests'' has had certain identifying features.
First, for impeachment purposes, a nation's ``foreign policy
interests'' are not merely the transient preferences of a political
party or faction. Rather, they are enduring interests about which there
is a broad societal consensus, ideally one embodied in statutes,
treaties, the practice of multiple Presidential administrations, and
(where applicable) the views of a nation's diplomats, foreign policy
experts or professionals.
Second, the word ``betrayal'' implies, not merely changing policy
or adopting policy views contrary to one's political adversaries, but
subverting the national interest for illegitimate, often personal,
motives.
British impeachments that illustrate these features include the
following.
In 1667, after an expensive and unnecessary war with the Dutch, the
Earl of Clarendon was impeached in part for seeking payments from
France to the British crown to evade parliamentary controls on royal
finance.
In 1678, the Earl of Danby was impeached for soliciting--on behalf
of the English King Charles II--a bribe from Louis XIV of France in
return for English neutrality in the Franco-Dutch War.
Both Clarendon and Danby's solicitations not only undercut long-
standing British foreign policy objectives and subjected the British
monarch to undue foreign influence, but were a bald attempt to avoid a
significant parliamentary constraint on royal overreach--the
requirement that the Crown obtain ``supplies'' (i.e., funding in
addition to the monarch's private wealth) through the legislature.
More relevant to the present case are the American impeachments of
Senator William Blount in 1797-98 and of President Donald Trump in
2020.
Sen. William Blount: Blount, then a U.S. Senator, concocted a
scheme to enrich himself by giving Great Britain control of the
territories of Louisiana and Florida. Blount's scheme was obviously
contrary to contemporary U.S. foreign policy interests inasmuch as the
American government and populace wanted to expand into Louisiana and
Florida, or at the very least to prevent Great Britain from assuming
control over those territories. In addition, the articles of
impeachment against Blount charged him with violations of the
Neutrality Act of 1794, and also with violation of the Treaty of
Friendship, Limits, and Navigation between the United States and Spain
(because his scheme involved stirring up Native American tribes to
attack Spanish officials and interests).
Not only was Blount's scheme undeniably contrary to U.S. foreign
policy interests, and to multiple treaty obligations,\3\ but it was a
``betrayal'' in the most obvious sense. Blount tried to sell out the
interests of his country for personal financial gain.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ As I have written elsewhere: ``Blount's scheme violated
national foreign policy objectives shared by the Executive and
Legislative branches. President Adams, and Washington before him,
favored U.S. neutrality in the on-going European wars. Before Adams'
election, Congress had passed legislation mandating neutrality and
specifically barring the sort of buccaneering adventure against foreign
states Blount was planning. The friendship treaty with Spain,
negotiated by the Executive and ratified by the Senate, imposed an
obligation on both nations not to stir up hostility against each other
among the Indian nations. Similarly, U.S. policy toward the Indian
nations, embodied in legislation, was to maintain peaceful relations
and to avoid friction by dealing with them only through Governmentally-
authorized agents. Finally, unstated in any treaty or statute, but
widely understood, was a general desire to weaken the hold of European
powers on lands bordering the United States, particularly land around
the vital Mississippi waterway, leaving those territories available for
American expansion and annexation. *** Blount's adventure ran afoul of
all these objectives.'' BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS, supra note
1, at 117-18.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Although Blount was acquitted by the Senate, the historical
consensus is that the verdict turned on the decision that senators are
not ``civil officers'' subject to the impeachment remedy under Article
II, Section 4 of the Constitution.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Id. at 115-16.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
President Donald Trump: President Trump's first impeachment
involved two articles, the first charging that Trump committed ``high
crimes and misdemeanors'' in relation to his scheme to coerce the
government of Ukraine into announcing investigations into Trump's
likely Presidential opponent, Joe Biden, and the second charging
obstruction of Congress. The first article was captioned ``Abuse of
Power,'' but as I have written, it ``braided together three themes . .
. corruption, damage to foreign policy interests, and injury to the
democratic process.''\5\ As the first article of impeachment summarized
the matter:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Id. at 331.

``President Trump abused the powers of the Presidency by ignoring and
injuring national security and other vital national interests to obtain
an improper personal political benefit. He has also betrayed the Nation
by abusing his high office to enlist a foreign power in corrupting
democratic elections.''\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ House Resolution 755, 116th Cong. (Dec. 18, 2019).

The ``national security and other vital national interests''
alluded to in the article were the interest of the United States in
supporting, militarily and diplomatically, a country threatened, and
indeed physically invaded, by Russia, a long-standing geopolitical
opponent of the United States, together with the interest of the United
States in preventing Russian territorial expansion up to the borders of
the countries of the NATO alliance.
These objectives had been endorsed as national security interests
of the United States over multiple Presidential administrations through
repeated bipartisan approval of legislation authorizing military and
security aid to Ukraine.\7\ They were also endorsed by the entire
diplomatic and national security apparatus of the U.S. Government
before and during the Trump administration itself.\8\ For example, when
Trump's White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB) placed a hold
on Congressionally-mandated aid to Ukraine in the July 2019 as part of
President Trump's scheme to coerce Ukraine, every relevant agency of
Trump's own administration except OMB questioned the hold and supported
military assistance to Ukraine as being in the national security
interest of the United States.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ BOWMAN, HIGH CRIMES & MISDEMEANORS, supra note 1, at 313.
\8\ Id.
\9\ Report of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence,
Pursuant to H. Res. 660 in Consultation with the House Committee on
Oversight and Reform and the House Committee on Foreign Affairs (Dec.
2019), at 72-74.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Thus, Trump's first impeachment precisely matches the template for
``betrayal of the nation's foreign policy interests'' described above.
First, the foreign policy interests of the United States in that
case were enduring interests embraced by multiple Presidential
administrations, endorsed by the foreign policy professionals of the
Executive branch, and manifested in bipartisan legislation enacted by
multiple U.S. Congresses.
Second, and critically, the ``betrayal'' of U.S. interests
consisted of subverting the national interest for illegitimate personal
motives--securing a personal political advantage over a potential
political rival. In Trump's case, the betrayal was doubly severe
because it amounted to an effort to use Presidential power to corrupt
the democratic electoral process.
Secretary Mayorkas: Nothing alleged against Secretary Mayorkas
meets the traditional criteria for impeachment based on ``betrayal of
the nation's foreign policy interests.'' The most that can be said
against him is that he has executed the policy preferences of President
Joe Biden in relation to immigration and border control issues and that
the political party in control of the House of Representatives
disapproves of those policy preferences.\10\ The most that can be said
is that there has been litigation challenging some decisions by
Secretary Mayorkas, none of which has to date resulted in a final
decision contrary to the Secretary. Moreover, as I indicated in my
written testimony to the committee, ``As a Constitutional matter, the
existence of active litigation challenging discretionary actions by a
Cabinet Secretary (or indeed by a President) is no ground for
impeachment.'' Bowman, Written Statement to House Committee on Homeland
Security (Jan. 10, 2024), at 9. There is no indication that the
Secretary's actions, or indeed the Biden administration's policy
choices, are contrary to established national foreign policy interests.
To the contrary, U.S. policy regarding immigration and border control
has varied from administration to administration and Congress to
Congress as the challenges, needs, and preferences of the country have
varied. More importantly, there is absolutely no indication that
Secretary Mayorkas has taken any official action for corrupt or
illegitimate personal motives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Republican Members of this committee have contended that
Secretary Mayorkas is not merely executing Biden administration policy
preferences but ``violating the law.'' However, as I have demonstrated
elsewhere, that is not the case. See Frank O. Bowman, III, Republicans
Are Calling to Impeach Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas,
Here's Why Their Case is Bunk, JUST SECURITY (March 13, 2023), https://
www.justsecurity.org/85427/republicans-are-calling-to-impeach-homeland-
security-secretary-alejandro-mayorkas-heres-why-their-case-is-bunk/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To repeat the central point, ordinary policy differences between a
Presidential administration and the opposing political party do not
become impeachable simply because the subject matter of the
disagreement is foreign, rather than domestic, policy.
Question 3. Rep. Crane suggested that Secretary Mayorkas has
betrayed the Nation, and that betrayal of the Nation would be
sufficient to warrant impeachment. Are you aware of any evidence that
Secretary Mayorkas has betrayed the United States? And Rep. Crane
further suggested that you said ``betrayal of the Nation'' is a
potential ground for impeachment, whereas you actually said ``betrayal
of the Nation's foreign policy interests'' is a ground for impeachment.
What precisely did you mean?
Answer. I did not say in my testimony to the committee or elsewhere
that that ``betrayal of the nation'' is a ground for impeachment. I
have agreed with Charles Black that one decent definition of ``high
crimes and misdemeanors'' that covers most cases is offenses ``which
are extremely serious, which in some way corrupt or subvert the
political and governmental process, and which are plainly wrong in
themselves to a person of honor, or to a good citizen, regardless of
words on the statute books.'' Nothing alleged against Secretary
Mayorkas meets this general definition of impeachable conduct.
I have also written that one specific category of impeachable
``high crimes and misdemeanors'' is ``betrayal of the Nation's foreign
policy interests.'' In my previous answer, I explain what is meant by
that phrase for purposes of impeachment and I demonstrate why Secretary
Mayorkas' conduct does not fall within it.
Finally, I am aware of no evidence that Secretary Mayorkas has
betrayed the Nation. To the contrary, based on the facts of which I am
aware, Secretary Mayorkas appears to be a capable, dedicated public
servant trying as best he can to carry out the policy priorities of the
President of the United States and to manage the perennial and
intractable problems related to immigration and control of the U.S.
Southern Border.

[all]
