- ADVANCING INNOVATION (AI): HARNESSING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO DEFEND AND SECURE THE HOMELAND

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

ADVANCING INNOVATION (AI): HARNESSING ARTI-
FICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO DEFEND AND SECURE
THE HOMELAND

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 22, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-67

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
58-784 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Mr. Troy Demmer, Co-founder and Chief Product Officer, Gecko
Robotics:
Oral Statement.................................................    10
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Mr. Michael Sikorski, Chief Technology Officer and Vice President
of Engineering, Unit 42, Palo Alto Networks:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Mr. Ajay Amlani, President, Head of Americas, iPROOV:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. Jake Laperruque, Deputy Director, Security and Surveillance
Project, The Center for Democracy and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................    22
Prepared Statement.............................................    24

For the Record

Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From the
State of New York:
Article, Wired, February 12, 2024..............................    73

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Troy Demmer............    79
Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Michael Sikorski.......    81
Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Ajay Amlani............    83
Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Jake Laperruque........    90

ADVANCING INNOVATION (AI): HARNESSING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO DEFEND
AND SECURE THE HOMELAND

----------

Wednesday, May 22, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:07 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark E. Green
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, Higgins, Guest, Bishop,
Pfluger, Garbarino, Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Brecheen, Crane,
Thompson, Swalwell, Carter, Thanedar, Ivey, Goldman, Garcia,
Menendez, Suozzi, Kennedy, and Clarke.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order. Without objection, the Chair may declare the
committee in recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from
private-sector stakeholders relating to the opportunities and
challenges presented by the emergence of artificial
intelligence and discuss how the Department of Homeland
Security can develop and implement certain AI technologies in
support of the homeland security mission. I now recognize
myself for an opening statement.
In this era of rapidly-advancing technology, I am
especially proud to live in a nation of innovators, some of
whom join us today. Today, American ingenuity is paving the way
once again. Artificial intelligence or AI promises to transform
the global economy and national security landscape as we know
it.
AI has the potential to create new jobs, catalyze
productivity in Americans' daily lives, and, of course, protect
our men and women in uniform and law enforcement.
Throughout this Congress committees in both chambers have
convened numerous hearings to understand the countless
opportunities and challenges AI presents. Like cybersecurity,
AI's impact is a complex and cross-cutting issue that cannot be
handled by one jurisdiction alone.
Therefore, we are here to examine what I believe to be one
of the most promising areas in which to expand our use of AI,
the security and defense of our homeland.
The Committee on Homeland Security has an oversight
obligation to make sure we harness AI technologies right. As
with any new technology, AI presents new risks and we must take
the time to understand them. This includes prioritizing safety
and security throughout AI development, deployment, and use.
It also requires us to treat AI with appropriate nuance so
that we understand the impact of proposed regulatory measures
on our businesses.
Today's full committee hearing follows up on a productive
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection Subcommittee
hearing led by Chairman Garbarino last December. The
subcommittee specifically considered the role of DHS and CISA
in securing AI, a topic we will continue to explore today.
As that hearing reaffirmed, the threats facing our country
are increasingly complex and DHS plays a critical role in
keeping Americans safe and our country secure.
DHS has a broad mission and has explored and even
implemented AI for specific purposes aligned with its unique
mission. For example, U.S. Customs and Border Protection has
used AI-powered systems to monitor border areas using drones
and cameras which help identify suspicious activity and
unauthorized crossings in real time.
The Transportation Security Administration is currently
examining the ways in which AI can enhance its security
screening, including using AI to augment its X-ray imaging of
travelers' carry-on luggage. TSA may soon look to AI algorithms
and particularly facial recognition powered by AI to identify
security threats among the traveling public and enhance the
prescreening process.
While these AI-powered systems offer the promise of
increased security and efficiency, they also bring significant
risks that Congress must carefully assess. For instance, AI-
powered facial recognition systems capture and store images of
Americans and foreign travelers which present substantial
privacy concerns. We must ensure that the use of AI-powered
facial recognition by TSA is balanced with strong protections
of privacy, civil liberties, and ethical standards.
Furthermore, U.S. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement is
using AI to help identify and track illegal activities, such as
human trafficking and smuggling, by analyzing large data sets
and detecting patterns.
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, CISA,
is carefully examining the risks and opportunities presented by
AI and the way it can be leveraged to enhance our Nation's
resilience against cyber threats. In the years ahead CISA will
play a critical role in addressing and managing risks at the
nexus of AI, cybersecurity, and critical infrastructure.
Considering the wide-spread push for AI adoption within DHS
it is critical that the Department collaborates with Congress
and with relevant stakeholders, including those from the
private sector, to manage AI's complexities and risks.
In addition to the domestic concerns relating to the
emergence of AI, we must also consider the broader strategic
implications. Our Nation's primary strategic adversary, the
People's Republic of China, has made AI development a national
priority and is investing heavily in its research, talent, and
infrastructure. The communist regime's aggressive pursuit of AI
poses a significant challenge to the United States, not only
economically, but also in terms of our national security.
In fact, DHS's 2024 homeland threat assessment warns that
developing ``malicious cyber actors have begun testing the
capabilities of AI-developed malware and AI-assisted software
development technologies that have the potential to enable
larger-scale, faster, efficient, and more invasive cyber
attacks against targets, including pipelines, railways, and
other U.S. critical infrastructure.'' This is extremely
concerning.
As complex as these threats are, our Nation's efforts to
combat them will be even more challenging if our adversaries
lead in AI research, development, and innovation. For these
reasons it is important for Congress, DHS, and the private
sector to work together to ensure that we remain at the
forefront of AI innovation while safeguarding our national
security, economic competitiveness, and civil liberties.
Today we will hear from a panel of experts who will provide
insights into the current state of AI for homeland security and
the steps that we can take to trust that AI, the AI we use will
be secure.
To our witnesses, thank you for being here today, for your
efforts to educate Members of this committee and the American
people on how we can responsibly advance AI innovation. I look
forward to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, MD
May 22, 2024
In this era of rapid technological advancement, I'm especially
proud to live in a nation of innovators--some of whom join us today.
Today, American ingenuity is paving the way once again. Artificial
intelligence, or AI, promises to transform the global economy and
national security landscape as we know it. AI has the potential to
create new jobs, catalyze productivity in Americans' daily lives, and
protect our men and women in uniform and law enforcement.
Throughout this Congress, committees in both chambers have convened
numerous hearings to understand the countless opportunities and
challenges AI presents. Like cybersecurity, AI's impact is a complex
and cross-cutting issue that cannot be handled by one jurisdiction
alone. Therefore, we are here to examine what I believe to be one of
the most promising areas in which to expand our use of AI: the security
and defense of our homeland.
The Committee on Homeland Security has an oversight obligation to
make sure we harness AI technologies right. As with any new technology,
AI presents new risks, and we must take the time to understand them.
This includes prioritizing safety and security throughout AI
development, deployment, and use. It also requires us to treat AI with
appropriate nuance so that we understand the impact of proposed
regulatory measures on our businesses.
Today's full committee hearing follows up on a productive
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection Subcommittee hearing led by
Chairman Garbarino last December. The subcommittee specifically
considered the role of DHS and CISA in securing AI--a topic we will
continue to explore today. As that hearing reaffirmed, the threats
facing our country are increasingly complex, and DHS plays a critical
role in keeping Americans safe and our country secure.
DHS has a broad mission and has explored and even implemented AI
for specific purposes aligned with its unique missions.
For example, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) has used AI-
powered systems to monitor border areas using drones and cameras, which
help identify suspicious activity and unauthorized crossings in real
time. The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) is currently
examining the ways in which AI can enhance its security screening
processes, including using AI to augment its X-ray imaging of
travelers' carry-on luggage.
TSA may soon look to AI algorithms, and particularly facial
recognition systems powered by AI, to identify security threats among
the traveling public and enhance the pre-screening process.
While these AI-powered systems offer the promise of increased
security and efficiency, they also bring significant risks that
Congress must carefully assess. For instance, AI-powered facial
recognition systems capture and store images of Americans and foreign
travelers, which present substantial privacy concerns. We must ensure
that the use of AI-powered facial recognition by TSA is balanced with
strong protections of privacy, civil liberties, and ethical standards.
Furthermore, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is
using AI to help identify and track illegal activities, such as human
trafficking and smuggling, by analyzing large datasets and detecting
patterns. And the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) is carefully examining the risks and opportunities presented by
AI and the ways it can be leveraged to enhance our Nation's resilience
against cyber threats. In the years ahead, CISA will play a critical
role in addressing and managing risks at the nexus of AI,
cybersecurity, and critical infrastructure.
Considering the wide-spread push for AI adoption within DHS, it is
critical that the Department collaborates with Congress and with
relevant stakeholders, including those from the private sector, to
manage AI's complexities and risks.
In addition to the domestic concerns relating to the emergence of
AI, we must also consider the broader strategic implications. Our
Nation's primary strategic adversary, the People's Republic of China
(PRC), has made AI development a national priority and is investing
heavily in research, talent, and infrastructure. The Communist regime's
aggressive pursuit of AI poses a significant challenge to the United
States, not only economically but also in terms of our national
security.
In fact, DHS's 2024 Homeland Threat Assessment warns that
developing ``[m]alicious cyber actors have begun testing the
capabilities of AI-developed malware and AI-assisted software
development--technologies that have the potential to enable larger-
scale, faster, efficient, and more evasive cyber attacks--against
targets, including pipelines, railways, and other U.S. critical
infrastructure.''
This is extremely concerning. As complex as these threats are, our
Nation's efforts to combat them will be even more challenging if our
adversaries lead in AI research, development, and innovation. For these
reasons, it is important for Congress, DHS, and the private sector to
work together to ensure that we remain at the forefront of AI
innovation while safeguarding our national security, economic
competitiveness, and civil liberties.
Today, we will hear from a panel of experts who will provide
insights into the current state of AI for homeland security, and the
steps we can take to trust that the AI we use is secure.
To our witnesses, thank you for being here and for your efforts to
educate Members of this committee and the American people on how we can
responsibly advance AI innovation. I look forward to your testimony.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to our witnesses. I would like to thank you
for holding this important hearing on the intersection of
artificial intelligence and homeland security.
Artificial intelligence is not new. The Department of
Homeland Security and its components have a long history of
trying to understand how to most appropriately leverage the
capacity AI provides. The release of ChatGPT in November 2022
made clear AI's transformative potential, and it accelerated
efforts by the administration and Congress to ensure the United
States continue to lead the world on the responsible
development and the use of AI.
As we consider how to deploy AI to better secure the
homeland, we must keep 3 critical principles in mind. First, we
must ensure that AI models we use and the data to train them do
not reinforce existing biases. That requires that AI used by
the Government be developed pursuant to specific policies
designed to eliminate bias and is tested and retested to ensure
it is not having that effect.
Eliminating bias from AI also requires a diverse AI work
force comprised of people from a variety of backgrounds who can
identify potential biases and prevent biases from being encoded
into the models.
Second, the Government must rigorously assess appropriate
use cases for AI and ensure that the deployment of AI will not
jeopardize the civil rights, civil liberties, or privacies of
the public. Law enforcement and national security agencies in
particular must implement an exacting review of potential
infringements on those fundamental democratic principles.
Moreover, it is essential that the work force be included
in decision-making processes on how AI will be deployed. The
work force is in the best position to understand capability
gaps and where AI can be affected.
AI is also a tool the work force will use to carry out
their jobs more effectively. It is not and should not ever be a
replacement for people.
Finally, the AI tools we use must be secured. In many
respects, existing cybersecurity principles can be adopted to
secure AI. I commend the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, commonly called CISA, for working with the
private sector to ensure the adoption of secure-by-design
principles in the development of AI.
Moving forward, we must determine vulnerabilities unique to
AI and work together to address them. I commend President Biden
on last year's Executive Order on AI which put the Federal
Government on the path of developing and deploying AI in a
manner consistent with these principles.
As DHS continues to assess how it will use AI to carry out
its vast mission set from cybersecurity to disaster response to
aviation security, I am confident that it will do so in a
manner that incorporates feedback from the work force and
protect civil rights, civil liberties, and privacy. We cannot
allow our optimism about the benefits of AI to short-circuit
how we evaluate this new technology. At the end of the day, bad
technology is bad for security.
As we consider the potential benefits AI presents for DHS's
mission, we must also consider the new threats if proposed. AI
in the hands of our adversaries can jeopardize the security of
Federal and critical infrastructure networks, as well as the
integrity of our elections. We know that China, Russia, and
Iran have spent the past 4 years honing their abilities to
influence our elections, sow discord among the American public,
and undermine confidence in our election results.
Advances in AI will only make their job easier, so we must
redouble our efforts to identify manipulated content and
empower the public to identify malicious foreign influence
operations.
I look forward to a robust conversation about how the
Department of Homeland Security can use AI strategically to
carry out its mission more effectively. I look forward to the
witnesses' testimony.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 22, 2024
Artificial intelligence is not new. The Department of Homeland
Security and its components have a long history of trying to understand
how to most appropriately leverage the capacity AI provides.
The release of ChatGPT in November 2022 made clear AI's
transformative potential, and it accelerated efforts by the
administration and Congress to ensure the United States continues to
lead the world on the responsible development and use of AI. As we
consider how to deploy AI to better secure the homeland, we must keep 3
critical principles in mind.
First, we must ensure that AI models we use and the data to train
them do not reinforce existing biases. That requires that AI used by
the Government be developed pursuant to specific policies designed to
eliminate bias and is tested and retested to ensure it is not having
that effect. Eliminating bias from AI also requires a diverse AI
workforce, comprised of people from a variety of backgrounds who can
identify potential biases and prevent biases from being encoded into
the models.
Second, the Government must rigorously assess appropriate use cases
for AI and ensure that the deployment of AI will not jeopardize the
civil rights, civil liberties, or privacy of the public. Law
enforcement and national security agencies, in particular, must
implement an exacting review of potential infringements on these
foundational democratic principles.
Moreover, it is essential that the workforce be included in
decision-making processes on how AI will be deployed. The workforce is
in the best position to understand capability gaps and where AI could
add efficiencies. AI is a tool the workforce will use to carry out
their jobs more effectively. It is not--and should not ever be--a
replacement for people.
Finally, the AI tools we use must be secure. In many respects,
existing cybersecurity principles can be adapted to secure AI. I
commend the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) for
working with the private sector to ensure the adoption of Secure-by-
Design principles in the development of AI. Moving forward, we must
determine vulnerabilities unique to AI and work together to address
them. I commend President Biden on last year's Executive Order on AI,
which put the Federal Government on a path of developing and deploying
AI in a manner consistent with these principles.
As DHS continues to assess how it will use AI to carry out its vast
mission set--from cybersecurity to disaster response to aviation
security--I am confident that it will do so in a manner that
incorporates feedback from the workforce and protects civil rights,
civil liberties, and privacy. We cannot allow our optimism about the
benefits of AI to short-circuit how we evaluate this new technology. At
the end of the day, bad technology is bad for security.
As we consider the potential benefits AI presents for DHS's
mission, we must also consider the new threats it poses. AI in the
hands of our adversaries could jeopardize the security of Federal and
critical infrastructure networks as well as the integrity of our
elections. We know that China, Russia, and Iran have spent the past 4
years honing their ability to influence our elections, sow discord
among the American public, and undermine confidence in our elections
results. Advances in AI will only make their job easier, so we must
redouble our efforts to identify manipulated content and empower the
public to identify malicious foreign influence operations.
I look forward to a robust conversation about how the Department of
Homeland Security can use AI strategically to carry out its mission
more effectively.

Chairman Green. I want to thank the Ranking Member for his
comments.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Honorable Jackson Lee follows:]
Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
May 22, 2024
Chairman Green, and Ranking Member Thompson, thank you for holding
today's hearing on ``Advancing Innovation (AI): Harnessing Artificial
Intelligence to Defend and Secure the Homeland.''
I look forward to the questions that will follow the testimony of:

Mr. Troy Demmer, co-founder and chief product officer, Gecko
Robotics;

Mr. Michael Sikorski, CTO and VP of engineering at Palo Alto
Networks Unit 42, Palo Alto Networks;

Mr. Ajay Amlani, president, head of the Americas, iProov;
and

Mr. Jake Laperruque, deputy director, security and
surveillance project, Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT)
(*Democratic Witness*).
I welcome the witnesses and thank them for their testimony before
the House Homeland Security Committee.
The purpose of this hearing is to explore how the responsible use
of AI can support the homeland security mission of the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS).
Members of the committee will learn about security challenges
created by AI, including how adversaries can leverage AI to target the
homeland and how the deployment of AI that does not meet safety or
security standards can undermine national security.
There are additional areas of concern that the committee should
remain focused on ensuring that AI's development and deployment for
civilian agency use is safe, secure, and protects civil rights, civil
liberties, and privacy.
Members of the committee will hear perspectives on how DHS and CISA
can best implement their responsibilities under President Biden's
recent AI Executive Order 14110, on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy
Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence.
Executive Order 14110 represents a comprehensive effort by the
Biden administration to maintain U.S. dominance in innovation while
ensuring artificial intelligence (AI) reflects U.S. values, including
prioritization of safety and security and respect for civil rights,
civil liberties, and privacy.
AI is generally understood to mean computerized systems that
operate in ways commonly thought to require intelligence.
President Biden's recent Executive Order 14110 defined AI as ``a
machine-based system that can, for a given set of human-defined
objectives, make predictions, recommendations, or decisions influencing
real or virtual environments.''
Artificial intelligence systems use machine- and human-based inputs
to perceive real and virtual environments; abstract such perceptions
into models through analysis in an automated manner; and use model
inference to formulate options for information or action.
The Executive Order outlines that where practicable, AI security
policy should be aligned with existing efforts to strengthen the
security of technology, such as secure-by-design.
Given the momentum associated with AI policy, such alignment could
help to further accelerate the implementation of such security
principles to broader sets of technology while streamlining DHS/CISA
guidance.
ai threats and opportunities
Generative AI is being used to generate increasingly realistic
photo, audio, and video forgeries, or ``deep fakes,'' that adversaries
could deploy as part of an information operation.
Past deep fakes have been detectable by experts; however, the
sophistication of the technology is progressing to the point that it
may soon be capable of fooling forensic analysis tools.
Additionally, as deep fakes become more realistic they risk
undermining public confidence in legitimate video or audio.
Generative AI can also facilitate cyber crimes by helping produce
more convincing phishing emails.
According to one report, in the last year, there has been a 1,265
percent increase in malicious phishing emails, suggesting generative AI
may be contributing to this significant rise in phishing attacks.
Further, artificial intelligence can be used to create full
``digital patterns-of-life,'' matching digital footprints with purchase
histories, credit reports, resumes, and other information to create
comprehensive behavioral profiles of Government officials or private
citizens.
These digital profiles can unmask people who work in Sensitive to
highly-Classified areas of Government and anticipate their movements.
This application of AI can also target elected officials, law
enforcement officers, and essential workers in critical infrastructure.
President Biden has taken important actions to support research and
development in AI and to ensure that AI development is secure, safe,
and respects civil rights and privacy concerns.
In October 2022, the White House Office of Science and Technology
Policy released the Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights, a non-binding
document designed to lay out key principles and policies to ensure AI
development protects civil rights and promotes democratic values.
On October 30, 2023, President Biden issued an Executive Order on
``Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence'', and during
the first few months of 2024, the Biden administration secured
voluntary commitments from 15 leading AI companies to follow certain
policies designed to manage risks posed by AI.
AI's goal is to replace many tasks performed by humans with
machines, but the consequences for human error and computing error are
not the same.
Human errors are costly and borne by the person or the company they
represent, while a computer error is borne by the purchaser not the
manufacturer.
This situation in an AI world would create incentives to replace
people with machines that are not held to the same standards of care as
people.
While precise definitions vary, President Biden's recent Executive
Order 14110 defined AI as ``a machine-based system that can, for a
given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions,
recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual
environments.''
The EO also issues several mandates for DHS.
It directs DHS to establish an AI Safety and Security Board
consisting of private- and public-sector experts to issue
recommendations and best practices to ensure AI deployments are secure
and resilient.
It also directs CISA to partner with sector risk management
agencies to conduct AI risk assessments for each critical
infrastructure sector.
Additionally, DHS will update existing security guidance to
incorporate NIST's AI Risk Management Framework and will conduct a
pilot on utilizing AI to discover and remediate vulnerabilities on
Federal agency networks.
CISA will also support the Office of Management and Budget's effort
to issue guidance to agencies on red-teaming generative AI systems.
Outside of AI security, DHS also has key tasks related to
facilitating immigration pathways for AI experts and leading efforts to
combat AI intellectual property theft.
dhs/cisa actions on ai
Shortly after President Biden signed the EO, CISA released its
2023-2024 Roadmap for Artificial Intelligence, which describes the 5
lines of effort the agency will undertake to action its obligations
under the Executive Order:

Responsibly Use AI to Support [CISA's] Mission;

Assure AI Systems;

Protect Critical Infrastructure from Malicious Use of AI;

Collaborate with and Communicate on Key AI Efforts with the
Interagency, International Partners, and the Public; and

Expand AI Expertise in our Workforce.
CISA's Roadmap wisely leverages existing programs and policies to
address AI security issues where possible while developing new policies
and work streams where gaps in policies exist.
Some of the more specific objectives CISA seeks to implement under
its Roadmap include developing a strategy to adopt the next generation
of AI-enabled technologies; generating best practices on the
development and use of secure AI systems; engaging with international
partners on global AI security; and recruiting staff with AI expertise.
In line with CISA's commitment to international cooperation on AI
policy and its goal of providing guidance on best practices for the
private sector, last month, CISA and the United Kingdom's National
Cyber Security Centre jointly released Guidelines for Secure AI System
Development in collaboration with agencies from 16 other countries.
The guidelines focused on securing all aspects of the AI
development life cycle, including secure design, secure development,
secure deployment, and secure operation and maintenance.
The publication aligns with CISA's broader focus on encouraging
software developers to follow secure-by-design principles that ensure
security is built into the technology product development process.
As DHS increases its use of AI across its components and missions,
in April of this year, Secretary Mayorkas established the DHS AI Task
Force, which seeks to drive the use of AI across DHS while protecting
civil rights, civil liberties, and privacy.
The task force is chaired by the Department's chief AI officer and
the under secretary for science and technology, with the officer for
civil rights and civil liberties serving as vice chair.
Artificial intelligence systems use machine- and human-based inputs
to perceive real and virtual environments; abstract such perceptions
into models through analysis in an automated manner; and use model
inference to formulate options for information or action.
This assumes that AI's human-based inputs function as intended free
from errors or omissions.
Contracting and service agreements on the adoption and use of AI
should consider important lessons learned from the healthcare.gov
experience--tens of millions were lost due to poor contract management.
For this reason, the management of AI development for civilian
agencies or critical infrastructure use is as important as the
applications that being developed.
ai opportunities
AI offers a wide range of potential applications across different
sectors.
In cybersecurity, AI has largely worked to the advantage of network
defenders.
For example, conventional cybersecurity tools defend against known
matches to malicious code, so hackers must modify small portions of
that code to circumvent the defense.
AI-enabled tools, on the other hand, can be trained to detect
anomalies in network activity, thus presenting a more comprehensive and
dynamic barrier to attack.
In the aftermath of the 2020 Solar Winds cyber campaign, Federal
agencies and the private sector have expedited implementation of
Endpoint Detection and Response systems that utilize AI to detect
anomalous network activity.
However, AI has and will continue to be used in myriad ways that
undermine national security, individual privacy, or introduce new and
novel attack vectors.
Rapid advances in generative AI, as highlighted by the release of
ChatGPT in November 2022, have increased concerns about how more
advanced versions of AI may increase security risks.
Generative AI means the class of AI models that emulate the
structure and characteristics of input data in order to generate
derived synthetic content.
This can include images, videos, audio, text, and other digital
content.
There will be no one definition of AI or one method that defines
what it is or what it will mean.
The efforts behind AI are focused on may not be able to plan for
all possible outcomes, but one that may make this conversation much
more challenging is the creation of machines that can write their own
computing code or algorithms without human intervention will quickly
lead to code that is only understood by AI.
The Biden administration's efforts, including EO 14110, reflect
major advances in Federal AI policy and full implementation of those
policies, in consultation with private-sector experts and stakeholders,
offer the potential to strengthen national security while mitigating
the novel risks posed by AI.
AI can be made to accomplish a great deal if we are not complacent
in the effort to build better AI for civilian agencies and critical
infrastructure use.
AI can be trained.
AI can be tested.
We must leverage these 2 facts to ensure that tax dollars on AI
systems and applications are not wasted or lost to fraud and abuse.
I plan to introduce legislation specifically addressing civilian
agency use and critical infrastructure to focus efforts on building a
sound model for AI adoption.
Thank you.

Chairman Green. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today, and I ask that our witnesses
please stand and raise your right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Green. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you. Please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Mr.
Troy Demmer is the co-founder and chief product officer at
Gecko Robotics, a company combining advanced robotics and AI-
powered software to help ensure the availability, reliability,
and sustainability of critical infrastructure.
Today Gecko's innovative climbing robots capture data from
the real world that was never before accessible. From
pipelines, ship hulls, missile silos, and other critical asset
types. Gecko's AI-driven software platform then enables human
experts to contextualize that data and translate it into
operational improvements.
Mr. Michael Sikorski is Palo Alto Networks' Unit 42's chief
technology officer and vice president of engineering. He has
over 20 years of experience working on high-profile incidents
and leading research and development teams, including at
Mandiant and National Security Agency. Mr. Sikorski is also an
adjunct assistant professor for computer science at Columbia
University.
Mr. Ajay Almanai--how do you pronounce your name, sir?
Mr. Amlani. Ajay Amlani.
Chairman Green. Ajay Amlani. Got it, thank you. He
currently serves as the president and head of the Americas for
iProov, a global provider of biometric authentication products
used for on-line enrollment and verification. In addition, he
is a well-recognized identity technology expert serving as a
strategic advisor for industry leaders working in artificial
intelligence, identity technology, and ecommerce.
Mr. Jake Laperruque is the deputy director of the Center
for Democracy and Technology, Security and Surveillance
Project. Prior to joining CDT, Jake worked as senior counsel at
the Constitution Project at the Project on Government
Oversight. He also previously served as a program fellow at the
Open Technology Institute and law clerk of the Senate
Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology, and the Law.
Again, I thank our witnesses for being here, and I now
recognize Mr. Demmer for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF TROY DEMMER, CO-FOUNDER AND CHIEF PRODUCT OFFICER,
GECKO ROBOTICS

Mr. Demmer. Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the committee. Thank you for the
opportunity to join you today. My name is Troy Demmer, and I am
the co-founder of Gecko Robotics, a Pittsburgh-based technology
company that uses robots, software, and AI to change how we
understand the health and integrity of physical infrastructure.
Back in 2013, Gecko started with a problem. A power plant
near where my cofounder and I went to college had to keep
shutting down due to critical assets failing. The problem was
obvious from the first meeting with the plant manager: They had
almost no data.
The data that had been collected was collected very
manually with a gauge reader at a single point and sensor
measurement. Furthermore, that data was often collected by
workers working off of ropes at elevated heights or in confined
spaces resulting in few measurement readings. That meant the
power plant had to make reactive decisions rather than being
proactive.
That was the genesis of the idea behind Gecko, using rapid
technological advances in robots, software, and AI to get
better data and generate better outcomes. We do this by
building wall-climbing robots armed with various sensor
payloads that can gather 1,000 times more data at 10 times the
speed compared to traditional methods.
We also have a software platform that takes that data and
combines it with other data sets to build a first order
understanding of the health of critical infrastructure. Where
are the vulnerabilities? What do we need to do to be proactive
before fixing it before a problem occurs? How do we prevent
catastrophic disasters?
Those are the problems Gecko is solving today for some of
the most critical infrastructure that protects the American way
of life. We're helping the Navy reduce their maintenance
backlog and build the next generation of military equipment
smarter.
We're helping the U.S. Air Force create the digital
baseline for the largest infrastructure program since the
Eisenhower interstate highway project. We're working with
various other critical public and commercial infrastructure
projects across the country. In every one of these cases the
missing link is the data, and that brings us to the
conversation we're having in today's hearing.
AI models are only as good as the inputs they are trained
on. Trustworthy AI requires trustworthy data inputs, data
inputs that are auditable, interrogatable. Data inputs that
provide the complete and undiluted answer to questions we are
asking. When it comes to our critical infrastructure,
infrastructure that powers the American way of life and
protects our homeland, those data inputs for the most part do
not exist.
Without better data even the most sophisticated AI models
will be at best ineffective and at worst harmful.
Yet the way America collects data on infrastructure today
hasn't fundamentally changed in 50 years. Today, despite
advances in data collection technologies like robots, drones,
fixed sensors, and smart probes that can detect corrosion
through layers of concrete, we are still largely gathering data
manually even on our most critical infrastructure like dams,
pipelines, bridges, power plants, railroads, and even military
assets.
To give you one example from our work, we have one major
national security partner who collects data on critical assets
both manually and with our robots. Their manual process
collected by handheld sensors and skateboards creates 3,000
individual data points. Our robots on that same asset collect
more than 8 million.
That is more than 2,600 times the data, data that
multiplies the power of AI models and their predictive value.
That's the scale and of the difference between new technology-
driven processes and manual processes that we still largely
rely on to secure our critical infrastructure.
Without better data collection AI will never meet its
potential to secure the critical infrastructure that protects
our homeland and the American way of life.
As I conclude, I want to touch briefly on how we think
about robotics and AI in the work force construct. At Gecko we
talk a lot about upskilling the work force. That's a big
priority for many of our partners.
We've responded by hiring a significant number of former
manual inspector workers and then training them to operate our
robots. More than 20 percent of our employees don't have 4-year
degrees. Workers who once hung from ropes at dangerous heights
are now operating robots. Workers who built their careers
inspecting assets are now helping our software developers build
the tools to make that work better.
Thank you again for the opportunity to join you today, and
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Demmer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Troy Demmer
May 22, 2024
Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members
of the House Committee on Homeland Security. On behalf of Gecko
Robotics and our 250+ employees in Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Texas,
New York, North Carolina, South Carolina, and around the world, I would
like to thank you for inviting me to testify before you today.
My name is Troy Demmer, and I am the co-founder of Gecko Robotics,
a Pittsburgh-based technology company that uses robotics, software, and
AI to change how we understand the health and integrity of physical
infrastructure.
My testimony today will focus on the missing ingredient preventing
AI from being an effective tool for securing the physical
infrastructure that powers the American way of life and protects our
Nation--the data.
Fifty years ago, we assessed the health of physical infrastructure
by taking manual data readings. Today, despite advances in data
collection technologies (robots that can climb, fly, and swim; probes
that can detect steel corrosion through layers of concrete), we are
still largely gathering data manually--even on our most critical
infrastructure like dams, bridges, power plants, railroads, and even
military assets. This manually-collected data is low quality and low
quantity, giving us little insight into the health of our
infrastructure.
Back in 2013, we started Gecko Robotics to solve this exact
problem. A power plant near where my co-founder and I went to college
kept shutting down due to critical failures. Unscheduled plant
shutdowns have a cascading effect on the local power grid and
surrounding communities. Utilities have to find power elsewhere and buy
it at higher rates--and those costs are passed on to consumers. As was
the industry standard at the time, the plant was regularly collecting
data manually. This low-quality, low-quantity data was not only
ineffective at helping them prevent shutdowns; collecting it often
required workers to hang from ropes at dangerous heights. Without high-
quality, high-quantity data on their critical infrastructure, the power
plant could not avoid failures. They were forced to react to problems
rather than prevent them.
Why does this matter in a hearing on ``Harnessing Artificial
Intelligence to Defend and Secure the Homeland''? Because AI models
that apply to physical infrastructure are designed to do just that--to
prevent problems before they happen. The right application of AI should
be able to tell you exactly how to operate a power grid or the
vulnerabilities of a dam or bridge. But even the best AI applications
are only as good as the data they are trained on. Trustworthy AI
requires trustworthy data inputs--data inputs that are auditable and
interrogatable. As much as data is important to cybersecurity and our
Nation's virtual infrastructure, it's also important to our physical
infrastructure. Without the data, no amount of AI can help us secure
and defend this infrastructure against vulnerabilities that threaten
our way of life.
Those of us working on this problem understand its importance and
are investing in building technologies that will solve it. Most people
are focused on building solutions that are realistically 10 years away
from mission readiness. But our critical infrastructure is failing
today. Bridges are collapsing. Power plants are failing. Ships are
corroding. AI can help, but only if it has the right data. We need a
solution not only for the future, but also for today.
When it comes to harnessing AI to secure and defend our critical
infrastructure, we face two issues: First, most AI efforts are not
focused on gathering data and building AI for the built world--and they
are building for tomorrow, not today. And second, most AI development
efforts are focused on software even though hardware is just as
important to supporting AI.
As the committee decides how best to harness AI, I encourage you
all to consider two key points:
(1) AI efforts must focus on gathering high-fidelity data not only
to support cybersecurity but to support infrastructure
security, as well
(2) Developing cutting-edge data acquisition hardware is critical
to creating AI technology that secures and protects our
infrastructure.
invest in data for ai programs designed for the built world
When we think of defending the homeland via AI, we typically focus
on cyber threats and digital infrastructure. However, physical
infrastructure--bridges, tunnels, railways, power plants, pipelines,
shipping vessels, and more--forms the backbone of our Nation's
security. Like cyber infrastructure, these assets are susceptible to
threats and degradation over time. Advanced AI systems can analyze data
collected from sensors and robotic systems to secure our critical
infrastructure--but only if we have the data.
The American Society of Civil Engineers' most recent Report Card
gave American infrastructure a bleak C- rating.\1\ Digging into the
scores presents an even bleaker picture. American transit earned a D-.
American dams, levees, roads, and stormwater systems all received Ds.
These poor grades not only reflect the quality of our infrastructure
today. They also reflect the quality of the data we have about that
infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Report Card for America's Infrastructure (2021). American
Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE). https://
infrastructurereportcard.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
This lack of data is alarming, because the less data we have, the
less insight we have and the more vulnerable we are when there's a
threat. If a cyber attack took down a major power plant, how hard can
we run all of our back-up generators and other electrical assets
without causing a major blackout? Today, we don't know.
And cyber attack isn't the only threat our infrastructure faces.
Natural degradation of this infrastructure also threatens our national
security. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) estimates
there are approximately 15,600 dams in the United States with a high
hazard potential, meaning their failure could result in loss of
life.\2\ Across the country, there are 167 million daily crossings on
bridges rated to be in ``poor'' condition.\3\ In fact, Gecko Robotics'
headquarters was just miles away from where the Fern Hollow Bridge
collapsed in 2023, injuring 10 and requiring $25.3 million to
rebuild.\4\ Recent climate studies estimate that a mass electrical
blackout that coincides with a brutal summer heatwave could more than
double heat-related deaths in major U.S. cities.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ FEMA National Dam Safety Program Overview (2021). Federal
Emergency Management Agency. https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/
documents/fema_nsdp-overview-fact-sheet.pdf.
\3\ Bridge Report (2024). American Road & Transportation Builders
Association. https://artbabridgereport.org/state/map.
\4\ $25.3M in Federal funding set aside to replace Pittsburgh's
collapsed Fern Hollow Bridge (2022). Trib Total Media. https://
triblive.com/local/25-3m-in-Federal-funding-set-aside-to-replace-
pittsburghs-collapsed-fern-hollow-bridge/.
\5\ How Blackouts during Heat Waves Amplify Mortality and Morbidity
Risk (2023). Stone et. al. Journal of Environmental Science and
Technology. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c09588.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Failure of these assets would be catastrophic, but we lack data on
how best to maintain them or respond during times of crisis. That's
because today, data is still collected by hand with scaffolding and
solitary sensors. Today, railroad companies use wax sticks to judge if
train tracks are too hot for operation. The result? We can't make
confident maintenance or crisis-time decisions.
Modern tools are so easy to use that any high school kid can build
an AI model with a few lines of code. But inputs matter. Because of
this, the very first question that you should ask as agencies implement
AI is, ``How was this data collected, and can I trust it?''
I urge this committee to prioritize identifying and collecting the
right data and pursuing AI programs that stress the importance of data.
The more accurate and relevant the data, the more effective our AI
solutions will be at enhancing infrastructure security.
update funding programs to account for hardware development
To collect AI-quality data about our physical infrastructure, we
need to invest in data acquisition systems like sensors and robots;
however, companies like Gecko face three key obstacles to developing
these kinds of systems because of the way current Government funding
programs are designed.
(1) The first obstacle is that most funding programs do not account
for the up-front investment required to develop these systems.
To develop and test our robots, Gecko Robotics has built an
industrial testing environment complete with sample boiler
tubes, tank shells, and concrete missile silos. Our internal
development of testing environments has been key to our ability
to rapidly test and prototype our technology. Under Executive
Order 14110, DHS is an important partner in ``developing and
helping to ensure the availability of testing environments,
such as test beds, to support the development of safe, secure,
and trustworthy AI technologies . . . ''.\6\ I urge DHS to
provide access to adequate testing environments for qualified
companies--a critical step in developing AI for physical
infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Executive Order 14110: Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy
Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence (2023). Executive Office
of the President. https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2023/11/01/
2023-24283/safe-secure-and-trustworthy-development-and-use-of-
artificial-intelligence.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(2) The second obstacle is that some funding programs don't account
for the ways hardware is developed. Unlike software, which can
be rapidly prototyped and scaled, hardware development often
demands more engineering staff and longer testing periods. We
need programs that recognize and account for the unique
requirements of hardware development. For example, programs
like DHS's Silicon Valley Innovation Program (SVIP) provide
huge opportunities to develop hardware systems that can drive
the development of safe and reliable AI for national security.
However, the current headcount (
TM
, combining the best of ML, deep
learning, and generative AI to achieve real-time and automated
security.
The continued investment in and integration of AI into cyber
defense capabilities is important because it provides defenders a more
capable and nimble tool kit to analyze security data--yielding powerful
insights that guide deployment of protective measures.
ai-powered cyber defense in action--significant benefits for defenders
For too long, our community's most precious cyber resources--
people--have been inundated with security alerts that require manual
triage, forcing them to play an inefficient game of ``whack-a-mole,''
while vulnerabilities remain exposed and critical alerts are missed.
Making matters more difficult, this legacy approach often requires
defenders to stitch together security data from across dozens of
disparate cybersecurity products at the same time, a difficult task
often counterproductive to achieving desired cybersecurity outcomes.
Organizations find themselves drowning in their own data, struggling to
operationalize it. Industry research shows that over 90 percent of SOCs
are still dependent on manual processes, a sure-fire way to give
adversaries the upper hand.
This inefficient, manual posture results in suboptimal Mean Time to
Detect and Mean Time to Respond times for security operations teams. As
the terms suggest, these metrics provide quantifiable data points for
network defenders about how quickly they discover potential security
incidents and then how quickly they can contain them. Historically,
organizations have struggled to execute against these metrics. In fact,
a recent report by Unit 42 found that security teams average nearly 6
days to resolve an alert in cloud breach incident response cases.
However, we are now seeing attackers exfiltrate data in under a day in
almost 50 percent of all incident response cases. As recently as just a
few years ago, attackers were taking over a week to exfiltrate data
after compromise.
AI-Driven Security Operations Centers
AI-driven SOCs can flip this paradigm and give defenders the upper
hand. This technology acts as a force multiplier for cybersecurity
professionals to substantially reduce detection and response times.
The results from deploying this technology on our own company
networks are significant:

On average, we ingest 59 billion events daily.

Using AI-driven data analysis, this is distilled down to 26
thousand raw alerts.

This is further triaged to just 75 that require further
analysis.
We then deployed this AI-powered SOC to our customers where we are
seeing similarly transformative outcomes:

Reduction of Mean Time to Respond from 2-3 days to under 2
hours.

Five-fold increase in incident close out rate.

Four-fold increase in the amount of security data ingested
and analyzed each day.
These dramatic improvements are critical to stopping threat actors
before they can encrypt systems or steal sensitive information. None of
this would be possible without the power of AI.
AI-Powered Copilots to Optimize Security Outcomes
Finding ways to radically simplify cybersecurity puts network
defenders in a position to succeed. AI-powered copilots introduce the
ability for practitioners to more seamlessly interact with their
security tools--asking questions in natural language and yielding many
operational advantages. Specifically, copilots can answer ``how to''
questions, provide easy explanations to complex security challenges,
provide step-by-step guidance, generate precise product queries, and
create visual responses.
From the copilots we have already deployed, it is clear that they
are a force multiplier for defenders--surfacing the most important
security tasks, explaining why they are critical, and more importantly,
expediting remediation.
securing ai by design
AI is here to stay. In fact, 42 percent of enterprises are already
leveraging AI tools, and this is expected to grow to 96 percent within
the next 12 months.
The typical large enterprise will use hundreds of AI apps
internally, leverage thousands of AI models, and produce many petabytes
of training and vector embedding data annually.
However, this expanded AI attack surface does not come without data
security and network security challenges. Research indicates that 50
percent of employees currently use AI apps without permission in their
enterprise, 80 percent of public models can be ``jailbroken''
(bypassing restrictions installed by model creators), and there are
already hundreds of malicious models available in the wild.
In sum, AI app proliferation is changing how enterprises operate
and necessitates an evolved security approach. We like to think of this
approach as Securing AI By Design. This approach requires the ability
to:
(1) Secure every step of the AI app development life cycle and
supply chain.
(2) Protect AI applications, models, and data from threats in run
time.
(3) Oversee employee AI usage to ensure compliance with internal
policies.
These principles are aligned with--and based on--the security
concepts already included in the NIST AI Risk Management Framework
(RMF). Palo Alto Networks would welcome the opportunity to continue
engaging with Members of the committee and staff about how we can
promote these principles for ecosystem-wide benefit.
maximizing ai's potential for cyber defense
We offer the following considerations for policy makers as we look
to further encourage the deployment of AI-powered solutions for cyber
defense:
(1) Promote Federal Government Leadership.--The power of Federal
procurement can drive behavior across a wide range of
cybersecurity stakeholders. Accordingly, we encourage the
Federal Government to continue to lean into the promotion of
AI-enabled cyber defense. To that end, Palo Alto Networks is
encouraged to see a dedicated section in the most recent
version of bipartisan FISMA reform legislation that
specifically calls on OMB to produce guidance promoting AI's
use ``wherever automation is used in furtherance of the
cybersecurity of information systems.'' This is an important
provision that we enthusiastically support.
(2) Build Upon Flexible Frameworks.--The NIST AI RMF serves as a
thoughtfully-crafted baseline for understanding AI risk that
can act as the cornerstone for any organization. The RMF allows
organizations to assess their needs and capabilities against
the varied circumstances in which they use, develop, or deploy
AI systems--evaluating both the risks and benefits of those
systems.
(3) Embrace Secure AI By Design.--As outlined in greater detail
above, enterprises will benefit from capabilities that assist
in inventorying AI usage, applying policy controls, and
securing apps built with AI.
(4) Differentiate Between Use Cases, Impacts, and Data Types.--We
believe policy makers should employ a risk-based approach when
considering AI guardrails that takes into account differences
in the use cases, the data processed in those use cases, and
the potential resulting impacts on individuals. There are
fundamental differences in risk between AI systems that
leverage consumer data to make or facilitate consequential
decisions with human impact--such as college admissions or loan
approvals--and those systems that leverage security data to
ensure the robustness and resilience of networks.
(5) Ensure Disclosure Requirements Do Not Have Unintended
Consequences.--Palo Alto Networks recognizes that impact
assessments and risk management disclosures for AI models are
increasingly being proposed to improve AI transparency. We urge
policy makers to take into account the potential national
security impact when formulating the details of disclosure
requirements. For example, public disclosures that require
information detailing how network defenders use and train AI
systems to secure networks could unintentionally create a road
map for cyber adversaries to break through those defenses, in
turn jeopardizing the underlying security of network and
information systems.
people and partnerships
With AI and automation central to modern cyber defenses, we must
educate and train the cyber workforce with the advanced skills required
for meaningful jobs that complement technological innovation. This is
essential to staying ahead of all cyber threats.
As an educator myself, I am personally passionate about expanding
access to cyber education at young ages and finding innovative ways for
Government and industry to work together to prepare future generations.
To that end, our company is encouraged to see the impact of several
initiatives aimed at broadening access to cybersecurity education,
including the Palo Alto Networks Cybersecurity Academy, which offers
free and accessible curricula aligned to the NIST National Initiative
for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Framework, to academic institutions
from middle school through college. Hands-on experiences with cyber and
AI benefit the entire ecosystem as they help to upskill our own
workforce as well as that of our customers.
Palo Alto Networks also offers several accelerated on-boarding
programs to help diversify our workforce, including the Unit 42
Academy. As full-time members of our incident response and cyber risk
management teams, early career professionals with both university and
military backgrounds spend 15 months developing skills through
specialized, instructor-led courses, on-the-job training, and
mentorship. We are proud to report that our 2023-2024 class is 80
percent female.
Partnership is in our DNA at Palo Alto Networks and our collective
defense depends upon deepening collaboration between industry and
Government. We continue to see productive collaboration take place
across a range of cybersecurity-focused convening bodies, including
CISA's Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC), the National Security
Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC), and the Information
Technology Sector Coordinating Council (IT-SCC), where we serve as
members. We are also an active participant in the DHS ICT Supply Chain
Risk Management Task Force. We maintain robust threat intelligence
sharing partnerships with DHS, the NSA Cyber Collaboration Center, the
Cyber Threat Alliance (whose board I serve on), and other entities to
share technical threat data and collaborate to support Government and
industry response to significant cyber incidents.
We take our partnership with law makers--and this committee--
seriously. Please consider Palo Alto Networks a standing resource as
you continue to consider cybersecurity and AI policy issues.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify. I look forward to your
questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Sikorski.
I now recognize Mr. Amlani for his 5 minutes of opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF AJAY AMLANI, PRESIDENT, HEAD OF AMERICAS, iPROOV

Mr. Amlani. Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and Members of the committee. My name is Ajay Amlani
and I've been building innovative solutions to help
organizations assure people's identities for the last 20 years.
I serve as president and head of Americas at iProov.
I started my Federal service as a White House fellow and
senior policy adviser to Secretary Tom Ridge, the first
Secretary of Homeland Security in the aftermath of the 9/11
attacks at a time in which the Federal Government was
rethinking how to manage its national security missions. A
large part of that included finding new ways to benefit from
the innovation happening in the private sector.
For the past 20 years I have forged partnerships with the
Federal Government and the commercial sector that facilitate
the utilization of commercial technology to augment national
security initiatives.
Today, this committee is considering how to harness the
power of AI as part of a multilayered defense against our
adversaries. To best answer this question we need to start with
understanding how AI enables threat actors. What capabilities
can DHS and its component agencies develop to combat these
threats? What actions can the Department take to better work
with industry as it promotes standards for AI adoption?
AI exponentially increases the capabilities and the speed
to deploy new fraud and cyber attacks on the homeland. They
enable new threat technology developers to dramatically shorten
their innovation cycles.
Ultimately, AI technologies are unique in the way that they
upskill threat actors. The actors themselves no longer have to
be sophisticated. AI is democratizing the threat landscape by
providing any aspiring cyber criminal easy-to-use advanced
tools capable of achieving sophisticated outcomes.
The crime-as-a-service dark web is very affordable. The
only way to combat AI-based attacks is to harness the power of
AI in our cybersecurity strategies. At iProov we developed AI-
powered biometric solutions to answer a fundamental question.
How can we be sure of someone's identity? iProov is trusted by
governments and financial institutions globally to combat cyber
crime by verifying that an individual is not only the right
person but also a real person. Our technology is monitored and
enhanced by an internal team of scientists who specialize in
computer vision, deep learning, and other AI-focused
technologies.
Novel attacks are identified, investigated, and triaged in
real time and technology enhancements are continuous. This
combination of human experts and AI technology is indispensable
to harness AI in defending and securing the homeland. But
equally important, is the need for AI-based security
technologies to be inclusive and uphold privacy mandates by
design.
DHS and its component agencies have prioritized
transparency and accountability, including performing routine
self-assessments and collecting public input on matters of
privacy protection and limitations on data use. Those actions
serve as a great model for how DHS and other agencies should
treat AI capabilities, both in regulating and promoting AI
adoption.
The U.S. Government has used biometrics in a growing number
of programs over the past decade to improve operational
efficiency and traveler experience.
With GenAI, biometrics take on an expanded role of helping
to ensure that someone is who they claim to be in digital
ecosystems. For example, deep fakes and synthetic identities
have recently become so realistic that they are imperceivable
to the human eye. Because of this, biometric verification plays
a critical role in the Nation's security posture.
To best assist DHS and its components, Congress should
support the creation of more useful standards for systems and
testing and give access to the best talent developing new
technology tools with the agility necessary to respond to the
changing threat landscape.
The Silicon Valley Innovation Program is a very powerful
model for both acquiring the expertise of the Nation's best
engineering minds while also creating a collaborative test bed
for providing and proving new technologies. iProov has worked
with S&T in all phases of the SVIP program and can testify
first-hand to the powerful impact that this program could have
if expanded to scale with a broader group of stakeholders.
Another example, the Maryland Biometric Test Facility,
could be expanded upon to incorporate a wider range of
perspectives as biometric technologies work to address future
threats.
In conclusion, we at iProov are completely focused on
pioneering capabilities which can counter identity fraud while
collaborating with Federal stakeholders to advance innovation.
We seek to play a constructive role in AI practices and hope
the committee will see us as a resource as you consider a path
forward.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Amlani follows:]
Prepared Statement of Ajay Amlani
May 22, 2024
Good morning, Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members
of the committee. My name is Ajay Amlani. I've been building innovative
solutions to help organizations assure people's identities for the last
20 years. Currently, I serve as the president, head of Americas at
iProov.
I started my Federal service as a White House fellow and senior
policy advisor to Secretary Tom Ridge, the first Secretary of Homeland
Security, in the aftermath of the 9/11 Terrorist Attacks, at a time in
which the Federal Government was rethinking how to manage its national
security missions, and a large part of that included finding new ways
to benefit from the innovation happening in the private sector. For the
past 20 years, I have forged partnerships between the Federal
Government and the commercial sector that facilitate the utilization of
commercial technology to augment national security initiatives.
Alongside close colleagues and friends, I have helped to build
Government organizations such as DHS and the DoD's Defense Innovation
Unit. I have also founded and built commercial technology companies to
support Government missions.
Today, this committee is considering how to harness the power of
``AI'' as part of a multi-layered defense against our adversaries. To
best answer this question, we need to start with understanding how AI
enables threat actors. What capabilities can DHS and its component
agencies develop to combat these threats? What actions can the
Department take to better work with industry as it promotes standards
for AI adoption?
AI exponentially increases the capabilities and the speed to deploy
new fraud and cyber attacks on the homeland. They enable threat
technology developers to dramatically shorten their innovation cycles.
Ultimately, AI technologies are unique in the way that they ``up-
skill'' threat actors. The actors themselves no longer have to be
sophisticated. AI is democratizing the threat landscape by providing
any aspiring cyber criminal easy-to-use, advanced tools capable of
achieving sophisticated outcomes. The Crime-as-a-Service dark web is
very affordable.
The only way to combat AI-based attacks is to harness the power of
AI in our cybersecurity strategies. At iProov, we have developed AI-
powered biometric solutions to answer a fundamental question: How can
we be sure of someone's identity? iProov is trusted by governments and
financial institutions globally to combat cyber crime by verifying that
an individual is not only the right person, but also a real person. Our
technology is monitored and enhanced by an internal team of scientists
specialized in computer vision, deep-learning, and other AI-focused
technologies. Novel attacks are identified, investigated, and triaged
in real-time and technology enhancements are continuous. This
combination of human experts and AI technology is indispensable to
harness AI in defending and securing the homeland.
But equally important is the need for AI-based security
technologies to be inclusive and uphold privacy mandates by design. DHS
and its component agencies have prioritized transparency and
accountability, including performing routine self-assessments and
collecting public input on matters of privacy protection and
limitations on data use. I believe those actions serve as a great model
for how DHS--and other agencies--should treat AI capabilities in this
new wave of Executive action for both regulating and promoting AI
adoption.
The U.S. Government has used biometrics in a growing number of
programs over the past decade to improve operational efficiency and
traveler experience. With Gen-AI, biometrics take on an expanded role
of helping to ensure that someone is who they claim to be in digital
ecosystems.
We must emphasize that Gen-AI attack content like deepfakes and
synthetic identities have recently become so realistic that it is
imperceivable to the human eye. Because of this, I strongly believe
that biometric verification must play a critical role in the Nation's
security posture. I hope to have the opportunity to expand upon the
topic during this hearing.
As iProov thinks about how to best assist DHS and its components,
two lines of effort stand out. Those are: (1) Support for the creation
of more useful standards for systems and testing; and (2) giving access
to the best talent developing new technology tools with the agility
necessary to respond to the changing threat environment.
The Silicon Valley Innovation Program (SVIP) performed by DHS's
Science and Technology Directorate is a very powerful model for both
acquiring the expertise of the Nation's best engineering minds, while
also creating a collaborative test bed for proving new technologies.
iProov has worked with DHS S&T in all phases of the SVIP program and
can testify first-hand to the powerful impact that this program could
have if expanded to scale with a broader group of stakeholders.
There is also work occurring inside DHS--like that at DHS S&Ts
Maryland Biometric Test Facility--which could be expanded upon to
incorporate a wider range of perspectives as biometric technologies
work to address future threats.
In conclusion, we at iProov are completely focused on pioneering
capabilities which can counter identity fraud, while collaborating with
Federal stakeholders to advance innovation. We seek to play a
constructive role in AI practices and hope the committee will see us as
a resource as you consider a path forward.
Thank you, I look forward to your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Amlani.
I now recognize Mr. Laperruque for 5 minutes to summarize
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JAKE LAPERRUQUE, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, SECURITY AND
SURVEILLANCE PROJECT, THE CENTER FOR DEMOCRACY AND TECHNOLOGY

Mr. Laperruque. Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson,
and Members of the House Homeland Security Committee, thank you
for inviting me to testify on the important topic of artificial
intelligence and how we can ensure that its use aids America's
national security, as well as our values as a democracy.
I'm Jake Laperruque, deputy director of the Security and
Surveillance Project at the Center for Democracy and
Technology. CDT is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that
defends civil rights and civil liberties in the digital age.
We've worked for nearly 3 decades to ensure that rapid
technological advances such as AI promote our core values as a
democratic society.
AI technology can only provide security if they are used in
a responsible manner and, as Chairman Green said, treated with
appropriate nuance. This is not only critical for keeping
America safe, it is also necessary for protecting our
Constitutional values.
Today, I'd like to offer a set of principles for the
responsible use of AI, as well as policy recommendations to
promote such use in the national security space. We must be
worried that for AI technologies garbage in will lead to
garbage out. Too often, AI is treated as a sorcerer's stone
that can turn lead into gold, but in reality, AI only performs
as well as the data that it is given.
Reckless deployment of AI technologies, such as using input
data that is low quality or well beyond the bounds of what any
given system was designed to analyze, will yield bad results.
In the national security space this could have dire
consequences, wasted resources, leading investigations astray,
or triggering false alarms that leave genuine threats
unattended to.
Ensuring that AI is used responsibly is also critical to
protecting our values as a democracy. AI is often framed as an
arms race, especially in terms of national security, but we
must take care of what we're racing toward.
Authoritarian regimes in China, Russia, and Iran have shown
how AI technologies such as facial recognition can throttle
dissent, oppress marginalized groups, and supercharge
surveillance.
The United States must not use AI so callously. Truly
winning the AI arms race does not simply mean the fastest
build-up on the broadest scale. It requires uses that uphold
civil rights and civil liberties. As Ranking Member Thompson
highlighted, responsible use requires exercising care from
creation to input of data into AI systems to the use of the
results from those systems.
To facilitate responsible use, Government applications of
AI should be centered on the following principles. AI should be
built upon proper training data. It should be subject to
independent testing. It should be deployed from the parameters
that the technology was designed for.
It should be used by specially-trained staff and
corroborated by human review. It should be subject to strong
internal governance mechanisms. It should be bound by
safeguards to protect Constitutional values. It should be
regulated by institutional mechanisms for transparency and
oversight.
Although the degree of secrecy in national security
programs will make upholding these principles especially
challenging, we can and must find ways of promoting responsible
use of AI. CDT proposes two policies in furtherance of this
goal.
First, Congress should establish an oversight board for the
use of AI in national security contexts. This board would be a
bipartisan, independent entity within the Executive branch with
members and staff given access to all use of AI within the
national security sphere.
The board would act as an overseer within Classified
settings to promote responsible use of AI so this would support
both compliance with existing rules as well as lead to improved
practices. The board's role would also allow for greater public
knowledge and engagement. This would serve as a conduit for
harnessing outside expertise and building public trust in
Government's on-going use of AI.
The Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board has
demonstrated how effective this model can be. That board's role
in counterterrorism oversight has enhanced public awareness and
improved public policy in a manner that's aided both security
and civil liberties alike. A new board focused on the use of AI
in the national security realm would be similarly beneficial.
Second, Congress should enact requirements to enhance
transparency for the use of AI. It should include required
declassification review of key documents, such as AI impact
assessments and privacy impact assessments. It should also
require annual public reporting and information such as the
full set of AI technologies that agencies deploy, the number of
individuals who are impacted by their use, and the nature of
that impact.
While we support prompt adoption of these important
measures, AI technologies are far too wide-ranging and complex
to be solved by a silver bullet. Promoting responsible use of
AI will park continual review, engagement, and adaptation. This
work should be done in consultation with a broad set of
stakeholders, impacted communities, and experts.
Thank you for your time and I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Laperruque follows:]
Prepared Statement of Jake Laperruque
May 22, 2024
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the House
Homeland Security Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
on the important topic of how we can ensure that use of artificial
intelligence (``AI'') enhances America's national security and protects
human rights and core democratic values.
I am Jake Laperruque, deputy director of the Security and
Surveillance Project at the Center for Democracy & Technology
(``CDT''), a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization that defends civil
rights, civil liberties, and democratic values in the digital age. For
nearly 3 decades, CDT has worked to ensure that rapid technological
advances promote our core values as a democratic society.
AI is rapidly altering the world, offering both exhilarating
possibilities and alarming risks. It's critical to examine how it
should be used in fields where the stakes are highest, such as homeland
security. AI can support our goals, but only if we use it properly.
While AI capabilities can often prove remarkable, we are wielding
complex software systems, not a magic wand. For AI to foster safety and
protect our rights, it must be used in a responsible manner. In this
testimony I describe key principles for doing so, examine facial
recognition as a case study into why responsible use of AI is so
critical, and provide a set of steps Congress can take to promote
effective use of AI technologies in the national security space.
i. responsible use and well-designed safeguards are essential if ai is
to aid national security and uphold our constitutional values
In order to provide benefits rather than cause harm, AI must be
used in a careful and responsible manner. Government use of AI needs at
its foundation a set of governance principles, which in turn lead to
the development of concrete rules governing AI's acquisition and use.
If AI is not developed and deployed responsibly, it will lead our
agencies and investigators astray in situations where avoiding errors
is most critical. For example, imagine a predictive AI system that was
designed to generate leads, but was built on selective or biased
training data; such a system will cause investigators to waste time and
resources chasing bad leads, leaving genuine security dangers
unattended to. Or consider a facial recognition system programmed so
poorly that it frequently triggers false alarms, leading investigators
not to register the needed level of concern when a real threat appears
amid the noise.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, e.g. Lizzie Dearden, ``Facial Recognition Wrongly
Identifies Public as Potential Criminals 96 Percent of Time, Figures
Reveal'', The Independent, May 7, 2019, https://perma.cc/YZ36-RC6A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to bolstering security, responsible use of AI is
critical to upholding our Constitutional values. AI--especially in the
context of Government use and national security--is often framed as an
``Arms Race.'' But we must take care in what we're racing toward.
Authoritarian regimes in China, Russia, and Iran have all shown how AI
can be used to throttle dissent, oppress marginalized groups, and
supercharge surveillance.\2\ The United States must not recklessly rush
ahead with the single-minded goal of deploying AI only to replicate
these anti-democratic systems. Truly winning the ``AI Arms Race'' does
not mean simply achieving the fastest build-up on the broadest scale.
It requires deployment in a manner that reflects and advances America's
Constitutional values.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Paul Mozur, ``In Hong Kong Protests, Faces Become Weapons'',
N.Y. Times, July 26, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/26/
technology/hong-kong-protests-facial-recognition-surveillance.html;
Paul Mozur, ``One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is Using A.I. to
Profile a Minority'', N.Y. Times, Apr. 14, 2019, https://
www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/technology/china-surveillance-artificial-
intelligence-racial-profiling.html; Paul Mozur, ``Inside China's
Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras,'' N.Y. Times, July
8, 2018, https://perma.cc/27U7-S365; Lena Masri, ``Facial Recognition
is Helping Putin Curb Dissent With the Aid of U.S. Tech'', Reuters,
Mar. 28, 2023, https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/
ukraine-crisis-russia-detentions/; Khari Johnson, ``Iran to Use Facial
Recognition to Identify Women Without Hijabs'', Ars Technica, Jan. 11,
2023, https://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2023/01/iran-to-use-facial-
recognition-to-identify-women-without-hijabs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are at a time of public anxiety and uncertainty about AI.
Securing the trust of the American people and our global allies--as
well as maintaining an advantage over adversaries--can only be achieved
if we demonstrate that this technology will both be effective and
support civil rights, civil liberties, and democratic values.
ii. principles for ensuring responsible use of ai technologies
The Department of Homeland Security (``DHS'') has taken a positive
step in highlighting the need for responsible use of AI in its
recently-published AI Roadmap, and offering principles for doing so.\3\
Notably, the Roadmap commits to its use of AI being ``rigorously
tested,'' ``safeguard[ing] privacy, civil rights, and civil
liberties,'' and being ``transparent and explainable.'' It is critical
that DHS and other Government agencies that use AI for national
security purposes adhere to and build upon these and other key
principles.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Dept. of Homeland Security, Artificial Intelligence Roadmap
2024 (2024), https://perma.cc/Y6KQ-5J9V.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Principles for responsible use of AI technologies should be applied
broadly across development and deployment. In particular, Government
use of AI should be:
(1) Built upon proper training data;
(2) Subject to independent testing and high performance standards;
(3) Deployed only within the bounds of the technology's designed
function;
(4) Used exclusively by trained staff and corroborated by human
review;
(5) Subject to internal governance mechanisms that define and
promote responsible use;
(6) Bound by safeguards to protect human rights and Constitutional
values; and
(7) Regulated by institutional mechanisms for ensuring transparency
and oversight.
Training Data.--Proper training data is the first hurdle to
avoiding ``garbage in, garbage out'' problems with AI. The
effectiveness of AI systems depends on the data used to develop them.
If data is inaccurate or of poor quality, then the resulting system
trained from it will exhibit flaws. Training data does not even need to
be wrong to cause problems--training AI on selective and
unrepresentative data can warp how those AI systems later function. For
example, a common flaw discovered in facial recognition systems was use
of training sets that were disproportionately white and male; as a
result these systems displayed algorithmic bias in which women and
people of color were misidentified at far higher rates.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru, Gender Shades: Intersectional
Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gender Classification, Fairness,
Accountability and Transparency, Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research 81:77-91 (2018), https://perma.cc/C9FV-G5SY; Patrick Grother,
Mei Ngan, and Kayee Hanaoka, Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) Part
3: Demographic Effects, National Institute of Standards and Technology
(2019), https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8280.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Independent Testing.--Requiring independent testing and high
performance standards is a key safeguard against adoption of low-
quality systems. Such measures are important because poor algorithm
design or flawed training data are not always readily apparent, and AI
technologies are frequently being applied to new situations and
circumstances. Testing should be conducted by independent experts, with
transparent methodology that allows for peer review and improvement.
Testing should occur periodically, and should be a precondition for
procurement, as well as regularly conducted for AI systems already in
use. And critically, systems should be tested in real-world contexts
(e.g., in pilots or limited releases), using the same system settings
as will be used in actual deployments, and using real-world scenarios.
As those system settings or scenarios change or evolve, testing should
evolve to account for them.
Deploy Only for Designed Function.--Deploying AI technologies only
within the bounds of the technology's designed functions is a principle
that takes on several components. This requires making sure that
``input data''--meaning the data and requests that AI technologies
analyze and base their outputs on--is proper. It must be high-quality,
which can be challenging as input data often exists on a sliding scale
and depends upon a huge range of factors, and cannot simply be labeled
``good data, use it'' or ``bad data, toss it.'' For example, as
discussed in detail below, a wide range of factors impact whether an
image can be effectively scanned by facial recognition technology.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Section III.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Assessing whether certain data and tasks properly fit within an AI
technology's designed capabilities can also be hard to discern. For
example, as CDT has discussed, automated social media analysis tools
can be undone when tasked with reviewing posts that contain slang,
sarcasm, and other context-specific language.\6\ AI can also be
deployed egregiously beyond the bounds of the technology's designed
functions. It is critical that the Government not treat AI technologies
as a philosopher's stone that can turn lead into gold--if a system is
tasked with analyzing poor-quality data or given tasks beyond its
designed function, it will produce unreliable results.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Mana Azarmi, ``The U.S. Government is Demanding Social Media
Information From 14.7 Million Visa Applicants--Congress Should Step
In'', Center for Democracy & Technology, Jul. 3, 2019, https://
perma.cc/JMK8-BA7B.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Training and Human Review.--The often challenging nature of
evaluating the proper bounds for using an AI technology highlight why
training and human review is another essential principle. If staff
using AI are not specifically trained in how it should be deployed,
poor results will follow. Training is also necessary for preventing
automation bias--meaning the tendency for people to naturally assume
automated systems are correct, even in the face of conflicting
evidence--in general, and in particular for effectively gauging how
much weight to give results from AI in various situations. And even
when AI is used in the most favorable settings, accuracy cannot be
guaranteed, making human review and corroboration of results essential.
Human review is important not only to account for naturally-occurring
errors in AI systems, but also to guard against risk of malicious
tampering that degrades results.\7\ Further, human approval should be
required before AI systems are used to take specific actions that may
affect individuals' rights (e.g., targeting a person for surveillance).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Section V.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Internal Governance.--Agencies should put in place internal
governance mechanisms to promote responsible use of AI. The recently-
released Office of Management and Budget's (OMB) guidance on governance
and risk management for Federal agencies' use of AI is an important
step forward in advancing this goal.\8\ That OMB memo should serve as a
baseline for the forthcoming National Security Memorandum that is
intended to establish parallel guidance for national security systems.
The OMB guidance provides useful direction to agencies concerning
internal governance processes in support of responsible and transparent
use of AI technologies. Agencies should clearly assign decision-making
and internal oversight responsibilities, including requirements for
approval by high-level officials for procurement of systems and use
cases that present particularly high risks. Legal, civil rights, and
privacy officials should be part of the decision-making process through
the AI development, procurement, and deployment life cycle and have
comprehensive visibility into how departments and agencies are using
AI.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Office of Management and Budget, M-24-10: Advancing Governance,
Innovation, and Risk Management for Agency Use of Artificial
Intelligence (Mar. 28, 2024), https://perma.cc/RKK7-SMYJ. See also,
Center for Democracy & Technology, ``CDT Welcomes Final OMB Guidance on
Federal Agencies' Use of AI, and Now Looks Toward Earnest
Implementation'', Mar. 28, 2024, https://perma.cc/MQ34-VUWG.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Effective governance also requires clear standards for procurement
of AI technologies from third-party vendors.\9\ Standards should
include requirements for pre-award Government evaluation of vendors' AI
models to reject vendors whose models don't address the needs agencies
identify.\10\ Standards should also include contractual requirements
for vendor reporting with sufficient detail to support agencies' on-
going independent review of model performance, evaluation of and
reporting on impacts, and agencies' own disclosures in their AI
inventories.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Hannah Quay-de la Vallee et al, Center for Democracy &
Technology, The Federal Government's Power of the Purse: Enacting
Procurement Policies and Practices to Support Responsible AI Use
(2024), https://perma.cc/BL2L-5Z6M.
\10\ Id. at 37-39.
\11\ Id. at 39-40, 42-45.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Safeguarding Rights.--While the principles above largely focus on
ensuring AI is as accurate and efficacious as possible, it is also
essential that AI technologies are used in a manner that upholds
Constitutional values, civil rights, and civil liberties. Safeguards
for achieving this cannot merely consist of generally tasking agencies
or individual staff with abiding by broad principles, and hoping that
AI's use will be properly restrained on a case-by-case basis.
Agencies should conduct impact assessments to determine whether an
AI system risks being biased or otherwise violating Constitutional and
human rights. Certain AI technologies or uses should be prohibited
because they pose an unacceptable risk to rights (e.g., AI profiling or
risk scoring systems that attempt to predict an individual's future
criminality). As the OMB memorandum notes, ``[w]here the AI's risks to
rights or safety exceed an acceptable level and where mitigation is not
practicable, agencies must stop using the affected AI as soon as
practicable.'' In cases where a system poses risks that can be
mitigated, agencies should impose specific and concrete rules tailored
to each specific AI technology and its use scenarios. For example,
agency guidelines on use of facial recognition should account for image
quality in various ways, and strictly regulate what (if any)
adjustments may be made to an image prior to scanning. Agency rules
must be designed to promote both efficacy and protection of civil
rights, civil liberties, and Constitutional principles. While agency
rules are an essential first step, Congress should also bolster
protections with statutory safeguards as needed for AI technologies
that present significant risks to civil rights and civil liberties.
Transparency & Oversight.--Upholding responsible use will require
mechanisms for transparency, oversight, and accountability. Such
efforts must be institutionalized systems, rather than ad hoc review.
Oversight structures should exist within agencies, and across the
Federal Government. Systems should also be designed to facilitate
public review and input, which is important for fostering trust,
ensuring compliance with rules, and promoting improvements in how AI
technologies are used. This will be challenging in terms of use of AI
in national security spheres where secrecy is the norm, but this cannot
be an excuse for inaction. Section IV of this testimony proposes
certain measures Congress could take that are specifically designed to
account for the secrecy of national security operations while promoting
public engagement.
iii. facial recognition as a case study of why responsible use is key
for both security and democratic values
Facial recognition serves as a premiere example of why responsible
use of AI technologies is critical to ensuring safety as well as civil
rights and civil liberties, and why the principles described above
serve as the foundation for responsible use. Facial recognition is
especially fitting in evaluating responsible use because it is an AI
technology that the Government has used for law enforcement and
security purposes for roughly a decade.\12\ Facial recognition can
provide a road map of why key principles are essential, as well as
offer clear warnings about how irresponsible and careless uses
undermine public safety.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Clare Garvie, Alvaro Bedoya, and Jonathan Frankle, The
Perpetual Line-Up: Unregulated Police Face Recognition in America,
Georgetown Law Center on Privacy and Technology, Oct. 18, 2016, https:/
/www.perpetuallineup.org/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AI technologies are too often viewed more as magic than software.
This problem has occurred in practice with facial recognition, which is
sometimes treated as universally applicable and virtually infallible.
For example, major facial recognition vendors have reportedly included
marketing materials and user instructions that improperly claim the
technology won't produce false matches, will provide definitive
identifications rather than candidate lists, and can be used on low-
quality images without impairing results.\13\ Clearview AI--which,
despite its notoriety, is used by 10 Federal law enforcement entities
including Customs and Border Protection and Immigration and Customs
Enforcement \14\--went so far as to post advertisements to police
networks claiming that law enforcement officials would ``realize you
were the crazy one'' for not expecting face recognition to function the
same as in absurd TV depictions like ``NCIS, CSI, Blue Bloods.''\15\
These claims are not just untrue; they encourage law enforcement to
engage in unsafe practices and build investigations around unreliable,
low-quality marches.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Jake Laperruque, ``Key Facts About Face Recognition for
Policymaking'', Project on Government Oversight, Aug. 24, 2021, https:/
/perma.cc/VBW6-Q44G. (``Tech Vendors' Exaggerations About How Face
Recognition Functions: Claim: According to Clearview AI, ``you will
almost never get a false positive. You will either get a correct match
or nor [sic] results.'' Fact: Any system, no matter how advanced its
algorithm, can produce false positives. Claim: FaceFirst stated,
``Facial recognition gives officers the power to instantly identify
suspects . . . '' `` . . . Officers can simply use their mobile phones
to snap a photograph of a suspect from a safe distance. If that
individual is in their database it can then positively identify that
person in seconds with a high degree of accuracy.'' Fact: Field
conditions for this scenario--such as lighting, angle, and distance--
significantly increase the likelihood of misidentifications. Claim:
DataWorks Plus pitched its systems as tech that ``uses facial
recognition technology to positively match photos of an individual''
with capabilities such as ``discovering a person's identity during
investigations.'' Fact: Face recognition can offer sets of possible
matches, but should not be relied on to offer a definitive, positive
match. Claim: Matches with low confidence thresholds can be acceptable.
Amazon worked with police to develop a system that will always ``return
the top 5 leads based on confidence levels'' (meaning the Amazon-
recommended setting will return matches no matter how low the
confidence threshold is) and touted the fact that police are ``willing
to trade a lower confidence level for more leads.'' Fact: Using an
unrestricted setting that always returns matches--no matter how low the
confidence threshold--creates serious risk of misidentifications.
Claim: Clearview AI said, ``A photo should work even if the suspect
grows a beard, wears glasses, or appears in bad lighting.'' Fact: Photo
conditions that limit ability to scan facial features impact the
ability to accurately obtain matches. Obstructions and low lighting
make misidentifications more likely even for high-performing systems''.
\14\ Government Accountability Office, Facial Recognition
Technology: Federal Law Enforcement Agencies Should Better Assess
Privacy and Other Risks, GAO-21-518, at 12 (2021), https://www.gao.gov/
assets/gao-21-518.pdf; see also Government Accountability Office,
Facial Recognition Technology: Federal Law Enforcement Agencies Should
Take Actions to Implement Training, and Policies for Civil Liberties,
GAO-23-105607, https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-23-105607.pdf (describing
continued use of Clearview by at least 6 agencies).
\15\ Jake Laperruque, ``Correcting Misconceptions and Planning
Effective Safeguards on Face Recognition Technology'', Project on
Government Oversight, Jul. 13, 2021, https://perma.cc/S7TT-Z85Z.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In reality, facial recognition's effectiveness is highly variable,
and depends upon a range of factors. First, the reliability of facial
recognition depends upon the quality of images being scanned; images
with low lighting, bad resolution, poor angles, or obstructions are
much less likely to yield reliable matches.\16\ This is a prime example
of how AI is only as good as the data it interacts with. There is no
clear line that separates ``good usable images'' and ``bad unusable
images'' into two neat groups. Rather, there is a gradation based on
all the image-quality factors listed above, each of which has a huge
range; evaluating how much value to give to matches from photos across
that range can be highly difficult.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ See, Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights: Hearing Before
the Sen. Subcomm. on Human Rights and the Law of the Sen. Comm. on the
Jud., 118th Cong. (2023) (testimony of Alexandra Reeve Givens,
president and CEO, Center for Democracy & Technology), https://
perma.cc/5ZKF-J97B; see also, The Constitution Project's Task Force on
Facial Recognition Surveillance and Jake Laperruque, ``Facing the
Future of Surveillance'', Project on Government Oversight, Mar. 4,
2019, https://www.pogo.org/report/2019/03/facing-the-future-of-
surveillance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Accuracy of facial recognition is also impacted by the significant
variance in how effective different facial recognition systems are
based on factors such as overall quality of the training data, as well
as degree of algorithmic bias. While some systems claim to have
overcome demographic variance in accuracy, for others it is a huge
problem; a National Institute of Science and Technology study found
certain systems were up to 100 times more likely to misidentify Asian
and African American people than white men.\17\ Low-quality training
data--in particular, using databases of faces that are demographically
skewed--is the main source of this problem.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Drew Harwell, ``Federal Study Confirms Racial Bias of Many
Facial-Recognition Systems, Casts Doubts on Their Expanding Use'',
Washington Post (Dec. 19, 2019), https://perma.cc/8RJE-VBMH.
\18\ See, ``Joy Buolamwini: How Does Facial Recognition Software
See Skin Color?'', National Public Radio: TED Radio Hour, Jan. 26,
2018, https://www.npr.org/transcripts/580619086; see also Joy
Buolamwini, ``Unmasking the Bias in Facial Recognition Algorithms'',
MIT Sloan School of Management, Dec. 13, 2023, https://perma.cc/7J6P-
JDG4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
System settings impact the quality of results as well. Many law
enforcement entities, including the FBI, configure systems to always
return a set of potential matches for a facial recognition scan, no
matter how reliable (or unreliable) those matches are.\19\ Such
practices inevitably yield matches that are undependable, but might be
interpreted as a credible lead from highly-sophisticated AI technology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ See, Erin M. Priest, Privacy and Civil Liberties Officer, FBI,
``Privacy Impact Assessment for the Next Generation Identification-
InterState Photo System,'' (2019), https://perma.cc/FR82-SFPB (``A
gallery of two to fifty photos will be returned, with the law
enforcement agency choosing the size of the gallery. If no choice is
made, a default of 20 photos is returned'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Furthermore, it is disturbingly common for law enforcement to
artificially replace portions of faces they are scanning; this practice
injects further uncertainty and speculation into results.\20\
Techniques for doing so range from using computer-generated imagery
(CGI) to add pieces of a face not captured in photos, to replacing the
real face entirely with a composite sketch or celebrity look-alike.\21\
This conduct puts the veneer of useful intel built from objective,
high-tech tools onto shoddy and baseless results.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ Clare Garvie, ``Garbage In, Garbage Out/Face Recognition on
Flawed Data'', Georgetown Law Center on Privacy & Technology, May 16,
2019, https://perma.cc/D4BL-WQGU.
\21\ James O'Neill, ``How Facial Recognition Makes You Safer'',
N.Y. Times, June 9, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/09/opinion/
facial-recognition-police-new-york-city.html (``We have used editing
software to substitute a generic feature when a suspect is closing his
eyes or sticking out his tongue in the submitted photo. The system can
also create a mirror image of the right side of a face if we have only
the left side, for example, to produce a 3-D model''); Clare Garvie,
``Garbage In, Garbage Out/Face Recognition on Flawed Data'', Georgetown
Law Center on Privacy & Technology, May 16, 2019, https://perma.cc/
D4BL-WQGU (``One detective from the Facial Identification Section
(FIS), responsible for conducting face recognition searches for the
NYPD, noted that the suspect looked like the actor Woody Harrelson . .
. A Google image search for the actor predictably returned high-quality
images, which detectives then submitted to the face recognition
algorithm in place of the suspect's photo.'')
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
All of these factors demonstrate the need for rigorous guardrails
on the design and use of face recognition technology. We have already
seen the devastating effect that lax practices and overreliance on
facial recognition can have on people's rights, with misidentifications
that led to wrongful arrests, and jail time for innocent
individuals.\22\ Beyond the undue deprivation of liberty, these errors
have caused lasting harms including loss of employment, enormous legal
bills, and mental health issues.\23\ Unfortunately, because the role of
facial recognition investigations is often hidden, these incidents are
likely just several among many instances in which poor applications of
the technology have caused wrongful arrests.\24\ \25\ Beyond the
significant harm to the individuals improperly flagged as matches,
reliance on facial recognition errors undermines public safety by
leading investigations far afield, which could have especially severe
consequences in the national security context.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ See, Khari Johnson, ``How Wrongful Arrests Based on AI
Derailed 3 Men's Lives'', Wired, Mar. 7, 2022, https://www.wired.com/
story/wrongful-arrests-ai-derailed-3-mens-lives/; Kashmir Hill,
``Another Arrest, and Jail Time, Due to a Bad Facial Recognition
Match'', N.Y. Times, Dec. 29, 2020, https://perma.cc/CHM4-QAZ3; Kashmir
Hill and Ryan Mac, `` `Thousands of Dollars for Something I Didn't Do,'
'' N.Y. Times, Mar. 31, 2023, https://perma.cc/CNK3-926N; Johana
Bhuiyan, ``Facial Recognition Used After Sunglass Hut Robbery Led to
Man's Wrongful Jailing, Says Suit,'' Guardian, January 22, 2024.
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2024/jan/22/sunglass-hut-facial-
recognition-wrongful-arrest-lawsuit.
\23\ See, Khari Johnson, ``How Wrongful Arrests Based on AI
Derailed 3 Men's Lives'', Wired, Mar. 7, 2022, https://www.wired.com/
story/wrongful-arrests-ai-derailed-3-mens-lives/; Kashmir Hill,
``Another Arrest, and Jail Time, Due to a Bad Facial Recognition
Match'', N.Y. Times, Dec. 29, 2020, https://perma.cc/CHM4-QAZ3; Kashmir
Hill and Ryan Mac, `` `Thousands of Dollars for Something I Didn't Do,'
'' N.Y. Times, Mar. 31, 2023, https://perma.cc/CNK3-926N.
\24\ Khari Johnson, ``The Hidden Role of Facial Recognition Tech in
Many Arrests'', Wired, Mar. 7, 2022, https://www.wired.com/story/
hidden-role-facial-recognition-tech-arrests/; Jennifer Valentino-
DeVries, ``How the Police Use Facial Recognition, and Where it Falls
Short'', N.Y. Times, Jan. 12, 2020, https://www.nytimes.com/2020/01/12/
technology/facial-recognition-police.html.
\25\ Disturbingly, it is likely that facial recognition
misidentifications have caused innocent individuals not just to
temporarily be held in jail but to actually face prison sentences, with
charges based on erroneous matches leading to either wrongful
conviction or accepting a plea bargain out of fear of long sentences or
extended time in pretrial detention.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Facial recognition also gives a dire warning to why responsible use
is necessary to protect Constitutional values. Absent strong
safeguards, AI can supercharge anti-democratic practices, and severely
harm civil rights and civil liberties. In China, facial recognition is
used for surveillance on a mass scale, including to oppress the
nation's Uyghur populace.\26\ The pervasive application of facial
recognition in itself becomes a means for authoritarianism: By using
facial recognition for low-level offenses such as jaywalking, the
Chinese government creates a digital panopticon, threatening its people
with the fear that the government, empowered by AI, is always
watching.\27\ The governments in Russia and Iran also weaponize facial
recognition to thwart dissent, with Russia deploying the technology
against anti-war protesters and Iran using it to identify and threaten
those demonstrating against the state's hijab mandate.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Paul Mozur, ``One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is
Using A.I. to Profile a Minority'', N.Y. Times, Apr. 14, 2019, https://
www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/technology/china-surveillance-artificial-
intelligence-racial-profiling.html; Paul Mozur, ``Inside China's
Dystopian Dreams: A.I., Shame and Lots of Cameras,'' N.Y. Times, July
8, 2018, https://perma.cc/27U7-S365.
\27\ Alfred Ng, ``How China Uses Facial Recognition to Control
Human Behavior'', CNET, Aug. 11, 2020, https://perma.cc/P6Y3-U7XV
(``The punishing of these minor offenses is by design, surveillance
experts said. The threat of public humiliation through facial
recognition helps Chinese officials direct over a billion people toward
what it considers acceptable behavior, from what you wear to how you
cross the street'').
\28\ Lena Masri, ``Facial Recognition is Helping Putin Curb Dissent
With the Aid of U.S. Tech'', Reuters, Mar. 28, 2023, https://
www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/ukraine-crisis-russia-
detentions/; Khari Johnson, ``Iran to Use Facial Recognition to
Identify Women Without Hijabs,'' Ars Technica, Jan. 11, 2023, https://
arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2023/01/iran-to-use-facial-recognition-to-
identify-women-without-hijabs/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet these disturbing and improper uses have not just occurred
abroad--in the United States there are already documented instances of
facial recognition being deployed against peaceful protesters.\29\ This
and other anti-democratic uses must not become the norm. Strong rules
must be put into place to protect civil rights and civil liberties.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Joanne Cavanaugh Simpson and Marc Freeman, ``South Florida
Police Quietly Ran Facial Recognition Scans to Identify Peaceful
Protestors. Is That Legal?'', Sun Sentinel, June 26, 2021, https://
www.sun-sentinel.com/2021/06/26/south-florida-police-quietly-ran-
facial-recognition-scans-to-identify-peaceful-protestors-is-that-
legal/.
\30\ CDT has previously advanced a number of policy proposals to
accomplish this goal, which we described in Section IV(d).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even though law enforcement use of face recognition is too often
cloaked in secrecy, we at least know about the existence of this
technology and have some insights into how Government deploys it, and
public interest researchers have been able to test and critique it.
Unfortunately this is not the case with other AI products that may be
in use. We do not have a broad list of AI technologies deployed in the
national security space, let alone details on use that would allow us
to effectively evaluate efficacy and risks. That is why it is essential
that Congress consider the appropriate institutional mechanisms for
ensuring transparency, oversight, and accountability.
iv. congress should establish institutional oversight measures to
support responsible use
Given its complexity and the range of technologies AI consists of,
there will be no silver bullet for ensuring responsible use and
adherence to the key principles outlined in this testimony. Instead, we
should attempt to develop and continuously build on a broad set of
policies that promote transparency, oversight, and accountability at a
broad level, while vigorously working to enact and enforce specific
regulations for each AI technology tailored to maximize its efficacy
and adherence to democratic principles. In its recent AI Roadmap, DHS
noted that responsible use of AI requires ``continuous monitoring to
build trust and accountability in AI applications,'' and the agency
committed to establishing ``safe, secure, and trustworthy use of AI by
DHS through robust governance and oversight policies and
practices.''\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Dept. of Homeland Security, Artificial Intelligence Roadmap
2024, at 15-16 (2024), https://perma.cc/Y6KQ-5J9V.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Congress should take steps in support of that goal through the
measures discussed below. While these policies are important and we
support their prompt adoption, they should not be viewed as
comprehensive solutions. Promoting responsible use of AI will require
continual engagement, review, and adaptation; this work must be done in
consultation with a broad set of experts, impacted communities, and
other stakeholders.
a. Oversight Board for Use of AI and National Security
Development and enforcement of proper policies for responsible use
of AI is especially challenging in the national security space because
Government operations in this realm are often shrouded in secrecy.
Active investigations, tradecraft, and protection of sources and
methods limit public knowledge. The level of secrecy due to these
legitimate factors is compounded by overclassification.
As a flagship tool for ensuring responsible use in the face of this
obstacle, Congress should create an oversight board for the use of AI
in national security, modeled after the Privacy and Civil Liberties
Board (``PCLOB''), established by the
9/11 Commission Act of 2007. This AI Oversight Board would be a
bipartisan, independent entity within the Executive branch, with
members and staff possessing security clearances and given access to
all use of AI within the national security sphere. The AI Oversight
Board would be tasked with:
(1) Serving as an overseer within Classified settings to promote
responsible use of AI. Such work would involve not only
fostering compliance with existing rules, but also encouraging
improved agency practices.
(2) Facilitating greater public knowledge and understanding of uses
of AI in the national security space, through development of
reports and seeking viable declassification of relevant
documents and information. In this work the AI Oversight Board
should also solicit input of outside experts, affected
communities, and other stakeholders. This would help building
public trust, and serve as a conduit for outside expertise to
improve use of AI in the national security space.
(3) Provide policy recommendations to both the administration and
Congress to better ensure that use of AI is responsible, aids
security, and advances democratic values.
PCLOB demonstrates how effective this model can be for balancing
the need for oversight with the secrecy built into national security
space. Over the past 15 years, PCLOB has proven highly valuable in
increasing public knowledge in the counterterrorism space, and thereby
promoting better public policy for both security and civil liberties.
For example, in 2014 PCLOB's report on use of the PATRIOT Act to
conduct bulk collection of Americans' phone records demonstrated that
despite its massive privacy harms, the program did not provide any
meaningful counterterrorism value as its proponents had claimed.\32\
This thorough and independent assessment of the program's efficacy was
invaluable to the public debate over the bulk collection program, which
Congress chose to outlaw the following year.\33\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, Report on the
Telephone Records Program Conducted Under Section 215 of the USA
PATRIOT Act and on the Operations of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court (2014), https://perma.cc/HS93-J5U3.
\33\ See, Center for Democracy & Technology, ``Victory: Passage of
USA FREEDOM Act Reins in NSA Surveillance'', Jun. 2, 2015, https://
perma.cc/K6BC-X96A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
PCLOB has also been greatly useful in relation to Section 702 of
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. PCLOB has issued multiple
reports on this warrantless surveillance authority, resulting in
declassification of hundreds of pieces of information about the
program, helping explain how certain operations under the law function,
providing insights into the effectiveness and risks of various
activities, and included over a dozen policy recommendations.\34\ This
work had a significant positive impact on the recent public debate over
Section 702's reauthorization that occurred over the past year.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, Report on the
Surveillance Program Operated Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act (2023), https://perma.cc/M73R-ZK4D;
Privacy and Civil Liberties Oversight Board, Report on the Surveillance
Program Operated Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act (2014), https://perma.cc/S5KV-88GL.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We urge Congress to promptly establish an oversight board for use
of AI in national security modeled after PCLOB in its structure, access
to information, and obligations. And although we believe PCLOB provides
an insightful road map, we also recommend Congress consult with PCLOB
and other stakeholders on what institutional features could be adjusted
to improve this new AI Oversight Board's effectiveness, as well as what
distinctions might be necessary to better support its focus on AI.
b. Robust Transparency and Reporting Structure
While internal agency rules are necessary, they are far from
sufficient to ensure responsible use of AI, especially given the
secrecy of national security activities. Transparency and public
awareness are a baseline for maintaining compliance by agencies and
continued improvements in policy. The AI Oversight Board discussed
above will contribute to this goal, but should not be laden with the
full responsibility for achieving it. Congress should build
institutionalized transparency and reporting structures into Government
use of AI for national security in at least two ways.
First, Congress should require declassification review of key
documents on use of AI for national security. This should include all
AI Impact Assessments, as well as Privacy Impact Assessments, Human
Rights Impact Assessments, or Privacy Threshold Analyses conducted in
relation to AI technologies. Required declassification review should
also apply to agency guidelines for use of AI technologies, and legal
analyses regarding use of AI systems. Finally, it should include any
efficacy assessments of AI systems. Following the model of required
declassification review for significant FISA Court opinions that
Congress enacted as part of the USA FREEDOM Act in 2015, reviews should
be conducted in a timely manner, and, if significant redactions that
might impair understanding of the document are included, be accompanied
by an unclassified summary.
Second, Congress should require annual agency reporting on use of
AI technologies. These reports should include information describing:
(1) The type of AI technologies used; (2) the types of data being
analyzed by each AI technology used; (3) the types of Government
activities each AI technology is used for; (4) the number of
individuals impacted by AI technologies and nature of that impact; and
(5) the number of criminal, immigration, and administrative court
proceedings in which evidence obtained or derived from AI technologies
was submitted into evidence. The Office of the Director of National
Intelligence Annual Statistical Transparency Report Regarding the
Intelligence Community's Use of National Security Surveillance
Authorities--composed largely of data Congress required be reported
annually as part of the USA FREEDOM Act--could be instructive in
developing these annual reports on use of AI technologies, especially
as they are used in the national security context.
c. Build Institutional Mechanisms Into Funding
Given the pace of development and the stakes of this issue, the
Government must not deploy AI technologies now and plan to develop best
practices and sort through mistakes later. As Congress considers
upcoming funding for new applications of AI in the national security
realm, it should require that agencies adopt institutional mechanisms
such as those described above as part of their governance of AI
development and deployment. If Congress does not take such steps now,
we may find ourselves too far behind to keep up with developments and
ensure responsible use.
d. Establish statutory safeguards for the most rights-impacting AI
technologies
While agencies should institute impact assessments and internal
guidelines to protect civil rights and civil liberties, Congress should
also supplement these rules with statutory protections, particularly
for AI technologies that pose the most significant risks to individual
rights. Self-policing often proves insufficient for protecting civil
rights and civil liberties in the national security context. And even
where internal guidelines are ideal, independent checks and safeguards
are needed to ensure that limits cannot be rolled back by the very
agency governed by them. As more information about specific AI uses is
revealed, it will be necessary for Congress to step in for those AI
technologies that have the greatest potential to impact rights, codify
agency rules that are effective, and establish additional safeguards as
necessary. For example, CDT has previously issued a set of key policy
recommendations for facial recognition centered on: (1) warrants, (2) a
serious crime limit, (3) disclosure to arrested individuals, (4)
testing and accuracy standards, and (5) limiting the degree of reliance
on matches for law enforcement activities.\35\ Those rules are critical
given the specific risks facial recognition poses, and were crafted to
account for how best to protect civil rights and civil liberties while
also maximizing efficacy given particular uses of that technology.
Congress should work to develop and implement properly tailored rules
for other AI technologies that are especially rights-impacting as we
obtain greater knowledge on their use.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\35\ See, Artificial Intelligence and Human Rights: Hearing Before
the Sen. Subcomm. on Human Rights and the Law of the Sen. Comm. on the
Jud., 118th Cong. (2023) (testimony of Alexandra Reeve Givens,
president and CEO, Center for Democracy & Technology), https://
perma.cc/5ZKF-J97B.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
v. careful evaluation of ai is key to defending against modern threats
As Congress evaluates Government use of AI in the national security
space and proper safeguards, it is also important to consider how
understanding and preparing for use of AI is necessary to defend
against modern threats to security. This vigilance will be necessary in
a variety of spheres.
Congress should rigorously examine use of AI within critical
infrastructure. Malicious tampering with AI systems deployed in
critical infrastructure could have disastrous implications for national
security, especially because the dangerous outputs from such tampered
systems might not be readily apparent. These risks are just as present
for AI applications in critical infrastructure that are entirely
disconnected from security operations (such as an automated system for
tracking power usage and distributing energy availability) as those
built specifically for it (such as facial recognition systems at
airports).\36\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\36\ See, Dept. of Homeland Security, Artificial Intelligence
Roadmap 2024, at 6 (2024), https://perma.cc/Y6KQ-5J9V (``Generating and
passing poisoned data into a critical sensor could trigger downstream
impacts, such as service disruptions or system shut-offs'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We should also be wary how adversaries might harness AI to augment
long-standing attack threats, such as in terms of cybersecurity.\37\
Bad actors will use AI to augment the scale of attacks, such as having
AI technologies help write and augment software deployed in malicious
hacking efforts. AI can also provide new weapons in furtherance of more
traditional hacking methods. For example a dedicated spear-phishing
attack previously conducted via an email or text message could in the
future be accompanied by a deep fake voice or video message to increase
the odds of deceiving a target. AI itself may prove useful to
mitigating these threats--a variety of technological advances have been
applied in cybersecurity settings to tip the balance back and forth
between attackers and defenders. We should be vigilant in identifying
AI-based cybersecurity threats and swift in responding to them, but
must also consistently adhere to principles for responsible use of AI,
even as a countermeasure to emerging threats. Doing so is the only way
to ensure these responses are effective.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\37\ As DHS highlights in its recently published AI Roadmap, ``The
proliferation of accessible AI tools likely will bolster our
adversaries' tactics. Cyber actors use AI to develop new tools that
allow them to access and compromise more victims and enable larger-
scale cyber-attacks that are faster, more efficient, and more
evasive.'' Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Election security is another area where AI technologies may present
risks. Generative AI could be used to create convincing fake election
records, or produce FOIA requests at a mass scale designed to overwhelm
election officials.\38\ AI technologies not only expand the range of
possible malicious activities, they make misconduct feasible at a
larger scale and lower costs. The decentralized nature of our election
system adds to the challenge of defending this space. Federal agencies
already coordinate information on cybersecurity risks across thousands
of election jurisdictions as they emerge through the Election
Infrastructure Information Sharing and Analysis Center, provide funding
through election security grants, support election officials and
administrators, and assist in educating the public about where to find
accurate information about elections. Actors in this space should also
identify and account for AI-based threats as they emerge. Additionally,
while Federal agencies' application of AI in the elections space is
limited, they should provide oversight and guidance on the use of these
tools to State and local election administrators.\39\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\38\ See Tim Harper, ``CDT Hosts Roundtable on Generative AI and
Elections with U.S. Department of State Bureau of Cyberspace and
Digital Policy'', Center for Democracy & Technology, Mar. 13, 2024,
https://perma.cc/5Q9A-J7GJ.
\39\ While generative AI has yet to be adopted in any meaningful
way by election officials, non-generative AI has been introduced into
election administration in recent years. Some election offices have
used AI-powered software for administrative purposes including matching
mail-in ballot signatures or translating voting materials. See Edgardo
Cortes et al, Safeguards for Using Artificial Intelligence in Election
Administration, Brennan Center for Justice (2023), https://perma.cc/
86VR-A82A.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
While the scope and capabilities of AI technologies may be
daunting, executive agencies and Congress should treat it with the same
careful consideration as any other powerful machine. Safety, security,
and promotion of democratic values can only stem from responsible use.
Achieving this requires adherence to principles such as those described
above, and Congress has a key role in establishing the oversight and
transparency mechanisms that will advance those principles. If we rush
to deploy AI quickly rather than carefully, it will harm security and
civil liberties alike. But if we establish a strong foundation now for
responsible use, we can reap benefits well into the future.

Chairman Green. Thank you, sir.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning. Mr.
Amlani, in the evolution of AI would you discuss your
perception or opinion on whether or not you think as the threat
evolves we are evolving ahead of the threat?
Mr. Amlani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the question. This
is a very important component of the work that we do at iProov.
At iProov we have a central operations center where we monitor
all the threats happening globally. We have deployments
worldwide, Singapore, United Kingdom, Australia, Latin America,
Africa, and the United States, and we're constantly using our
human people there with PhDs to be able to assess the threats
that are actually trying to attack biometric systems globally.
We're migrating and adapting our AI technology to stay
multiple steps ahead of the adversary, and I think this is very
critical as we look at AI technology to be able to build in
steps to continue to stay multiple steps ahead of the
adversaries and understanding what attacks are actually
happening globally so that we can continue to modify our
systems.
Chairman Green. Well, thank you for that. I am glad to hear
that. I think it makes everybody sigh a little bit relief, but,
you know, I want to shift the subject a little bit because we
are talking about AI as a tool and as a, you know, all the
positives and then the challenges of it when it is on the
attack side. But I want to ask something about work force.
You know, what do we need to do uniquely and this, Mr.
Sikorski, would really I think be for you since, you know, your
company employs a very large number of individuals in this
fight, you know, how do we need to be thinking about developing
the work force for AI as well as cybersecurity in itself?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's a great question, Congressman. I
think it's super imperative. Myself I've trained cyber agents
for the FBI at Quantico, Department of Energy employees,
private companies, and then I've been teaching at the
university level for over a decade.
First-hand I've seen that we really need to focus in as AI
cybersecurity, it's here to stay, and we need to really make
strides to continue to push down, get people trained up, our
work force, our children get them learning these concepts very
early on is super important.
Then from a Palo Alto Networks perspective, we're very
invested in this as well. So as far as the Unit 42 team goes
within Palo Alto Networks we have what's called the Unit 42
Academy which takes undergraduates, give them internships
during the college years, hands-on training.
Then they come to work with us as a class, like a cohort,
where they learn a lot of up-leveling skills and their first
year is spent just engaged in learning and growing. I'm proud
to say that 80 percent of the Unit 42 Academy in the last year
was actually made up of women.
Chairman Green. Do me a favor and let's go just a little
bit more granular on this question. What are the skills,
specific skills, that these individuals need to have? What are
we teaching them? I get, you know, the coding and all that
stuff, but what specifically do you need to see in a candidate
that you would want to hire?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, so No. 1 is having a background and
understanding how to engage these technologies. We've spent a
lot of time building technologies over the last 10, 20 years in
the cybersecurity industry, so knowledge of how they work, what
they give them access to, and how they can leverage them to
fight against, you know, evil that's coming into these
networks.
I also think about things like understanding of how
computer forensics works, malware analysis, an ability to
really dive deep into the technical details so that they could
dig out and sift through the noise. That also comes into play
with AI.
Do they have an understanding of AI and how it is being
leveraged in the product to sift through that noise for them?
Because one thing we deal with heavily is these analysts are
inundated with just too many alerts from all these products
firing and in those alerts is what the actual bad stuff that's
happening.
So by leveraging AI you sift through that noise, bubbles up
things for them to actually dive deep into what's really there.
Chairman Green. The essential is the AI is now fighting the
AI, basically, right? I mean, the machines are fighting the
machines. Am I getting this right? It is to put it in simplest
terms?
Mr. Sikorski. I think to some extent. I think there is
definitely that kind of thing going on for sure.
Chairman Green. Yes.
Mr. Sikorski. But at the end of the day the cyber analyst
is being up-leveled in their ability to fight back.
Chairman Green. Yes. We have got to figure it out. We have
got some legislation coming out pretty soon on work force
development and I want to just make sure that the AI piece is
captured in that.
So thank you. My time has expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
You know, one of the things that we have become accustomed
to is if we are filling out something on-line as we complete it
they want to figure out if you are robot or if you are a human.
So you got to figure out. Now, is this a bus or is this a car
or is this a light?
So all of us are kind-of trying to figure this out. So you
gentlemen have given us some comfort that there are some things
out here but let me just give you a hypothetical question.
As we look at this how do you see the role of Government as
AI develops and what do we need to do to ensure the public that
that development does not allow our adversaries to become even
more our enemy than what it is?
We will start with Mr. Demmer.
Mr. Demmer. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member, for the
question. I agree the country needs to prioritize building AI
that is safe with the Executive Order. That, you know, where I
stand is that we need to collect highly-accurate data that
ultimately informs these models.
Increasingly what I think can be done is to help create
test beds for helping to validate those models and creating the
training data sets that enable, you know, good AI to be created
leveraging only good data sets. So that's my position.
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. I think one thing that I think of is my
history in cybersecurity. We rushed as innovators to get the
internet out and we didn't build that while thinking about
security, and look at the spot we're in.
I think that's why it's really important that we build AI
and have it secure-by-design. It's one of these things where it
falls into a few different categories, making sure that the AI
that we're building. Everybody's rushing to get this technology
into their products and out to consumers, but we need to think
about it as we build it. For example, what is the application
development life cycle? What is the supply chain of that being
built and is that secure?
Thinking about these things as they're running in real
time, how are we protecting those applications so that they
don't get manipulated? How about the models we're building? How
about the data? Is that, you know, subject to manipulation? How
are we protecting that?
Then how do we monitor it? How do we monitor our employees
that are all probably using this today without even our
knowledge? So those are all areas where I would focus.
Mr. Amlani. In addition, when building the internet,
identity was actually not a layer that wasn't originally
thought about. So the challenge that you just described about
the changes of buses, I just encountered sea planes versus
normal planes, and it's very difficult to try to decipher
between what's a sea plane and a normal plane in terms of a
captcha. That's the field it's called.
Standards and testing is a very important component here. I
think we need to continue and constantly test all the tools to
make sure that they're inclusive and making sure that they're
accurate. Standards are another important component here that
comes out of testing, but it is also very focused on leveraging
and organizations like NIST and to continue to invest in
organizations like NIST.
Talent development is the other component that I would
heavily focus on and much of that resides in the private sector
and partnerships with private-sector companies.
At Defense Innovation Unit we surveyed the top 25
engineering schools about where they wanted to work after they
graduated, and there was no Government agency other than NASA
on that whole list. There was no Defense or a Government
contractor on that whole list other than SpaceX.
So as we start to think about this, how do we actually get
access to the top engineers across society? That is actually
through partnerships with the commercial world. Thank you.
Mr. Laperruque. Yes. I would echo several of what's been
said already. We need well-trained systems. We need high
standards for procurement to make sure that we're using good
systems. We need proper data inputs to be going into AI systems
and proper treatment of what's coming out with human review.
I would also emphasize, though, that beating our
adversaries in this field means that we do not end up imitating
our adversaries. Right now facial recognition is an example
I've already harped on that is used in a frightening way in
regimes like China, Russia, Iran. Right now Federally we do not
have any regulations on law enforcement use of facial
recognition. Although the cases are limited, there are
documented cases of it being used against peaceful protesters
in the United States. That's a type of standard that we should
be prohibiting.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, maybe I will submit for the record.
We have elections coming up in November. The last time
there was some involvement by Russia, China specifically with
our elections.
Are you in a position to say whether or not we are robust
enough to defend against our adversaries for elections? Or are
you to encourage us to be a little more attentive to any aspect
of our elections?
Mr. Sikorski. Well, that's a great question. I think that
certainly generative AI makes it easier for malicious actors to
actually come after us in that way. We've actually already seen
them in the cyber arena start to build more efficient phishing
emails, so things like typos, grammar mistakes, all of that
kind of stuff, that's a thing of the past. That won't be
something we encounter anymore, and----
Mr. Thompson. In other words, there won't be any more
typos?
Mr. Sikorski. Right, and they could also read someone's
inbox and then talk like that individual, right?
Mr. Thompson. Right.
Mr. Sikorski. They could leverage it in that way. I do
think that CISA, and we're a member of the JCDC and they're
taking, you know, election security is a big priority for them.
So, you know, we're assisting in those ways and, you know, I
think that it's definitely super concerning and something we
need to lean into with the election cycle coming up.
Mr. Thompson. Anyone else want to address that?
Chairman Green. It is a good question. I will let the
gentleman's time continue if anybody else wants to answer.
Mr. Amlani. I think from an identity perspective this also
is very important with regards to who is it that's actually
posting on-line and being able to discuss.
So from an identity perspective making sure that it's the
right person, it's a real person that's actually posting and
communicating, and making sure that that person is, in fact,
right there at that time is a very important component to make
sure that we know who it is that's actually generating content
on-line. There is no identity layer to the internet currently
today.
We have a lot of work that's being done on digital
credentials here in the United States. Our country is one of
the only in the Western world that doesn't have a digital
identity strategy. We had some work that's actually been done
in the national cybersecurity strategy, Section 4.5, but it
hasn't really been expanded upon. I think that's some work that
we should think about encountering and doing.
Chairman Green. Yes, if I may? You know, I have some
questions on that, too, that I might submit in writing because
this digital identification thing is, you know, as banking and
all of that goes into the wallet and on the phone it is this
digital ID is a critical issue. So I will send some questions,
too.
Are you good?
Mr. Thompson. Yes, I am good.
Chairman Green. Thank you, Ranking Member.
I now recognize Mr. Higgins, the gentleman from Louisiana,
for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I have
worked extensively with my colleagues on the House Oversight
Committee regarding artificial intelligence and I am not
necessarily opposed to the emerging technology. Even if I were
it would be like opposing the incoming tide of the ocean. It is
happening.
I think it is important that Congress provides a framework
so that AI cannot be leveraged in any manner that is contrary
to Americans' individual liberties, rights, and freedoms.
I introduced the Transparent Automated Governance Act, the
TAG Act, as a first step to set limits on Government
application of artificial intelligence. As a whole, the bill
seeks to ensure Federal agencies notify individuals when they
are interacting with or subject to decisions made using a AI or
other automated systems and directs Federal agencies to
establish a human review appeal process to ensure that human
beings have supervision of AI-generated decisions that that
could impact the lives of Americans and specifically our
freedoms.
So I have concerns about this tech, but we may as well
embrace it, because I think it is crucial that America lead in
the emergence of AI technologies and how it interfaces with our
with our daily lives.
May I say, we could have hours and hours of discussion
about this, but I have 5 minutes, so I am going to ask you
gentlemen regarding the use of AI as it could contribute toward
more effective counterintelligence or criminal investigations
as those criminal investigations and counterintelligence
efforts relate to homeland security. I am trying to focus in on
this committee, our committee here, and our responsibilities.
What are your thoughts, gentlemen, on how we can best
deploy AI with our existing law enforcement endeavors for
border security and criminal investigations that result from
our effort to secure and re-secure our border?
Mr. Sikorski, I would like to start with you.
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's a great question. I think one
thing I look toward is the way we're already leveraging AI for
cyber defenses, as I spoke about in my statement. We've been
taking really large amounts of data and distilling it into very
few actionable items that a human can----
Mr. Higgins. You say taking large amounts of data. Where
you getting that data from?
Mr. Sikorski. So for us as a cybersecurity company we are
focused on processing security data, which means ones and
zeros, the malware that is found on the systems, the
vulnerability enumeration of those systems, low-level operating
system information that enables us to, like, tease out what's
the actual threat, which is very distinct from----
Mr. Higgins. So you are drawing your raw data from open
sources and from--like, how are you accessing the raw data that
you are analyzing?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. So that's a great question. So some of
the data that we're getting is from, you know, the customer
collection that we have in our products that are spread
throughout the world. It's a total of 93 is the level of
information----
Mr. Higgins. From the Fortune 100 you said? Your company
works with 95 of the top 100?
Mr. Sikorski. That's right.
Mr. Higgins. OK. So those companies have agreements with
their users. That is that part that we don't read as it comes
up on your phone and you renew the agreement and nobody reads
it. We go to the bottom and click yes.
So in the 95 companies there are agreements to share that
data. You are using that to analyze through AI for the purposes
of what?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, in order to find new attacks. So one of
the things we're doing is it's firewall data, network-level
telemetry, host system-level telemetry. It is very different
than, you know, say, personal information or something like
that.
Instead we're focused on that lower-level data, bringing
that together and then leveraging AI to say how is that network
attack related to what's happening on the actual computer,
bringing that together quickly so that the analyst can find the
threat and eliminate it very quickly.
Mr. Higgins. You are specifically referring to
cybersecurity, but--Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I have
many questions I am going to submit to these gentlemen in
writing. Thank you for convening this hearing. It is very
important.
Chairman Green. Absolutely, thank you.
I now recognize Mr. Carter, the gentleman from Louisiana--
--
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green [continuing]. For 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you to the witnesses for joining us
today. Advancements in AI technology as it demands for its use,
possesses significant challenges. We must mitigate the
associated risk and threats by leveraging AI to improve our
national security.
I urge my colleagues to support my bill H.R. 8348, the CISA
Securing AI Task Force Act, which proposes the creation of a
dedicated task force within CISA. This task force will focus on
addressing safety, security, and accountability challenges
posed by AI. Today's discussion is crucial for the American
people as we work to tackle these pressing issues.
AI is not new. We know that. It is relatively new to the
general public and some of its applications have enormous
value. Some of them can be quite frightening.
National security, obviously, is major so I would like to
ask each of you to take a crack at answering the questions
relative to civil rights, civil liberties, and privacies in
general for the American people. How is this contemplated as we
develop further delving into AI?
Mr. Demmer.
Mr. Demmer. Well, I'd defer to my fellow witnesses on this
issue given their expertise, but it is certainly worth a
spirited conversation about how we balance national security
and civil liberties. What I can say is Gecko is focused on
building the datasets on most critical infrastructure in a way
that promotes national security.
Mr. Sikorski. So I'm a cybersecurity practitioner, as I
said, so I'm not--you know, don't know all the ins and outs of
the policy itself, but my sense is that when we think about AI
and regulation we've got to think of the purpose. So defining
what is high-risk, right, and then saying, you know, what are
the AI use cases that are actually high-risk, and focusing on
the unique security requirements for them.
On the cybersecurity side I think that security data, those
ones and zeros I was talking about earlier, are a little bit
not high-risk compared to a lot of other technologies that are
being rolled out.
Mr. Amlani. At iProov we take inclusivity by design very
seriously. We do regular self-assessments on our own
technology. We work with every single independent assessment
organization that's out there.
We're encouraging more independent assessment
organizations. We're encouraging them to stay ahead of the
technology. Many times these independent organizations focus on
threats or challenges in the past. We need to stay up to speed.
We need to stay above and go beyond.
We build inclusivity by design, as I mentioned. That
includes, obviously, skin tone but also cognitive and physical
capabilities, making sure that those are taken into
consideration in inclusivity, socioeconomic class as well.
Many technology tools are expensive to be able to attain. I
just got the iPhone 15 Pro and I can attest to that. Age is
also a very important component, as well as gender.
So making sure that all of those different characteristics
of inclusivity are also embedded into the design of the AI is
an extremely important component of success.
Mr. Laperruque. So there certainly is a range. Some systems
like, for example, damage assessment systems that DHS uses
present lower risks to maybe no real risks to civil rights and
civil liberties. Other technologies such as facial recognition,
mobile device analytics, or automated targeting systems, all of
which DHS employs, present very significant risks to civil
rights and civil liberties.
The OMB memorandum on AI puts a good stress on care for
civil rights and civil liberties. We hope that's a good step
toward development of strong internal guidelines within
agencies, but this is an area where transparency and oversight
are essential to evaluating the effectiveness of those rules,
evaluating whether more steps are needed, and, as necessary,
prompting Congress to step in and make their own rules.
As I mentioned, in the field of facial recognition there's
no current Federal laws or regulations for law enforcement use.
We think that's something that needs to be changed.
Mr. Carter. So the information out is only as good as the
information in, so the data becomes paramount. So how do we
take into account cultural nuances, natural biases so that we
are not replicating biases that humans have and then become a
part of the bias that is in AI?
Mr. Amlani.
Mr. Amlani. At iProov we have a world-wide deployment and
so we operate in Singapore, we operate in Australia, in the
United Kingdom, in South Africa, in many African countries, as
well as Latin American countries as well as North America.
We take very careful consideration that basically making
sure that we're seeing all of the threats coming in from all of
those locations but also taking into account all of the data
and making sure that we have a representative database that we
train on.
We go over and above when it comes to making sure that our
training data is, in fact, representative of the overall
population. I would encourage you to be able to include
standards and testing and invest in those to make sure that
other providers are also doing the same.
Mr. Carter. So from our standpoint, obviously, as you have
heard from the questions here, you continue to hear that
Congress has real concern on making sure that we learn from
the--mistakes may not be the right word but we learn from how
fast the internet came, Facebook, Instagram, and all of those
things. They are constantly bringing about new challenges, the
good, the bad, and the ugly.
How do we learn from that to make sure that we are managing
this AI as it unfolds and becomes more prevalent in our
society?
I realize that my time has expired, so, Mr. Chairman, if
you would allow them to answer, that I will yield.
Mr. Higgins [presiding]. The gentleman can answer the
question.
Mr. Amlani. Sure. That's directed at me, I assume?
Mr. Carter. Yes or anyone else who cares take a crack at
it.
Mr. Amlani. Thank you, Congressman. Staying on top of all
of the different technologies is very important in making sure
that we have independent organizations within the Federal
Government that can have different companies submit their AI to
testing and making sure that we have the right people staffed
within those organizations who can stay on top of all of the
latest opportunities and threats in the market.
Yes, there is a lot of interest that this overall industry
has in making sure that basically its well-represented
databases and common standards that we can all adhere to. I
think making sure that those accurate solutions can be in front
of the customers for biometric verification is also a very
important component.
Biometric verification it is also something that's very
different than biometric recognition, and I want to make sure
that we can call out the two differences between the two.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman's time has expired.
The Chair has been flexible and generous with time, but I
ask all Members to watch the clock.
The gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Guest, is recognized
for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank all of our guests for joining us today. As
we have we seen the incredible growth of AI, we know that AI
can be used to gather and analyze data. We know that AI has
both offensive and defensive capabilities. With all technology
that AI can be used for good and evil.
But specifically as we drill down today on homeland
security and looking at the role that AI is playing in homeland
security, I think it is easy for many of us to see the role
that AI plays in cybersecurity. We have heard testimony about
the offensive and defensive capabilities of AI in the cyber
world, but I want to talk a little bit about the role that AI
may play in securing our physical borders.
One of the things that this committee has been focused on
is trying to secure our Southwest Border. We know that last
year there were 3.2 million encounters on the Southwest Border,
a record number of encounters, that we are on track to break
that record again this year.
We know from statements that the Secretary of Homeland
Security has been reported that he has made that 85 percent of
those individuals encountered are at some point are released
into the interior. So my question is how can we use AI to
better identify the individuals that are being encountered?
Because I have a great fear that we are not identifying and
properly vetting those individuals before they are released
into the interior.
I will start with you, Mr. Amlani. You talk a little bit in
your written testimony about biometrics and the use of
biometrics and the Maryland biometrics test and their facility
and the things that you all are doing.
So I would ask maybe first if you could start off and then
if anyone else would like to join in, how can we within the
Department of Homeland Security better use AI to identify the
numerous individuals that we are encountering on a daily basis
along the Southwest Border so that we are not allowing people
into the country that would cause ill will, people who may have
criminal records, criminal backgrounds?
We see people all the time who are apprehended that they
may have a tie to some sort of a terrorist organization or
individuals who have previously been arrested and convicted of
violent crimes in other countries. So how can we use AI to
better vet those individuals, to do so in a more timely fashion
before they are released?
So I will start with you, allow you to kick that off, and
then would ask anyone else who would like to join in to please
continue in this discussion.
Mr. Amlani. Thank you, Congressman, for the question. This
is a very important question in my mind. We at iProov,
obviously, cannot speak on behalf of DHS, but I can speak upon
behalf of my experience in 2003 at the Department of Homeland
Security originally launching new technologies like biometrics
at the border.
Secretary Tom Ridge did assess biometrics as one of the
core technologies to be able to improve the Department's
capabilities, improving throughput as well as being able to
improve security at the same time.
My personal experience with biometrics was actually
introduced to me first in 2003 US-VISIT program when it was
rolled out at airports for the first time for people coming
into the country that were not citizens. We actually used
fingerprint technology at the borders.
It was very eye-opening for me for people walking up to a
Customs and Border Patrol agent who had a look of fear in their
eyes, about to be asked a significant set of intrusive
questions and disclosing a lot of private information, who then
put their fingerprint down on the device and to have the
Customs and Border Patrol agent say welcome to the United
States.
That sole interaction for me was something that lit a fire
within me over the last 20 years to recognize that this was not
just a security tool and a capability that was focused on law
enforcement, but actually a tool for consumers to be able to
allow themselves to be able to protect their own privacy and
have better experiences.
Mr. Guest. Anyone else like to add in?
Mr. Laperruque. Yes, sir. I would just add that this is, I
think, a very good example of how input data, what you're
putting into a system, and the quality can make such a
difference.
In biometrics and facial recognition fields a photo that is
done, good lighting, close up, clean profile such as a DMV
photo or a photo during processing and booking, that is much
more likely to yield accurate results than, say, for taking
something in the field from a distance, if I just took my
smartphone and tried to click a picture of you now, or if
someone was taking a photo at night.
So it's, I think, a prime example of when you're talking
about something like during processing why those different
situations can make such a difference about whether AI is
reliable or not. It really is highly situational.
Mr. Guest. Would either of our other two witnesses? I will
give both of you an opportunity before I yield back if anyone
would like to add to the discussion?
Mr. Chairman, I am over time so I yield back.
Mr. Higgins. The gentleman yields.
The gentleman from Maryland, Mr. Ivey, is recognized for 5
minutes for questioning.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate that.
To my Republican colleagues, if you will relay to Chairman
Green my appreciation for having this hearing, I think this is
an outstanding topic for us. In fact, we might even need to
have additional hearings on this topic because the time goes so
quickly, but thanks again for having it.
To Mr. Amlani, welcome from Maryland. I represent Prince
George's County. You are just outside of our district.
Hopefully when that lease comes up we can convince you to move
a little further south, but we will take it one step at a time.
I did want to ask the Whac-A-Mole question to you, Mr.
Sikorski, because that is something I have been kind-of
worrying about quite a bit. We have identified a lot of threats
and the challenge, I think, is that sometimes they can
replicate very quickly, faster than certainly a litigation
approach can remedy those.
Let's take the, you know, deep fake types of imagery. We
have had some of those pop up. Sometimes they are aimed at
embarrassing individuals, sometimes, you know, revenge porn
kind of things.
So since I don't know that litigation is fast enough to do
it, and I think you mentioned that your company has taking some
steps to try and deal with that moving forward, I'd like to
hear a little bit more about it.
But in addition to that, how can the Government create
incentives for the private sector to do more on that front?
Because I think it might have been the Ranking Member
mentioned, you know, you've got AI fighting AI? I think that is
going to be better than Government fighting AI or certainly the
courts.
How can we go about it in a way that allows us to keep
pace?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. That's a great question, Congressman. I
think there's some things that are already happening that are
really great with the Government, a few things that I'm
actually pretty passionate about myself, things like
collaborative defense.
So back when I worked for the NSA you didn't tell anybody
you worked there. Now, there's a cyber collaboration center
that reaches out to industry and realizes that we can go much
further with defending the Nation if we work together versus in
complete and utter silos.
So continued push, like we've seen with CISA and the JCDC,
for example, has been very successful and is moving the needle.
So keeping pushing hard on that front, I think, is imperative.
I also think that it's important to think about cyber
hygiene and what entities are doing. So companies that are out
there, how are they protecting themselves?
I think CISA offers a great range of cyber hygiene and
vulnerability scanning services, for example, which is great,
but one thing we lack somewhat is, like, what's the report card
on how efficient somebody's cybersecurity is, especially when
you talk about critical infrastructure, health care, and so
forth.
So maybe we should roll out metrics that we could actually
track over time like Mean Time to Detect, Mean Time to Respond,
how quickly are we actually responding to attacks and sifting
through all that noise?
Mr. Ivey. All right. I want my monitor my time, but just to
follow up, if you could respond in writing perhaps, but the
Unit 42 Academy was very interesting to me. I was wondering how
that might be replicated?
Perhaps are there ways that the Government could encourage
other private entities or, you know, colleges and universities
that might be willing to do it? But find ways to expand that
effort, too. The too-many-alerts points that you made earlier
is another one I would like to find out a little bit more
about.
With respect to talent development, I appreciate the fact
that, you know, there are efforts going on and, Mr. Sikorski, I
think your company mentioned that and, Mr. Amlani, I think you
did as well. I think that is going to be a good solution for
the intermediate and long term.
In the short run, you know, I think we are importing a lot
of the talent, and in some instances we have had people come
and testify before this committee that they are coming from
hostile states, frankly.
So one of the things that I am wondering about since the
Government monitors it to some extent on the way in through
the, you know, the immigration process which has its challenges
for sure, even with respect to these types, but the other is
once these guys get in and they go to these companies how do we
know that the company is doing a good job of monitoring these
individuals to make sure that they are staying on the right
track? They are not misusing their position? There is no
economic espionage going on?
Should we be confident that these companies are doing a
good enough job to make sure that the United States is
protected and their industries are protected from those sorts
of potential attacks?
I apologize to the Chair for running over the line----
Chairman Green [presiding]. Please.
Mr. Ivey [continuing]. But I appreciate the Chair's
indulgence on this.
Anyone who would like to answer?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's a great question. I think, you
know, I've been doing incident response for almost 20 years and
it varies. It's not just nation-states that have threats. It's
not just ransomware.
Another big threat is insider, and we see insider threats
when Unit 42 is responding where, you know, it's not just the
threat of them maybe putting something into the supply chain
and getting it out the door and that kind of threat, which we
know nation-states are embedding employees in that way, but
also we've seen where they go out the door and then they have
stolen data.
Then they start engaging in ransomware-like behavior,
especially if their country doesn't have the ability to make
money and has their economy cut off. So those are just some
ideas I had.
Mr. Ivey. Anyone else?
Well, Mr. Chairman, thank you, and I yield back.
Chairman Green. Yes, of course, and I appreciate it. I did
see your kind words when I was out in the lobby section out
there, so I appreciate that.
I will tell you that I think, honestly, and I would ask
Members for feedback on this, we need more, you know, the 5
minutes in a hearing room just aren't getting it, right?
So what I may do is have, like, a town hall-type thing
where we are the town hall and they are on there and we are
just asking questions. It is more. I think that would be more
informative and maybe some presentations, so to speak, on data
poisoning for AI and all that kind of stuff and then us
understanding a little better to ask more informed questions.
So thank you for saying that. Work with me and we will get
some more stuff on the books for this.
Mr. Ivey. I appreciate that, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Green. I now recognize Mr. Ezell, the gentleman
from Mississippi, for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today and helping us out here.
This is something that we all are concerned about, and we
appreciate you being here today.
The capabilities of AI are quickly advancing. This product
which when I look at it feels futuristic, holds the power to
significantly improve the way we work and go about our daily
lives. However, we also know that advancements in technology
create new opportunities for bad actors to operate effectively.
Our great Congress must be closely monitoring this powerful
tool to ensure the application is not misused, but the
Government cannot get in the way of American leaders in this
sector and their ability to improve the product. The Chinese
Communist Party has intense ambitions to win the AI race.
As I talk with people in the private sector, it is clear we
are in a global AI arms race. Our adversaries are innovating
quickly and it is critical that we do not restrict the
capabilities of American business.
I would like to just direct this to the entire panel. How
can we ensure America's leadership in AI and what Government
actions could jeopardize this? Start with anybody who wants to
answer.
Mr. Amlani. Thank you so much for the question. This is a
really critically important point for me. I think continuing to
stay ahead of our adversaries on technology requires both
investment in our talent and work force.
I just took my 15-year-old son on college visits and I can
tell you it's actually very difficult to be able to get into an
engineering university today.
I think that there's an unprecedented demand for people
wanting to study AI and wanting to study cybersecurity and
wanting to study other types of engineering that are being left
out of the work force that are there at the college stage. They
get intimidated by software engineering.
Being able to make that a part of the high school
curriculum leading into college I think will also help and then
creating more educational opportunities for individuals wanting
to be able to get into the work force and learn those skills,
not just at the college age, but also going forward as they are
progressing through their careers.
In particular, investing in companies and making sure that
we are actually hiring companies that have the best talent is
another component. Those companies themselves can recruit the
best talent. They provide entrepreneurial worlds that allow
individuals to be able to create and solve problems in settings
that are fun environments to be able to do that.
I think if we can actually make a concerted effort through
organizations like the Silicon Valley Innovation Program to
hire the right companies to be able to solve some of our
massive Government problems is an important component to stay
ahead.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
Anybody else like to say anything?
Mr. Laperruque. I would say that encouraging, whether it's
by a procurement, other incentives, responsible development of
tools and proper use of those tools is key in making sure that
we're not simply trying to barrel ahead with reckless
development or reckless applications. That's not going to yield
good results.
As I said before, winning the AI arms race doesn't just
mean the fastest and broadest build-up. It means the most
efficient and effective one.
It's also, I think, a matter of looking at our values. When
we look at countries like China, Russia, et cetera, it is a
deployment of AI that is draconian in nature and that has
supported those authoritarian regimes. So I think it's
important that we be not just a global leader in innovation but
a global leader in values in this space and making sure that
when we're promoting the use of AI we're promoting a use that
is in conjunction with democratic values.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
Mr. Sikorski, China limits its citizens' access to
information through censorship, and I assume they will continue
these restrictions on AI. How does America's freedom and the
capitalist economy help to attract global investment around AI?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, I think that's a great question, and I
think that one way that we do is just by that fact we're a
little bit more open with regards to how we're able to innovate
and in what regard we're able to innovate.
I think as, sort-of, putting that together with your
previous question, I think about, you know, what is the high-
risk AI models we're building that are impactful to our
citizens? Things like maybe somebody applying for credit or for
university, right? Those kinds of things are high-risk and
maybe something we should need to hunker down on as far as, you
know, how are they being built up? Versus on the cybersecurity
side, I think the risk is a lot different and, therefore, like,
really pouring in a ton of innovation, which we're doing in
industry and we see organizations like CISA doing. So us coming
together with the Government to really iterate fast and
thinking about the charge of how do we sift through the noise,
which I've talked about a few times of all this security alerts
and actually make sense of it to find, you know, the next big
attack.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you all again.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
Now, as Chairman I will take a privilege here just a second
and shamelessly plug the academic institutions in Tennessee,
the Vanderbilt University just hired General Nakasone to become
lead cyber and the University of Memphis, University of
Tennessee are doing some exceptional research with Oak Ridge
and Redstone.
Of course, Tennessee Tech, one of our engineering programs,
your son should check that one out, too, an outstanding one.
They go out to high schools and middle schools and they are
starting cyber to very early age. Great, great schools in
Tennessee. Sorry I just had to do that, guys.
I now recognize Mr. Magaziner for 5 minutes of questioning.
He snuck in on you. Oh, I am sorry, but he----
Mr. Thanedar. Yes, it is----
Chairman Green. Mr. Thanedar, I am sorry. I looked at the
nameplate. You are----
Mr. Thanedar. Well, my name is Shri Thanedar. I represent
Michigan and Detroit, and my question is for Mr. Sikorski. You
mentioned in your testimony the need to secure every step of AI
app development life cycle.
As we saw with the Solar Winds hack, a supply chain
vulnerability can have far-reaching consequences. Can you speak
in more details about what steps Palo Alto Networks takes to
minimize supply chain vulnerabilities?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's a great question. Actually I was
heavily involved and actually led the team that reverse-
engineered the Solar Winds back door, which was pretty exciting
to get to brief Homeland Security about that as we were
unboxing it.
I think about, you know, that is one of the biggest
concerns we have when we think about cyber threats is the
supply chain attack. We've seen there's been numerous other
examples since Solar Winds which is now a few years in the
past, where our adversaries are able to get into that supply
chain, deploy code, and then it gets shipped out to customers
which then essentially gives them a back door into networks.
At Palo Alto Networks we're really focused on thinking
about how to eliminate that as you're building your code and as
you're shipping out your products. So as I mentioned, there's
sort-of multi-different tiers that we're thinking about when it
comes to AI security, but one of the biggest is absolutely the
supply chain because people are very quickly developing this.
They're pulling in technologies that are out there on the
internet or otherwise and that makes a really good opportunity
for an adversary to slip something in. So we adopt technologies
and are really focused our AI on eliminating those threats.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Can you elaborate on what
shortfalls the AI industry has demonstrated when it comes to
securing AI app development life cycles?
Mr. Sikorski. I'm sorry, what was that? The horn is----
Mr. Thanedar. Can you elaborate on what shortfalls the AI
industry has demonstrated when it comes to securing AI app
development life cycles?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. I think one of the things I think of is,
you know, when we're rushing out new technologies we're often
not taking the time because, you know, often what happens is
there's companies that are pitted against each other and who
can get this AI technology out to their customers first will
win the industry. Like, that's what we're talking about is to
how fast AI development is working and we've all talked about
how much it's going to evolve our life over time and it's
inevitable.
I think that when you do that people end up rushing, doing
things, and cutting corners to get those technologies out, not
thinking about security. Shocker. That's the thing we dealt
with a lot of innovation over time.
I think that making sure that we're actually putting in
mechanisms to think through how what is people's security
posture? Are they doing the right things as they're shipping
out applications because to a large extent software development
in our country is a national security issue when we talk about
the supply chain.
Mr. Thanedar. This is a question for the whole panel. The
world has not yet seen a major AI-driven cyber attack. On the
scale of attacks like NotPetya or WannaCry, what is the
likelihood that we see an attack on this scale or worse in the
next 5 years? Anybody.
Mr. Sikorski. I'll take that one as well, you know, as a
cybersecurity guy. So one thing I think about is that is an
absolute threat and huge concern I have because we saw
ransomware spread like wildfire, take down systems with
NotPetya, like you mentioned. The shipping industry was
impacted with that and I remember seeing, you know, grocery
stores for one of the big chains just completely knocked out.
People couldn't even buy groceries.
Then I also think about my experience with Solar Winds and
the fact that just imagine that Russia was using AI in that
attack. They would have been able to focus more on getting
their hooks into systems for which the Solar Winds attack gave
them access.
If they could have done that in an automated way rather
than using their human army, it would have been much more of an
efficient attack.
Mr. Thanedar. All right. Anybody else?
Mr. Laperruque. Thank you. Yes, I'll just--it's a serious
challenge because it's a type of scenario where AI can be the
weapon or it could be the target. So as we've discussed a bit
here, it might be something that's used to facilitate a
phishing attempt. You could use something like a deep fake to
augment a phishing attempt maybe instead of just sending an
email and then you get a fake call, voice message, or even a
video saying, oh, open up that email I just sent you. That
makes someone less suspicious and helps facilitate that.
It's also potentially a target point. Critical
infrastructure they use lots of AI systems in ways that might
not at all be related to national security, but if there's a
vulnerability there or there's some sort of manipulation of AI
systems then that could also be a vulnerability point maybe.
Perhaps, you know, how we might use AI to distribute power
along the grid or how we use it to check to people coming into
a stadium or a large-scale event. If those AI systems and the
algorithms behind them were a target of an attack or subject to
manipulation that could raise a host of risks.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much.
Mr. Chair, I will take my own seat next time. Sorry for the
confusion.
Chairman Green. So you don't confuse me, yes. I got it.
Poisoned the data there. Thank you and sorry I got your name
wrong.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger, for
5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think it is an
important discussion. I am glad we are having it.
Thanks to the witnesses for being here.
The public-private partnership that we have throughout the
United States between Government, you know, including
Department of Homeland Security and other agencies, and then
private industry, including and I think importantly critical
infrastructure, I don't know that it has ever been as important
as it is today.
So I think the witnesses for being here because I think the
goal is for us to be able to keep up. One of the ways that we
can keep up and one of the ways that we can continue to train
the next generation is actually happening in my hometown at
Angelo State University.
They are a cyber center of excellence. They are a Hispanic-
serving institution. I think that is very important. It is a
very rural area, but they also have a very strong focus in
addition to just general cyber issues on AI.
In San Angelo we have Goodfellow Air Force Base, which is a
joint intelligence training base. So you pair these up together
you have got university work being done. You have the military
that trains our intel professionals, a majority of them train
at that location. So I want to put a plug in there for that and
I may ask some questions on that.
But let me go to Mr. Sikorski. In your testimony you talk
about how adversaries are leveraging AI, and I would just kind-
of like to get whether it is phishing or some other older
technique or whether it is a new technique maybe talk to me
about how you see adversaries increasing the scope, the scale,
and actually the threat using AI?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. That's a great question, Congressman. I
think that, you know, it goes to the question earlier, right,
like, the what if some of the attacks we've seen in the past
leveraged AI in a large-scale attack.
I also think about the evolution, right? So the first thing
that the attackers want, and we're monitoring them, you know,
one of the things Unit 42 does is threat intelligence so we're
monitoring the dark web. We're seeing what they're talking
about in their forums, what they're selling to each other,
their access to networks, but also talking about how to
leverage this technology to create really efficient attacks.
The big focus so far has been on social engineering
attacks, which means things like phishing, which we talked
about, to get you to click on something you wouldn't otherwise.
Then also manipulate you to get, like, multifactor
authentication, you know, where you need that extra token to
log in? They're really focusing there as well.
Where we start to see them, you know, poking around is
using AI to be able to do better reconnaissance on the networks
they're attacking to know, you know, what holes are in networks
across the world.
Then also they're starting to wade into how can they
develop malware efficiently and variations of it so that it's
not the same attack you see over and over again, which goes
back to the point of how do you fight against that, which is
you need to develop technologies that are really efficient
using AI to see those variations.
Mr. Pfluger. I want to ask all of you in the last 2 minutes
to speak to this model that Angelo State University is using
where they're training students. Those students may go into the
NSA. They may go into the military. They may go, you know, in
the private sector. What should Angelo State and other
universities be doing?
We will start with Mr. Laperruque and then go down. We have
about a minute and a half.
Mr. Laperruque. I mean, I'm not a hard science person so I
probably have less to add than my colleagues, but I would just
say I think I have found in my field it's invaluable for people
in the policy space like me to learn from the people who
understand the tech, and people who are developing the tech to
understand and to learn from people who are experienced in
policy, experienced in protecting civil rights, civil
liberties, and values.
You know, it helps with sort-of how we can translate across
to each other and also helps as you're designing these systems
to think about what's the best way to do it and how we can
actually do it in a way that's going to promote what we care
about as a society.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you.
Mr. Amlani.
Mr. Amlani. I think, first of all, I think actually there's
a vocabulary around cybersecurity that is a very important
component to be able to educate our youth on everything from
spear-phishing, you know, you mentioned all the other types of
attacks. I think these are important things to be able to teach
people about to make sure that they themselves are not hacked,
but also they understand what the attacks are actually
happening and how to guard against them.
Identity is a big, big component of all cyber attacks. It's
about 91 percent of all cyber attacks are actually originated
with a credential that's been stolen, that's been hacked,
that's been compromised in some way, shape, or form.
Then malware gets implanted within a system that can then
be activated afterwards on an on-going basis. So having better
identification mechanisms to make sure that individuals don't
have to change their password every day, they don't have to
have multiple things that are very hard to remember----
Mr. Pfluger. Would you say that the universities should be
researching this? That they should be doing it in maybe even a
Classified setting that they should be working on these types
of techniques and partnering with Government agencies as well?
Mr. Amlani. Government agencies as well as commercial
sector as well.
Mr. Pfluger. Very good.
My time has expired. I am sorry, Mr. Demmer. I didn't get a
chance to talk to you, but I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
Mr. Suozzi, I think Mr. Menendez has asked that you go
ahead of him and so you are recognized for 5 minutes.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you so much for
doing this hearing. I am very interested in the idea of you
doing some, sort-of, offsite retreat where we could delve into
this in more depth.
Thank you to the witnesses. When I listen to you and I
think more and more about AI the more terrified I become, quite
frankly. I know there is great opportunities but I am scared.
In 1974, I was in seventh grade and I remember Sister Ruth
at St. Patrick's grade school saying, you know, technology is
moving so fast these days that we don't have a chance to figure
out how it is affecting us, how it is affecting our values, how
it is affecting our families, how it is affecting our society,
how to effectively--it is just moving too fast.
That was, you know, because of the space race and
electronics. You know, Atari had just come out with Pong in
1972 or something, so, you know, think about how fast
everything is moving now.
You know, think of all the impacts we have seen from social
media on our young people where these polls come out and say,
you know, 35 percent of kids are patriotic whereas, you know,
for Boomers like me it is 70-something percent. Nobody believes
in any religion anymore or any institutions and we have all
these kids with mental health issues related to their self-
esteem.
So everything is moving so quickly and I am confident that
you are going to figure out how to protect, as Mr. Sikorski
talked about. He represents 90 of the Fortune 500, and we are
going to fight our way through to protect our businesses to
make sure that they are looking out for their security and
interests.
Hopefully we will think of more things with our Government,
but I am worried about our kids. I am worried about our senior
citizens getting scammed. I am worried about people using our
voices to say things we didn't say.
I am worried about our society that is so divided and our
foreign adversaries, the Chinese Communist Party, Russia, Iran
are trying to divide us more by using social media and our
freedom and certainly using, I think, AI and deep fakes to try
and divide us even more.
So I am worried about this divisiveness. I am worried about
fraud. So I am going to give you the rest of my time and I am
asking each one of you.
You just talked about values, Mr. Laperruque. I am worried
about the values in our country, just like people that believe
in our values. Forget about the fact that there are other
countries that don't believe in our values at all. I am worried
about our own country and our values and promoting those
values.
So each of you just give me 30 seconds each, if you can.
What is the No. 1 thing on the big picture you think we need to
be focused on right now to address not the positive parts of AI
but the scary parts of AI? So what is No. 1 on your mind?
Mr. Laperruque, you go first.
Mr. Laperruque. I would say it has to be a comprehensive
approach from the creation of systems to input of data and
inputting in proper situations to retrieval and use of results.
That's something that there ought to be a lot of factors to
bring together in the national security space because it's so
often veiled in secrecy. That means we have to find mechanisms
for transparency and oversight because you don't typically have
that sort of light that you can shine on potentially in the
private sector and business practices or even other parts of
government. So I think we have to find ways to promote that
oversight and making sure that we're upholding those principles
for responsible use, even when you don't always have the same
level of public insights to----
Mr. Suozzi. So oversight to watch the input of data?
Mr. Laperruque. Oversight on everything from procurement to
what data is being input to how you're using data, what kind of
human review and corroboration you have, how much you rely on
it. It has to be----
Mr. Suozzi. That sounds awfully big effort. OK.
Mr. Amlani.
Mr. Amlani. I mean, as a father of 3 children, all of whom
use digital tools regularly, I think first off we're placing a
large responsibility on parents to be able to monitor the
digital communications of our children.
There aren't the age verification mechanisms currently
today to be able to provide a gateway to make sure that the
right people are accessing the right systems at any point in
time. I think it goes back to the identity layer of the
internet that I mentioned before.
As you mentioned, there's all kinds of on-line bullying,
you know, extremism, recruiting, other things like that that
are happening on-line and it's all being done, you know, not
just in the dark web but actually out in the open.
But it's because we don't have the ability to be able to
properly recognize who people are on-line and it creates
mechanisms and difficulties for making sure that we can
actually have stronger values enforced and allow parents to be
empowered.
Mr. Suozzi. OK, better ID'ing people.
Mr. Sikorski.
Mr. Sikorski. Yes I agree with both those takes so far, but
the other one that I would consider and put out there is the
education piece. So I talked heavily already about cyber
education and the work force that's going to defend the Nation
next as being paramount, but there's also an education piece
for the rest of society when it comes to security and AI and
being in disinformation, right?
Knowing that what you're seeing on your phone may or may
not be real, right? People in an age where people are getting
their news by just scrolling through their phone second after
second I think that's something that really needs to be
considered.
Then how do we eliminate those kinds of things that are not
real?
Mr. Suozzi. Mr. Chairman, can we let Mr. Demmer answer? He
hasn't been able to answer a question for a while. Go ahead,
Mr. Demmer.
Mr. Demmer. Thank you for the question, Congressman. You
know, I agree with you on the societal and technological
advancements, you know, creating some downstream maybe impacts
that are unintended.
I personally believe that technology advancement that is
happening today, you know, creates a promising future for all
workers to be able to upskill, have more fulfillment in their
work, and to be enabled with these tools of technologies but it
all starts with the critical data.
If we don't have good data going into these systems, then,
you know, garbage in, garbage out.
Mr. Suozzi. OK, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the Chairman of the cyber subcommittee, Mr.
Garbarino, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all the witnesses for being here.
My colleague just before, he was talking about 1974 and
Sister Ruth and I was, like, where was I? Oh, wait, I wasn't
alive, so 1984, though.
Mr. Demmer, recently one of our biggest concerns has been
the prepositioning of Chinese state actors in U.S. critical
infrastructure, meaning their posture for a cyber attack if
conflict with the United States were to arise.
The U.S. intelligence community has said that AI has been
helping them detect this activity given it is much more
challenging to decipher than traditional tactics that involve
malware injection. How have you been thinking about this
challenge?
Mr. Demmer. Absolutely. So the threats are dual and there's
the cyber threats that I think, you know, there's others on
this witness stand that can best answer that on the on the
physical infrastructure, specifically our critical assets, is a
vulnerability. We've seen that.
You know, Gecko's a proven partner for the U.S. industrial
base on both public and private sector, and we need to ensure,
you know, energy security, you know, critical infrastructure
like roadways, bridges, dams. These are all susceptible to
physical attacks and, ultimately, you know, creating wins for
the industrial base enables us to fight some of these other
existential threats as well.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, I appreciate it.
Mr. Sikorski, I understand that you teach cybersecurity at
Columbia University, which undoubtedly means that you have a
front row seat at our Nation's cyber talent, up and coming
cyber talent. In your view, what does the Government need to do
to bring sufficient numbers of people into the cyber work
force?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes it's a great question. I think back to my
experience, right, when I was in school it wasn't until I was a
senior in college in New York City and 9/11 happened that I
was, like, I want to go work for the NSA. Like, that's what I
want to go do.
But I didn't really think about that before. It was things
like video games and stuff like that, right? I think getting
people excited earlier on is a really good place that we can
focus, right, of, like, there's cybersecurity hacking clubs,
like, at universities and high schools and this gets people
really excited to gamify it and play along.
So I think, you know, while we look at the work force gap I
think as Palo Alto Networks goes, I already mentioned our work
force capability where we have, like, the Unit 42 Academy where
we're bringing people in and who don't maybe have the hands-on
experience. We're giving it to them with on-the-job-training.
Then I also think about Government programs like I was in
when I went to NSA. I was in a technical development program
there where I got ramped up on all the things that I didn't
learn during my education previous to that. So those types of
programs that are feeders, I think, are really powerful in
getting people to level up the skills that maybe they didn't
get during college.
Mr. Garbarino. So that was actually, you know, you pretty
much already answered my second question. How does it--well,
not technically, not all the way. You have these clubs. You
have these feeder organizations. What is Congress' role in
further improving those or do we have a role?
I mean, how do we--because it is, you know, over half a
million jobs, cyber jobs openings in the United States. I mean,
that is what keeps me up at night, you know, that we don't have
the work force to defend against these cyber attacks.
AI can only bring us so far. We still need that human
element, so do we have a role and what is it, if you have
thought that far?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. I think absolutely do. I think there's
an ability to create these types of programs, right, where it
makes it really easy for people to apply and get into, to the
point made earlier, about, hey, it's hard to get into schools
that have these programs available.
I think we often think that, oh, well, it needs to be a
very specific cyber program that they're doing. Some of it is
they can learn those types of skills on the job when they get
in and it's more about building out the broad base of technical
capability in our work force. I think that that's, you know,
one great area.
I do think that there's a lot of Government agencies like
CISA that have information out there where people can learn and
train up. I think there's a lot of virtual education kinds of
things going on that are very powerful.
So I think just thinking about how to drag in that work
force and some of that is even earlier on, right? So we're
talking sometimes giving people skills.
I remember when I taught the FBI it was, like, all of a
sudden these people were cyber agents and they had none of the
background in cyber. Everybody had no technical computer
science background and it was really challenging.
So it's not just a snap your fingers, train them up in a
month. It starts earlier.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes. I think I am out of time but companies,
I think, need to start focusing on skills-based hiring instead
of degree-based hiring. I think that will help, too.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the Congressman who represents Palo Alto, I
think, yes? Yes. Mr. Swalwell for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Swalwell. Chair, thanks for holding this hearing. It is
so important.
Chairman Green. Absolutely.
Mr. Swalwell. I think we are at our best as a committee
when we are taking on issues like this. I have enjoyed working
with the gentleman from Long Island, Mr. Garbarino, on the
cyber committee. I think we are doing a lot of good work there.
Mr. Laperruque, I was hoping to talk to you a little bit
about something that Californians are very concerned about and
creatives everywhere. You know, the entertainment industry is
the second-largest jobs engine in California and it is not just
folks who are on screen. It is folks who are writers, editors,
part of the production teams off-screen.
AI certainly it is the future. There is no ignoring it.
There is no putting it back in the bottle. It is the future and
so we have to embrace it. We have to shape it, put guardrails
on it, and contours around it.
But when it comes to the creative community, you know, the
example over the weekend of what happened to Scarlett Johansson
with her voice essentially being stolen from her for an AI
product, what should we be thinking about to make sure that we
protect artists and creators from this, but still, as I said,
embrace AI and recognize that this is where we are going?
Mr. Laperruque. Well, I think it's going to be important
that we find ways to sort-of try to be proactive in
anticipating what people's rights are going to need to be. I
mean, a situation like that, I mean, you know, probably not
something that was even imagined or contemplated when the movie
where she played an AI I think it was 4 or 5 years ago came
out.
This is something that's come up a lot, I think, in the
recent writers' strike, the actors' strike is how do we build
in those protections now, not just for how AI is being used
right now in this industry, but also how is it going to be used
in 5 years? How is it going to be used in 10 years?
So, you know, looking at workers' rights is a little
outside of my field, but from just the technology standpoint it
moves so fast I think it's important to be proactive in
thinking about not just current risks and factors to care about
but what do we need to care about down the line that we might
not be ready for when it comes up?
Mr. Swalwell. When you talk to creatives they are not
opposed to AI and that is such a basic hot take, which is, oh,
they oppose AI. They don't oppose AI. They just want rights and
they want--you know, and they are willing to engage around
their likeness and their voices, but they should be
compensated.
The majority of people who are writers and actors are
people you have never heard of, but this is their livelihood.
In California we are especially sensitive to that.
I wanted to ask Mr. Amlani because we are in the same
backyard in the Bay Area, and the Chairman alluded, you know,
that our tech culture has created, you know, so many
opportunities in the Bay Area, but I do worry about with AI,
and I have a community in my district called Pleasanton. It is
one of the wealthiest communities in America and you have heard
of it.
I have other places in my district, like San Lorenzo and
Hayward and Union City, and they have some of the poorest
communities in the country with schools that don't have enough
resources and those kids have dreams as big as kids in
Pleasanton. So I just fear that at, you know, a child's
earliest days in schools that there are going to be two classes
created: those who are given access to AI in their classrooms
and those who are not.
So what can the private sector do because you are often,
really, some of the best solutions out there to partner with
school districts to make sure that you are imparting your
knowledge and skills on places that need it the most,
recognizing that you are going to have a need to recruit talent
down the track as well.
Mr. Amlani. Sure. Thank you so much for the comments and
questions, Congressman. Obviously, this is a pretty personal
issue with me, but I think with regards to actually allowing
people to have access to the technology and AI in particular
it's interesting the way that AI is actually democratizing
itself and it's making itself available to everybody.
It's as much of a concern to make sure that actually
everyone has access to it and is actually able to have these
tools but also people that have gone through large universities
and master's degrees and Ph.D.'s now a lot of that content and
knowledge is available at people's fingertips who have never
gone through any of those programs.
So, you know, with different AI tools that are now
available at people's fingertips you can now code. You can now
write apps. You can now create content. You know, I've got my
12-year-old creating music right now.
This type of democratization of the AI capabilities is both
an opportunity but also a massive threat. It really does
upskill many cyber criminals around the globe to be able to
attack systems, people that are not as well-off potentially and
would love to have the ability to be able to create malware
that could potentially create a ransom payment.
So those types of opportunities to be able to educate the
youth and make sure that they know how to use it responsibly
and for the right aspects are something that I think our
society needs to embrace and do a lot more of.
Mr. Swalwell. OK, thanks.
Thanks again, Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. D'Esposito, the gentleman from New York
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank
you for taking the committee in this direction. I think that it
is an issue that really affects every corner of the United
States of America and, obviously, our world and has real
promises for the future.
Just last week during police week I chaired an Emergency
Management and Technology Subcommittee hearing with the Law
Enforcement and Intelligence Subcommittee hearing about the use
of drones in the first responder world.
We heard a lot about the expanding field and how law
enforcement agencies are utilizing drones to assist them in
doing their job. I have to say as someone who spent a career in
the NYPD it was, it was good to hear and promising that they
are embracing technology about how to handle the issues that
are plaguing so many cities across this country.
Obviously, as we embrace technology and as the field
expands, we meet challenges and we find challenges so listening
to all of you speak about the power of AI to assist the United
States from attacks from our enemies, it seems that there may
be a space for AI in these drones.
So generally speaking, any of you could answer, is AI
already being used in drones either by those in law
enforcement, the Government, or privately?
Mr. Demmer. Congressman, thank you for the question. Being
in a related field with doing wall-climbing robots primarily, I
can say that AI is useful for, you know, using these smart
tools properly, everything from localizing data, you know,
ensuring that the data point is synched to the location on a
real-world asset, to processing millions of data points, or in
this case visual images.
We heard a little bit earlier, you know, drones being used
as well to secure the border. So there are definitely
applications here for that there.
Mr. D'Esposito. Yes, and you mentioned data, so, obviously,
drones are utilized by law enforcement to collect that data,
whether it is audiovisual, location data, GPS, among others. So
that information that is collected needs to--you know, we need
to make sure that it is collected correctly and obviously kept
private.
So is there a role that AI can play in ensuring that this
information remains secure and doesn't give the bad guys
access?
Mr. Demmer. Absolutely, and I'd defer to, you know, my
fellow witnesses here on specific policy recommendations for
cybersecurity. But, you know, Gecko collects data, you know,
massive amounts of information on the physical built world and
we take, you know, very seriously the responsibility of
securing that data, you know, following requirements like NIST
800-171, NIST 800-172 for these standards of securing the data.
You know, also providing training to the entire work force so
that they know how to properly handle any type of information
or Classified information.
Mr. D'Esposito. Do any of the other witnesses have
recommendations with regards to that?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. I could just add that, you know,
securing the models, the data that's used to build them is
critical. One of the things we deal with the most when doing
incident response, especially, you know, ransomware attacks
have actually shifted. They no longer encrypt the files on disk
anymore. They just focus on stealing data and then use that to
extort victims.
So securing the crown jewels of data, which is what most
entities have, is paramount.
Mr. D'Esposito. During the--I am sorry, Mr. Amlani, did you
have something?
Mr. Amlani. Sure. This is at Defense Innovation Unit for
the autonomous systems portfolio part of my role years ago was
actually to manage autonomous systems within drones. I think
one of the biggest concerns is actually Chinese-made technology
within drones and making sure that we create a list of
different drones that people could potentially use in law
enforcement and other avenues to make sure that we have a safe
list of drones and which is something that Defense Innovation
actually did create.
Mr. D'Esposito. So that is actually what--you are leading
into my next question. It was almost like we planned this out.
So part of the conversation that we had last week from the NYPD
was the fact that they currently utilize Chinese technology in
their drones and they are working to eliminate them from the
fleet because of the issues and the concerns that we have.
My colleague from New York, Ms. Stefanik, has introduced
legislation recently that would help law enforcement make sure
that they only purchase American-made technology, American-made
drones.
But, obviously, those Chinese drones are still in our
atmosphere, are still being utilized by first responder and law
enforcement agencies. So just quickly, how can AI help us
mitigate the threats that they pose?
Mr. Amlani. There's also a significant amount of work being
done by Defense Innovation Unit and other agencies on
mitigation of drones and counter-drone work. So AI used for
counter-drone work is also another way to be able to mitigate
those.
Mr. D'Esposito. Excellent.
My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from California from Los
Angeles, Mr. Garcia. You are recognized.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
holding this hearing.
I want to thank all of our witnesses for being here as
well. It is truly amazing how fast AI has evolved and continues
to evolve every day.
It used to be something, of course, a lot of us would read
about or see in movies and read about in science fiction
novels, it has changed so much and just the progress of AI in
just the last 6 months to a year has been startling.
But also, I think, shows the promise of what AI can
actually do in our lives and how we can also improve our lives
as Americans and as a world.
Like a lot of folks here, the concerns as it relates to our
own security, our own homeland security challenges we have here
in this country, but I also want to focus on the challenges it
faces to our own democracy and our elections process. A lot of
my colleagues have brought that up in the past and there are
bills to address that, of course, here in the Congress as well.
You know, just in the last 24 hours DHS issued a warning
ahead of the 2024 elections of threats that AI poses to our
very elections. Earlier this year the World Economic Forum
announced that AI threatens and continues to threaten global
democracy, not just here in the United States but across the
globe. This assessment was actually echoed just last week by
our own intelligence community.
The DNI intelligence officials have testified in the Senate
that since 2016 when Russia first tried to meddle in our
elections that the threats are happening from foreign actors
even more. So as we know today, Russia, China, Iran, others
competing to influence not just their own countries but what is
happening in our own elections here in the United States. That
is actually a very danger to all of us and a concern for us as
well.
Now this past January, we know that voters in New Hampshire
were exposed to one of the most high-profile recent cases of
AI. We know that there was a robocall, for example,
impersonating President Joe Biden telling people not to vote.
That attempt, of course, was identified, stopped, and
investigated, which I think we are all very grateful for. But
we can see that those types of efforts could cause enormous
havoc, especially in elections that were close if they were
targeted in States or in communities across the country.
We already know that there has been unsuccessful and
successful attempts to undermine our elections in 2016 and
2020, and folks are trying to do it again in 2024. So the rise
of AI, deep fakes, and other technology is very concerning, I
think, to the Congress and to all of us.
I am also especially concerned because, well, one of both
the advantages in the United States is that we have a lot of--
our elections are decentralized. Our elections are not run
generally by the Federal Government. They are run by States,
counties, towns, cities, oftentimes small communities without a
lot of resources or the technology to know how to actually deal
with kind of the oncoming, I think, wave of AI attempts to
actually meddle in all of these elections.
So I am really concerned about how these smaller agencies,
these city clerks actually are able to take on AI and have the
resources to do so.
We know that the new DHS Artificial Intelligence Task
Force, which is coming out of Homeland Security, which I think
is really important, but this is a huge, I think,
responsibility of this committee is how we provide and get
assistance to these clerks and county recorders across the
country.
Mr. Laperruque, I know that CDT has done a great, good deal
of examining some of these risks. What additional safeguards do
you think need to be put in place as it relates to this
election piece? How can Congress better support all of these
election organizations and officials across the country that
have a decentralized system? How are they supposed to get
support? That is, I think, very concerning.
Mr. Laperruque. As you were emphasizing, the decentralized
nature of our elections, which in some ways provides a lot of
assets, is also a significant challenge when you're facing
threats like this.
So we, unfortunately, over the last decade have built up a
robust network of Federal entities that provide support for
election security from things such as cyber threats.
I think we should supplement that by having those same
entities serve as means for highlighting AI threats, whether
that's of a specific type of attack or a misinformation
campaign that's going around, using that to disseminate
information, but also for more general awareness and education
that can be brought from that small set of Federal entities and
disseminated outwards to that broad network trying to educate
about here are the types of AI technologies.
Here's how they might be used for everything from trying to
use AI to create spam FOIA requests to overload your office to
building up fake materials about polling information to using
AI for spear-phishing.
Mr. Garcia. Could I also just finally, I think what is--
even though we have for, you know, our elections obviously for
President or U.S. Senator, these are Federal elections, but
they rely on data from local towns and counties and registrars
that just send their information and their voting information
up through the process through the State and then eventually,
of course, the States will certify elections.
So the real concern is that you can micro-target, of
course, precincts. You can micro-target small towns and cities
with these AI disruptions that can have real impacts in certain
States to Presidential elections. I think that is something
that I think we have to really consider and think about as we
move forward and how we get these small towns and city clerks
the technology but also the education that is needed to take on
this these deep fakes and AI concerns.
So with that, I yield. Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Lee. Good afternoon. Mr. Sikorski, I would like to go
back to your testimony where you mentioned that our cyber
adversaries are utilizing AI to really enable some of their
malicious behavior, like creating more sophisticated phishing
attacks, finding new attack vectors, enhancing the speed of
lateral movements once they do intrude upon a network.
I am interested in hearing more about how we are using
machine learning to build and enhance our cyber defenses
against these kinds of attacks. You mentioned in your written
testimony precision AI, some other tools including some
revisions to how the SOCs are operating.
Would you elaborate for us on how machine learning can
enhance our cyber defenses?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, it's a great question. Actually Palo
Alto Networks and myself have both been involved on this
machine learning AI journey for over 10 years. This isn't while
ChatGPT and other technologies like that have gotten really
popular really quick, we've been leveraging that type of
technology for quite some time.
Myself specifically on, you know, malware, anti-malware
technology to be able to detect malware on a system and so
we've been training models to do that. We've been in it for
quite some time and that detects sort-of variation in what
we're seeing and making sure that variants of malware that come
out will be stopped due to that training.
Then there's also the idea of sort-of leveraging AI to get
rid of the noise. That's really the more recent evolution that
we've been focused on at Palo Alto Networks where we're trying
to say everybody's inundated with all these tools.
You know, go back to the Solar Winds example.
I did numerous incident responses to that after, you know,
that came out. I went on to corporate networks and one of the
big problems that they had was they actually detected the
attack. They detected the malware being dropped on a system.
They detected the lateral movement, but they didn't know it was
there because they were flooded with so much noise.
So what we're doing is we're taking our technology and very
much focusing on how to put these alerts together, reduce the
amount of information so that the brains of the analysts, who
by the way are getting burned out by having to look at so much
data that makes no sense to them, instead it gives them a
chance to zero in on the attack, figure it all out, and then
actually move the needle.
Ms. Lee. You also mentioned in your testimony at a point
about the unintended consequences of disclosure, and I would
like to go back to that, particularly raise a concern that
public disclosures that require information about how we are
using AI to train and defend networks that requiring
disclosures of a certain type could unintentionally create a
roadmap for the cyber adversaries and reduce our overall
security.
I am interested if you were a policy maker how would you
balance disclosure requirements with not alerting our
adversaries to the type of information that we don't want them
to have?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's also a great question. I think
about it's all about the, like, what is your end goal with
respect to the AI that you're trying to get to customers or to
protect the network? I think you've got to think about the risk
level involved there and think about the tradeoff, right?
The more that we regulate things and think about what's
there and really put a lot of pressure on oversight it could
slow down the innovation and the protection. I think it's the
appropriate thing to do when we're talking about somebody
applying for a home loan or something like that, thinking about
every step of the security process with that.
I think when we start to talk about cybersecurity we've got
to focus on what is the data and is the data, the ones and
zeros, the malware, the detections to be able to eliminate
attacks and how important that is to make sure that we continue
to make a difference with the technologies that we're building
on the cyber war that we're all out there fighting day in and
day out.
Ms. Lee. You also mentioned, that reminds me, of the
concept of secure-by-design. I know it is something that we
need to be contemplating as we analyze internally what to
regulate it and in what manner.
Share with us, if you would, a little bit more about
secure-by-design and what that should mean to us as Federal
policy makers.
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, I think it goes back to the point that
AI is here to stay no matter what any of us do, right? Like,
it's coming and it's sort-of like the internet, right, but we
didn't plan security into the internet. We didn't plan security
into all of the applications and everything that was built out.
Instead what we're stuck doing, and especially comes up as
a cybersecurity company, is, you know, we missed out on an
opportunity to build things in a secure way. That's where when
it comes to securing-AI-by-design you think about what are you
building, how are you building it? What are you pulling in from
the supply chain into that build? How are you protecting the
application as it's running? How are you protecting the models,
the data, everything as it's actually flowing out to customers
or otherwise?
I think that's where a really big focus on building things
in a secure way is really important.
Ms. Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Menendez for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Ranking
Member, for having this hearing.
Thank you to all the witnesses. I first want to start and
build off some of the questions that my colleagues have asked
about training our cybersecurity work force and first want to
acknowledge Hudson County Community College, which is in New
Jersey's 8th Congressional District.
It is designated as a National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cybersecurity by the NSA. They were recently
awarded $600,000 to expand their renowned cybersecurity program
which is getting more women into the cybersecurity field, so
incredibly proud of the work that they are doing.
Mr. Sikorski, thank you for emphasizing the need to educate
and train our cyber work force. I am wondering in your
experience what are you seeing as the most prominent barriers
to participation in the cyber work force?
Mr. Sikorski. I think there's a few parts to that. I think
the first is desire. I think that getting people at a much
younger age, you know, focused on getting excited about these
technologies and wanting to get involved in what's happening.
It goes back to what we discussed earlier which is how do
we make sure they have proper access and actually are talking
about AI and cybersecurity at a very early age?
Then I think that to the point of what's happening in your
district is very focused on how do we build the university
system such that they're really feeding the engine of all of
these cybersecurity work force shortage jobs that we need to
actually fill?
So I think, you know, and working with industry to make
sure that they're lining up for the jobs because, you know, a
lot of cybersecurity companies actually struggle to find talent
to hire into these jobs which go into, you know, securing
networks around the world, collaborating with CISA, and other
things that we're doing.
There's just not enough people to pull from there.
Mr. Menendez. Yes, because across public-private sectors
everyone is looking to enhance their cybersecurity capabilities
which includes adding cybersecurity professionals, whether it
is the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey or whether it
is a private entity that is concerned about these issues.
Just sort-of quickly following back, you mentioned a desire
at a younger age for people to engage in this field. I believe
you are an advisor to Columbia's cyber student organization.
Are you seeing anything sort-of in that student demographic
that draws them to cyber that maybe we should be sort-of using
to highlight and amplify at a younger age?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. That's a great question. I think that
one thing I think about is the gamification of it.
Mr. Menendez. Yes.
Mr. Sikorski. When I think of myself personally I wanted to
be a video game programmer originally because that was really
cool back in the Nintendo days, right? I had the tech skills
for it. But then once I realized that, you know, cybersecurity
is like this, it's good-versus-evil kind of situation going on
in the real world and it's only going to get bigger, I started
to get really excited.
Then there's hacking competitions and like, you know,
driving that into getting people to participate more because of
the fun that can be had and the team building that could be had
working toward that.
That doesn't really exist out there but that's what
actually happens at Columbia University. There's a
cybersecurity club where they focus on that. They go to
competitions together and it rallies them into a common goal. I
think those types of things are great.
Mr. Menendez. That is great. I appreciate it.
I am going to shift real quick to Mr. Demmer. In your
testimony you touched on how AI can be used to better secure
physical infrastructure and you specifically note the
collection of high-quality, high-quantity data.
I also sit on the Transportation Infrastructure Committee.
We are overseeing the major investment that is being utilized
by the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which is
building our future infrastructure.
I was commissioner of the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey. One of my favorite projects was Restoring the
George where they went through and cables, and it was a
completely intricate project but necessary.
As we think about investing in our infrastructure so we
don't have to make these huge investments of replacing our
existing infrastructure, how could the use of AI and the data
collection that you touch on be used to better upkeep our
existing infrastructure?
Mr. Demmer. Thank you, Congressman. This is, you know,
something we care deeply about. Of course, protecting the
infrastructure we have today, capturing the right dataset so
that we can ensure that they are here for us when we need them
not vulnerable to, you know, just wear, old age, or some
external threat.
But increasingly, we also see the opportunity with these
datasets to help us build more intelligently in the future. So
as we bring new systems on-line how do we instrument them in
ways where we can do that modernization and telemetry of what's
going on with that equipment so that we don't have sort-of the
failures or the vulnerabilities? Hopefully lower that cost of
maintenance because two-thirds of the cost of critical
infrastructure is usually consumed after the initial build.
Mr. Menendez. That is right. What type of dollar amount
investment could the Federal Government make to quickly scale
up this technology and put it to use?
Mr. Demmer. Yes. So there are, you know, very much, you
know, technology-ready solutions out there for national
security and there are ways that, you know, I'd love to follow
up with some guidance on that in terms of programs that could
be utilized to help bring those technologies to the forefront
and accelerate the adoption of them, whether it be investment
in hardware technologies, as well as, you know, ensuring that
the policy side has recognized that not all solutions are
created equal.
Today we do a lot of things that seem, seemingly placate
the ability to think that we have a handle on what's going on,
but it's actually woefully inadequate in terms of how we're
actually managing, you know, and maintaining.
Mr. Menendez. Sure. I would appreciate to continue this
conversation, but I am woefully out of time. So I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from North Carolina, Mr.
Bishop, for 5 minutes----
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Chairman, I yield my time to you.
Chairman Green. Thank you. A quick question on the creating
a sense of security for the public on AI. There is all the fear
that is out there and are there requirements that we can place
in the system that would give people a sense of security?
I mean, kill switches, always having a person in the
system, what are some things that we can do give the public a
sense of security that we are not going to create, you know,
The Terminator or something like that? Anyone? You are smiling.
Mr. Laperruque. I'd say human review and control is one of
several factors that's critical for something like this. Again,
I think you need strong principles to ensure responsible use
all the way from creation to what data you're putting into
systems and what systems you are using AI for to what data
you're taking out and how you're using it as you said, you
know, for human review.
One of those steps on this sort-of on the outside is there
should be human cooperation for AI results. It shouldn't just
be AI making its own decisions.
We have to know how reliable AI is in certain
circumstances. Sometimes it can provide small bits of insight,
sometimes it can be very reliable, sometimes it gives a degree
and you have to treat it with a bit of skepticism. But also
maybe it provides a bit of value along those lines, not just
human review but specially-trained staff. That's why it's so
important for folks that won't just overcome a general
automation bias.
That's the tendency for individuals to always just assume
that automated systems tend to work better than humans. That's
been documented in many cases, but you need to understand what
type of biases or what type of liability you might want to
apply to any given AI system in any situation.
Chairman Green. Mr. Amlani, Mr. Laperruque has said some
negative things about facial recognition earlier, I think if I
heard him. Maybe not negative, but concerning and the fairness
in the use of it against large groups, population stuff, law
enforcement.
What are your thoughts on the reliability of facial
recognition and since this is your field, is there something? I
am aware in my district of a company that has the use of the
three-dimensional vasculature in the hand, for example, which
apparently according to them hasn't failed, but facial
recognition has failed.
So what are what are your thoughts on it? Because identity,
I think you are right, it sort-of begins and ends with being
able to make sure the person is the person in the system, to
make sure that it is. So what are your thoughts on that?
Mr. Amlani. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This is actually a
really important question from even going back to your prior
question about building confidence in individuals and systems
in AI. I think it ties to that as well, which is fundamentally,
you know, post-
9/11 after the terrorist attacks, one of the steps that we did
is we actually Federalized the work force and created TSA.
Having Federal agents at the checkpoints actually made
people feel safer to get back on airplanes again. That used to
just be a private contracted work force paid for primarily by
the airports and the airlines, but by having Federal agents
there it made people feel more comfortable. So these steps are
really important to be able to put into place.
People do not feel comfortable right now with
identification and authentication steps that are necessary
right now to access systems. Passwords are antiquated. People
forget passwords. The most secure place to actually store
passwords, according to all of the major cybersecurity experts
in the field right now, is actually in a personal book that you
write with you because nobody overseas actually is trying to
steal your personal book of passwords. They can access your
systems. They can steal centralized places where you store
passwords, but your book of passwords is something that they
have very difficult access to to receive.
So leveraging better authentication mechanisms builds
confidence in digital tools and capabilities. People have
become very comfortable with face ID to be able to actually
secure their systems. People have no confidence in what Ranking
Member Thompson mentioned with regards to on captchas, right,
and other silly systems like one-time passcodes that get sent
to your phone, which are very easily compromised.
So giving people that confidence with facial matching and
facial recognition and facial verification is an important
component.
Chairman Green. If I can jump in now because in the time
remaining I have a quick question for Mr. Sikorski. Data
poisoning, how big of a threat is that for the AI systems that
are using that data to make very quick decisions particularly
in the defense world? If we need to go somewhere else to have
that conversation we can postpone it until then, but if you
could just real quickly share a few concerns about that, if you
have any.
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. I think it goes back to the secure-AI-
by-design, right? As we're building out these applications how
are we securing that information? How are we securing the
models themselves that make the decisions as well as the
training data that goes there?
There is a lot of research and a lot of thought about what
attackers could do if they could manipulate that data, which
would then in turn not even necessitate an attack against the
technology itself. It's an attack against the underlying data
with which it's trained with. That's definitely a concern that
needs to be taken into account and built into as the technology
is being built out.
Chairman Green. Thank you. I yield.
Mr. Goldman, the gentleman from New York, is recognized for
5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here. The 2024 Worldwide Threat
Assessment warns that our most sophisticated adversaries,
Russia, Iran, and China, see the upcoming Presidential election
as an opportunity to sow disinformation, divide Americans, and
undercut our democracy.
Many of our law enforcement and intelligence agencies have
confirmed that they are also seeing upcoming threats. Of
course, it is not abstract.
We know Russia used social media and cyber to interfere in
our election in 2016. We know that Iranian actors posed as
Proud Boys in an on-line operation aimed at intimidating voters
in 2020. Just recently, we learned that China is experimenting
with AI to enhance their influence operations.
Within the Department of Homeland Security, CISA is charged
with protecting the security of our elections.
Mr. Sikorski, I know you work closely with CISA on some of
these issues and I would love just to ask you a relatively
open-ended question, which is how is CISA prepared or how is
our Government writ large prepared to address the use of AI by
foreign adversaries to undermine and interfere in our
elections?
Mr. Sikorski. That's an excellent question as we want to
have a very secure election, obviously. I think CISA is doing a
great job with the JCDC, which is the collaboration with
private industry to work with us, Palo Alto Networks, and many
other private entities on thinking through, like, what are we
actually seeing in the threat landscape?
So one of the things I'm tasked with as running the Threat
Intelligence Division at Palo Alto Networks, is how do we take
all of the information that we're getting from other private
entities, from government agencies around the world, bring that
all together and then share that back with the Government
itself to say this is where we're seeing these threat actors
go, right? Whether it be what China is up to today, what Russia
is doing in the war in Ukraine, staying on top of those threats
and finding the new ones.
For example, we saw, you know, a novel attack of how Russia
was sending emails, phishing emails, to Ukrainian embassies and
actually making that discovery and showing how that actually
went down. So that hyper collaboration is definitely going to
move the needle.
Mr. Goldman. One of the biggest threats is deep fakes which
are, we know, our intelligence agencies said that they had
spotted Chinese and Iranian deep fakes in 2020 that were not
used, but the FBI has recently identified that recent elections
in Slovakia were impacted by the use of deep fakes.
How prepared are we to prohibit or prevent the use of deep
fakes that might have a significant impact on our election?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. So I think what we've seen with AI it
really lowers the bar for attackers to be able to generate
believable communications, whether that's emails like I talked
about earlier with phishing, whether it be voice or even a deep
fakes technology.
So I think that that lowering of the bar makes it a lot
easier to make believable things that they're going to select.
At Palo Alto Networks we're not hyper-focused on, like, you
know, eliminating, you know, deep fake technology, and I think
that that impact of inauthentic content is really concerning
and something we need to explore.
Mr. Goldman. Anyone else have any insight into this?
Mr. Amlani. Yes. At iProov we are actually obsessed with
detecting deep fakes. That is actually what we do.
We use screen lighting from a cellphone screen or a desktop
screen that reflects against live human skin, calculating 3D
geometry, making sure that it's a live human being, including
skin translucency, all simultaneously while you're actually
recording a video or doing a biometric match and verifying that
it's a live human being and the right person at the right time,
you know.
With being there at the creation of the video is an
important component that you can then tag the video and verify
that it's, in fact, not a defect.
Mr. Goldman. Are you coordinating with CISA on this?
Mr. Amlani. No. We have not been asked by CISA.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Laperruque.
Mr. Laperruque. Yes, beyond just the cyber risks, I mean,
deep fakes is something that our elections team and
misinformation in general has highlighted that one of the risks
is the liar's benefit. That, you know, in addition to
misinformation going out there and this is something that when
you're evaluating truthful information someone could just say,
no, that was just a deep fake. No, that was just
misinformation.
It's not just the initial itself misinformation. It's
trying to create an entire ecosystem of uncertainty so it's
just that's, you know, to emphasize why it's such a significant
threat and why we need to make sure that we have clear
information and ways of trying to debunk this that are
reliable.
Mr. Goldman. Mr. Chairman, I know that you and--oh, he is
not here, but you and many of the Members on this committee are
concerned about election security. I would just urge you to
encourage some of your colleagues who are trying to interfere
with law enforcement's efforts to coordinate election security
and prevent election interference with the cyber companies who
through which the adversaries do try to influence.
I hope that we don't see any more Members of the Republican
Party trying to cut funding in CISA and that we work closely
with CISA to make sure that our elections are safe. I yield
back.
Mr. Brecheen [presiding]. Mr. Goldman yields.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Crane from Arizona for his 5
minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I realize that this
hearing is about utilizing AI to bolster homeland security. I
want to bring up an interesting meeting I just had in my office
before coming to the committee.
I was with one of the largest tech companies in the United
States and arguably global companies, and they were talking
about major cybersecurity attacks that they are seeing.
I was told that they used to see attacks in the range of
tens of thousands a day. They are now seeing attacks to the
tune of about 150,000 a day.
Mr. Demmer, Mr. Sikorski, is that consistent with what you
all are seeing and hearing in your space as well, an increase
in cyber attacks?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, we've--yes. That's a great question.
We've actually seen a great increase in cyber attacks and the
number of pure attacks that we're stopping on a per-day basis
across all of our customers, which is 65,000 customers, is, you
know, in the billions, right?
Now, actual net new it's in the millions, but that still
gives you a sense of, like, you know, how many new attacks are
going on. Then we see the cadence of ransomware attacks and
extortion continuing to increase as all these ransom gangs have
evolved.
Mr. Crane. This company also told me that not only are the
numbers of attacks on a daily basis increasing drastically, but
they also said the brazenness of some of these foreign actors
is becoming more and more hostile and increased as well. Is
that something that you all can verify that you are seeing as
well?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes. I think the days of a ransomware attack
where they just encrypt files and you're just paying for a key,
we actually miss those days because now they're stealing the
data and harassing our customers to get ransomware payments.
So they're taking that data which has their customer
information, patient data in some instances, threatening to
leak that out and really going to what I call a dark place of,
like, the level of harassment they're willing to go to.
They're sending flowers to executives, and they're even
going after companies' customers pretending to spam them as the
company when, in fact, they're the threat actor harassing their
customers and then leading to getting the payment that they're
after.
Mr. Crane. My real question to you guys is what do you
attribute this stark and drastic rise in aggression and the
amount of cyber attacks that we are now seeing against our own
corporations and also our infrastructure?
Mr. Demmer, I am going to start with you.
Mr. Demmer. So thank you, Congressman, for the question.
You know, my expertise really lies on the physical
infrastructure, the critical assets that we help maintain and
protect. I can say that, you know, the threats are arising on
our critical energy systems, on our infrastructure like bridges
and roadways and dams.
Although we haven't seen, you know, the pace of attacks
that we are seeing on the cyber side, it is a real
vulnerability and a risk as our infrastructure ages and has
more vulnerabilities. So it's something that our company is
looking at.
Mr. Crane. What about you, Mr. Sikorski?
Mr. Sikorski. I think the threat actors, specifically in
crimeware and when we talk about ransomware have become a
business where it's actually not the same hacker who's breaking
in and then doing the ransomware and everything else.
It's actually one group breaks in and then they sell that
access on the dark web to ransomware gangs who are almost like
franchises like McDonald's or something where they pop up. They
have a reputation score of how likely they're there to do what
they say they're going to do about giving the data back.
That enables them to build the relationships and get the
access they need. So this almost it's operated like a 9-to-5
job for some of these ransomware operators.
Mr. Crane. Let me ask you something more pointedly. Do you
believe that some of these nation-states and some of these
foreign actors, do you think that they sense weakness here in
the United States? Do you think that has anything to do with
it?
Mr. Sikorski. So I don't think that I could speak to if
they sense weakness or not. I think it's more an opportunistic
thing from what I see. We've seen them leverage
vulnerabilities----
Mr. Crane. Well, did those opportunities--sir, did those
opportunities, were they not present a couple of years ago?
Mr. Sikorski. I would say those opportunities have always
been present. There's always been vulnerabilities in systems,
however, the availability and opportunity for them to figure
out how to get in has increased. They are better enabled and
now that they're operating in this, in this model and it makes
them more efficient and able to pull out overt attacks.
Mr. Crane. What do you think we could be doing? Do you
think we are doing enough offensively to make sure that
individuals that would utilize these types of technologies to
attack corporations and U.S. infrastructure--what do you think
we could be a better job of doing to make sure that they pay a
heavy price if they are going to carry out these type of
attacks against our country?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's a great question. I think when I
think about, you know, I'm not a policy maker as far as
thinking what's the best stick to have when it comes to dealing
with the cyber threat.
One of the things that I'm always focused on is on the
defensive side, right, and how do we make sure we're doing
everything we can to secure. Then opening all the lanes for
sharing on the threat intelligence front, which is big steps
and strides we have made in recent years, the last few years.
All of this collaboration that's happening is moving the
needle. I think that'll help a lot us staying, you know, in
front of what the adversary is.
That being said, we're in an arms race right now on AI,
right? The defenders need to win here because one opportunity
we have is we could use AI to remove all those vulnerabilities
I was talking about before the threat actors can use AI to find
them.
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Thank you for the extension, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Brecheen. The gentleman being last gets some extra
grace, as did Mr. Goldman. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Kennedy from New York for his 5 minutes
of questioning.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you to the
Ranking Member.
Thank you to the panel today for your testimony. We are
hearing a lot about advancements in AI and the upcoming
election. It is a historic election. We want to make sure that
it is secure.
As November approaches, there is more and more concern
about those that would seek to undermine our election. As a
matter of fact, just last week a report from the Department of
Homeland Security warned, and I will quote, ``As the 2024
election cycle progresses, generative AI tools likely provide
both domestic and foreign threat actors with enhanced
opportunities for interference by aggravating emergent events,
disrupting election processes, or attacking election
infrastructure.''
So I worry about the rapid advances having an impact on the
election as we are discussing here today. The Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency is responsible for election
security.
Mr. Laperruque, how can this agency best support election
officials and United States voters so that they can trust the
authenticity of the content that they are seeing when they see
information on-line?
Mr. Laperruque. Well, as I said before, I think this is an
area where we can learn a lot of lessons from what we've taken
in cybersecurity space over the last 5 to 10 years using these
type of Federal agencies to distribute information out to the
huge range of local election administrators, as well as the
public.
That comes from both providing education about how these
technologies work, how threats work, what to be aware of, as
also--as well as information about specific threats if there is
something on our monitor, some sort of common deep-fake
technique, some sort of new type of attack on providing
information in that field.
It's something where because our election system is so
decentralized and because there is a lot of information out
there sort-of acting as that hub of getting out good and useful
information and warnings can be very important.
Mr. Kennedy. What do you foresee as a role for the
Cybersecurity and Security Agency in authenticating content on-
line in regards to the upcoming election?
Mr. Laperruque. I think that would be a much more
challenging question if we're talking about just content from,
you know, any layperson as opposed to a message that may be
targeted at an election administrator.
You know, that's something that our elections team, which
is separate from my work, does a lot of research into so I
would encourage, you know, continued work with them. They're
always happy to provide thought and detailed research into this
space.
Mr. Kennedy. Great, thank you.
Then I know Chairman Green earlier mentioned, you know, his
community, but I want to plug the University of Buffalo which
established the U.B. Institute for Artificial Intelligence and
Data Science to explore ways to combine machine's ability to
ingest and connect in 2021. Just this past year, the New York
State budget included $275 million for the University of
Buffalo's new AI center.
So, Mr. Amlani, when you are searching for universities
with your 15-year-old you should look at Buffalo and the
engineering school that they have there right in the heart of
my community.
But how can we better harness the institutes of higher ed,
especially our public institutions, for getting at this
cutting-edge technology? While they are training up our youth
in this new technology how do we make sure that they are
developing it in a safe way regarding AI?
Mr. Amlani. So thank you so much for your question,
Congressman. My son and I would love to come to Buffalo. We
would also love to be able to visit Niagara Falls.
Mr. Kennedy. You are always welcome.
Mr. Amlani. Thank you. Fundamentally, I think there is a
level of distrust in some of the AI content created and much of
that distrust is not knowing who or where the content came
from. So it comes down to identity, properly identifying the
creator and properly verifying the content has not been
tampered with after it was created by the initial creator.
So making sure that you're able to identify the initial
creator is a very important component on trusting all of this
content and also for intellectual property concerns and other
aspects of things that we've already discussed here today.
So using proper identification tools, things that can
verify that it's the right person, it's a real person, and it's
right now to allow the individual to have ease of use to be
able to identify themselves and verify they are who they say
they are and the content is coming from them.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
I yield my time.
Mr. Brecheen. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes. So for the purpose
of, you know, this committee I think a lot of the questions are
centered around the border and how AI can help us be able to
identify fraud and also protect entities within the United
States.
That is where I want to go here initially. The ability of
your company to help bolster border security, for those of you
that are representing the free market, I really, Mr. Sikorski,
you had alluded to, I have got some information here where AI-
powered copilots, my understanding it is a natural language
assistance that can yield you guys state, you know, multiple
operational advantages.
I am actually curious as to when we are doing our initial
credible fear interviews, asylum claims, if our border security
officials can utilize that tool to better inform the cases of
the future so that as people are being coached for those
interviews with which can be fraught, you know, a language
barrier can exist and they can be told to say certain keywords.
Have you all or anyone on the panel aware of how we can
make sure that we can get to the depth of fraud for our
officers to be able to use AI to be able to get past a language
barrier that can be used as a defensive mechanism to the
benefit of those who are applying help us get to the truth of
the matter?
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, that's a great question. I think I'll
take from my experience helping to create that technology at
Palo Alto Networks. So when we say copilot what we mean is you
have a human who's using technology to find new threats, right?
That's what we sell.
But it's very difficult to use so what we end up doing is
we built these technologies called copilots for our products so
that users can engage very quickly to ask questions just, you
know, and then the AI will process the question and give them
the answer that's there so they don't have to figure out all of
the complex complexities of our product.
I think what you can do is you can take what we've done in
that capacity and apply that to a use case, like where you're
talking about, where you can say they get a copilot and they're
paying attention to what they're collecting, what information,
and the AI maybe says to them, hey, you know, I saw it
differently than you saw it when I feed all this in and put it
against my model.
Then you could put the two side-by-side and it's sort of
like Iron Man where you put on the suit and you're more
powerful than you were before. That's sort-of one area I would
think to go into.
Mr. Brecheen. So to elaborate, if I am understanding you
correctly, you do think that CBP officials could be empowered
in those moments to help inform the case? But I am assuming
there is also the defensive mechanism that someone crossing
illegally with credible fear asylum claim wouldn't be
fraudulent could also use that technology to time delay, read
the question and then I am assuming the technology is moving
there where they can get a response to help their case also
that is AI-generated.
Mr. Sikorski. Yes, I'm not--I'm definitely not an expert
on, you know, the border and how those policies are to figure
out, you know, what the best way is on immigration and other
things. However, the thought processes, the types of things
we're doing with AI to enable customers or prevent cyber
threats could. The model is similar for really anybody who's
collecting data to make better decisions that they might not
otherwise do by themselves.
Mr. Brecheen. Let me move on. The rise of AI, the
significant question about, you know, concerns, Constitutional,
elections. AIs can be very dangerous when we are dealing with
China, social credit scores, and the ability to have facial
recognition AI-powered that then may produce a different
outcome depending upon whether you adhere to the Government's
positions or not.
So there is a real fear and it is a credible fear out there
for those of us that think this could be used or weaponized
against a nation's citizenry.
I want to ask from your perspective, the significant
concerns you have regarding the AI of the future. If anybody
wants to talk about election fraud, specifically candidates
that can be created to look like they are saying something that
they are not actually saying and how that could be generated,
the ability for a user and I am not talking about Government
regulation here but for a user to have a fact check, something
that could be encrypted where I could have the ability to
determine whether or not that was created or if that is an
actual video?
If anyone wants to respond to that?
Mr. Amlani. Sure. I think the identity of the creator is
actually a very important component up front, Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Congressman. I believe that right now that is not actually
associated with most of the videos.
It is shared openly. It is shared on open sites and you can
never really tell who created the original video. If you had
the ability to be able to do so at least you would have some
confidence that the video itself was actually created
originally by the initial creator.
But there is some watermarking tools and other technologies
being used by other companies that there's some investment in
that space currently today to be able to assess it.
Mr. Brecheen. Interesting.
I want to honor the time here and with that I yield to the
gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke, for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank our Ranking Member in absentia for holding this
important hearing.
Let me also thank our panel of witnesses for bringing their
expertise to bear today. The rapid advancements in artificial
intelligence and cybersecurity represent significant new
opportunities and challenges with respect to securing the
homeland.
Every day developers are creating new AI tools to better
identify and respond to the increasing number of cyber attacks.
But while AI is a critical tool in our cyber defenses, it is
also still created and deployed by human beings.
AI systems are trained on datasets which often replicate
human biases and thus, the bias is built into the very
technology created to improve our lives and keep us safe.
For example, AI designed for law enforcement purposes that
was trained on historic police or crime data may serve to
reproduce or expand existing inequities in policing as those
are not an accurate reflection of crime but rather of police
activity and crime reporting, which can be fraught with bias.
While artificial intelligence and cybersecurity will remain
important elements defending the country, these are not just
technological issues but critical civil and human rights issues
as well.
To that end, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to enter
into the record an insightful article on this topic published
in Wired.
Mr. Brecheen. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]
Article Submitted by Honorable Yvette D. Clarke
the hidden injustice of cyberattacks
By Nicole Tisdale, Wired Magazine, Feb. 12, 2024
Cyberattacks and criminal scams can impact anyone. But
communities of color and other marginalized groups
are often disproportionately impacted and lack the
support to better protect themselves.
Talk about the promise and the peril of artificial intelligence is
everywhere these days. But for many low-income families, communities of
color, military veterans, people with disabilities, and immigrant
communities, AI is a back-burner issue. Their day-to-day worries
revolve around taking care of their health, navigating the economy,
seeking educational opportunities, and upholding democracy. But their
worries are also being amplified through advanced, persistent, and
targeted cyberattacks.
Cyber operations are relentless, growing in scale, and exacerbate
existing inequalities in health care, economic opportunities, education
access, and democratic participation. And when these pillars of society
become unstable, the consequences ripple through national and global
communities. Collectively, cyberattacks have severe and long-term
impacts on communities already on the margins of society. These attacks
are not just a technological concern--they represent a growing civil
rights crisis, disproportionately dismantling the safety and security
for vulnerable groups and reinforcing systemic barriers of racism and
classism. The United States currently lacks an assertive response to
deter the continued weaponization of cyber operations and to secure
digital access, equity, participation, and safety for marginalized
communities.
Health Care
Cyberattacks on hospitals and health care organizations more than
doubled in 2023, impacting over 39 million people in the first half of
2023. A late-November cyberattack at the Hillcrest Medical Center in
Tulsa, Oklahoma, led to a system-wide shutdown, causing ambulances to
reroute and life-saving surgeries to be canceled. These attacks impact
patients' reliance and trust in health care systems, which may make
them more hesitant to seek care, further endangering the health and
safety of already vulnerable populations.
The scale and prevalence of these attacks weaken public trust--
especially among communities of color who already have deep-rooted
fears about our health care systems. The now-condemned Untreated
Syphilis Study at Tuskegee, where researchers denied treatment to Black
men without their knowledge or consent in order to observe the
disease's long-term effects, only ended 52 years ago. However, the
study created a legacy of suspicion and mistrust of the medical
community that continues today, leading to a decrease in the life
expectancy of Black men and lower participation in medical research
among Black Americans. The compounding fact that Black women are three
to four times more likely, and American Indian and Alaska Native women
are two times more likely, to die from pregnancy-related causes than
White women only adds to mistrust.
Erosion of trust also extends to low-income people. Over a million
young patients at Lurie Children's Surgical Foundation in Chicago had
their names, Social Security numbers and dates of birth exposed in an
August 2023 breach. The hospital treats more children insured by
Medicaid--an economic hardship indicator--than any other hospital in
Illinois. Once breached, a child's personal data could be used to
commit identity fraud, which severely damages credit, jeopardizes
education financial aid, and denies employment opportunities. While
difficult for anyone, children from financially insecure households are
least equipped to absorb or overcome these economic setbacks.
Economic Opportunity
Identity theft is not the only way cyberattacks exploit hard times.
Cyberattacks also go after financially vulnerable individuals--and they
are getting more sophisticated. In Maryland, hackers targeted
Electronic Benefits Transfer cards--used to provide public assistance
funds for food--to steal more than $2 million in 2022 and the first
months of 2023. That's an increase of more than 2,100 percent compared
to the $90,000 of EBT funds stolen in 2021. Maryland's income limit to
qualify for the government's food assistance program is $39,000 for a
family of four in 2024, and only if they have less than $2,001 in their
bank account. Unlike a credit card, which legally protects against
fraudulent charges, EBT cards don't have fraud protections. Efforts to
help the victims are riddled with red tape: reimbursements are capped
at 2 months of stolen benefits, and only within a specific time period.
Cybercriminals also target vulnerable populations, especially
within older age groups. Since the last reporting in 2019, 40 percent
of Asian Pacific Islander Desi Americans (APIDAs) aged 50 and older
have reported experiencing financial fraud, with one-third of those
victims losing an average of $15,000. From 2018 through 2023, Chinese
Embassy Scam robocalls delivered automated messages and combined caller
ID spoofing, a method where scammers disguise their phone display
information, targeting Chinese immigrant communities. This resulted in
more than 350 victims across 27 US States and financial losses
averaging $164,000 per victim for a total of $40 million. And for 5
years, this scam just kept going. As these scams evolve, groups now
face increasingly sophisticated AI-assisted calls, where scammers use
technology to convincingly mimic loved ones' voices, further exploiting
vulnerabilities, particularly among older adults--many of whom live on
fixed incomes or live with economic insecurity.
While social movements have fought to promote economic equity,
cybercriminals undermine these efforts by exacerbating financial
vulnerabilities. From the 1960's La Causa movement advocating for
migrant worker rights to the Poor People's Campaign mobilizing across
racial lines, activists have worked to dismantle systemic barriers, end
poverty, and push for fair wages. Current attacks on financial systems,
however, often target the very groups these movements aim to empower--
perpetuating the disparities that advocates have fought against.
Digital scams and fraud incidents disproportionately impact those least
equipped to recover--including natural disaster victims, people with
disabilities, older adults, young adults, military veterans, immigrant
communities, and lower-income families. By stealing essential
resources, cybercriminals compound hardships for those already
struggling to make ends meet or those experiencing some of the worst
hardships of their lives--pushing groups deeper into the margins.
Education Access
Education is another area where cybercrime has soared. One of the
worst hacks of 2023 exploited a flaw in a file transfer software called
MOVEit that multiple government entities, nonprofits, and other
organizations use to manage data across systems. This includes the
National Student Clearinghouse, which serves 3,600 colleges,
representing 97 percent of college students in the US to provide
verification information to academic institutions, student loan
providers, and employers.
Attacks on educational systems are devastating at all levels. A top
target for ransomware attacks last year was K-12 schools. While the
complete data is not available yet, by August 2023 ransomware attacks
(where hackers lock an organization's data and demand payment for its
release) hit at least 48 US school districts--three more than in all of
2022. Schools already have limited resources, and cybersecurity can be
expensive, so many have few defenses against sophisticated
cyberattacks.
The data compromised in attacks against educational institutions
includes identifying information and deeply sensitive student records,
such as incidents of sexual abuse, mental health records, and reports
of abusive parents. This information can affect future opportunities,
college admissions, employment, and the mental health of students. The
impacts are especially magnified for students from marginalized
backgrounds, who already face discrimination in academic and employment
opportunities. In 1954, the US Supreme Court struck down segregated
public schools as unconstitutional in Brown v. Board of Education to
address disparities based on race, but today's threats to equitable and
accessible education are being jeopardized through digital attacks.
Democratic Participation
Another foundational pillar of our civil rights is also under
attack: democracy itself. Since 2016, foreign state actors and state-
linked criminals have increasingly used sophisticated cyber operations
to suppress minority democratic participation worldwide. The early
warnings for the 2024 global elections are clear: Influence and
disinformation threats will likely escalate--now enabled by AI-powered
cyber operations. Unlike humans, AI systems have few limitations--they
can spread disinformation and divisive content to a vast, multilingual,
global audience across countless mediums, simultaneously and without
rest. Worse, they can do so in an individualized, highly targeted
manner.
The undermining of democracy is also more insidious, less about
pushing communities toward a specific candidate than sowing distrust in
the system itself--which leads fewer people to vote and otherwise
suppresses civic participation. The concentration of these attacks on
racial and ethnic minority groups means communities of color, who
historically have not been in positions of power, will remain
marginalized and disenfranchised. Consider a 2022 cyberattack on
Mississippi's election information website on that year's Election
Day--a significant event in a State without modern early voting
options. The 2022 elections included crucial midterm elections that
decided congressional representation, and Mississippi has the second-
highest Black population (39.2 percent) in the US, behind only the
District of Columbia--a jurisdiction without voting rights in Congress.
The disruption also extended to State judicial elections, where most
judges are elected in a single day, due to a lack of judicial
primaries. In Mississippi, 11 percent of adults and 16 percent--of
Black voters could not cast a ballot because of past felony
convictions. With the compounded challenges in Mississippi--no early
voting, no judicial primaries, and the high rate of
disenfranchisement--coupled with the opportunity of a pivotal Black
voting bloc, access to voting information is imperative for those who
can vote.
Weaponizing cyber operations for any form of voter suppression
leaves marginalized groups further aggrieved and isolated. Worse, it
takes away our only ability to address systemic inequities in wealth,
health, and education: democratic participation.
These compounding problems require a new perspective on
cyberattacks that looks beyond lost dollars, breached files, or
doomsday debates over generative AI tools like ChatGPT or artificial
general intelligence. Marginalized communities are suffering now and
civil rights advocates cannot take on these burdens alone. To quote
civil rights icon Fannie Lou Hamer, ``The only thing we can do is work
together.'' Cybersecurity analysts, developers, journalists,
researchers, and policymakers must incorporate civil rights into our
work by building inclusive defenses, understanding demographic trends
in cyber attacks, deterring misuse of AI, and utilizing diverse teams.
Cyber operations are being used to attack the foundation of civil
rights, democracy, and dignity around the world, and that is a problem
that affects everyone.

Nicole Tisdale is an attorney and founder of Advocacy Blueprints, a
firm focused on national security and cyber policy consulting, and
advocacy training. Formerly a director at the White House National
Security Council and US Congress Homeland Security Committee, Nicole
has been an influential voice in global policy dialogs, having
participated in 35 international delegations across 22 countries
addressing key economic, security, human rights, and intelligence
issues.

Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. This article written
by Nicole Tisdale, a former staffer of this committee and the
National Security Council, provides valuable context on the
societal impacts of cyber threats, the need for inclusive
cybersecurity strategies.
Developers and deployers of artificial intelligence,
whether in the realm of securing the homeland or providing a
service to consumers must be thoughtful and intentional in the
creation and rollout of this technology.
Similarly, we as policy makers must be deliberate and
meticulous in our choices as we work toward major legislative
efforts such as creating a framework for the use of AI in
securing the homeland as well as in crafting a comprehensive
data privacy standard, which remains foundational to our work
on AI and the range of other issues.
We must all take care to ensure that civil rights and the
principles of our democracy are baked into this emerging
technology because once it gets out there will be no putting
the genie back in the bottle.
Mr. Sikorski, you have encouraged the Government to
consider different standards for different use cases
recognizing that certain uses of AI may not pose the same civil
liberties concerns as others. Can you elaborate on why you
think such differentiation is important and how you think the
Federal Government should identify which uses of AI should
trigger heightened security while keeping American civil rights
top of mind?
Mr. Sikorski. That's an excellent question, Congresswoman.
I think about, you know, whenever you're applying security to
something people see it as an inconvenience and they don't want
to do it.
Especially when it comes to innovation as well, people are
moving very fast with this technology and we need to think
about security as we do it rather than just rushing to get it
out there. Because like you said, it's unstoppable once it's
out, right, the genie is out of the bottle.
So I think that when I look at cybersecurity specifically
and the defense challenges we have, we spoke earlier about the
amount of threats and the amount of attacks going up over time,
and that our adversaries we also touched upon are leveraging AI
and trying to figure out how they could produce more attacks
leveraging AI.
So it's very important, I think, to keep innovating very
quickly on the security side and focus on, well, that data is
the ones and the zeros, the malware, the what's happening on a
system, what is vulnerable, and using that as the inputs to
make the decisions.
I think when it comes to things like you mentioned,
policing, you could go to employment, credit, education,
college application, wherever this ends up going it's important
to really take a look at those, you know, high-risk cases and
take an approach to regulation that has a purpose and why
you're doing it. Because in those impacts it's really impacting
people's lives in a way that maybe with cybersecurity it's like
we're helping people's lives by preventing them getting
attacked.
Ms. Clarke. Very well, thank you.
Mr. Laperruque, do you agree that we should have different
standards for different use cases and what use cases do you
believe pose the greatest civil rights and privacy risk? Other
witnesses are also welcome to chime in.
Mr. Laperruque. It's there are certainly some types of
oversight that should be universal. You know, a lot of the
principles I'd mentioned for ensuring accurate results and
efficacy you'd want to apply across the board.
But at the same time there are certain forms of AI that do
create heightened risk to individual rights and liberties that
we do need to have heightened standards and safeguards for. Any
type of AI, for example, that might be used to help make a
designation that an individual should be the target of an
investigation, subject to surveillance, or arrested, that's,
you know, an obvious example where there's severe rights
impacting ramifications to a use of AI that weren't heightened
scrutiny and a number of extra safeguards you would probably
want to have in place to make sure that uses are efficacious
and that you are not having problems such as the biases that
you've mentioned.
Mr. Brecheen. The gentlelady yields.
With that, I want to thank the witnesses for your valuable
testimony before this committee today. We would ask the
witnesses to respond to any additional questions in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days. Without objection, this committee now
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:53 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Troy Demmer
Question 1. Please describe at the unclassified level the nation-
state activity Gecko Robotics has observed while scanning critical
infrastructure for vulnerabilities.
Answer. Gecko has observed malicious activity from regions of
interest for our commercial offering; however, in the field, we have
not noticed any activity from foreign nation-states. For U.S.
Government assets, all inspections are done on U.S. Government
facilities with their own security measures. For commercial
inspections, we are not qualified to attribute any interactions as
belonging to or related to foreign nation-state actors. As part of our
on-going maintenance and protection of our critical digital
infrastructure, Gecko Robotics logs internet protocol (IP) location and
volume. Because our controlled Government work is air-gapped, we have
not observed any malicious activity with regard to Government data. We
welcome further discussion of this topic in an appropriate venue.
Question 2. How should policy makers think about AI ``risks''--
which ones should we worry about today, and which are perceived risks?
What steps can AI developers take today to ensure that we can mitigate
``existential risks'' if we ever reach that AI capability?
Answer. Policy makers should prioritize the risk of bad data inputs
to the development, training, and testing of AI. Bad data inputs are
not a perceived risk; they represent a real and current risk to many
deployed and in-development AI algorithms. The outputs of AI trained on
bad data inputs are used by Americans every day for decision making.
Bad inputs produce bad outputs, and while some of these bad outputs are
comical, others may be dangerous.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ A recent Washington Post article reported that Google scaled
back its AI after outputs told readers to put glue on pizza and
informed them Barack Obama was Muslim. The bad outputs were sourced
from bad inputs (i.e., social media posts that contained false
information): https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2024/05/30/
google-halt-ai-search/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
AI models are only as good as the inputs they are trained on.
Trustworthy AI requires trustworthy data inputs, and so policy makers
should create policies that mitigate the existential risk of bad data
by ensuring all data used to develop, train, and test AI is accurate,
auditable, and interrogatable--with clear traceability from the time,
place, and method of data creation to the point of its use in AI
development.
Building a data foundation has proven to be one of the biggest
challenges to effective AI development. Without robust, interrogatable/
audible, accurate, and verifiable/trustworthy data, AI models present
an outsized risk to Americans by delivering suboptimal or incorrect
results--with potentially hazardous consequences. We encourage policy
makers to create robust data quality frameworks and hold AI companies
accountable for data transparency.
Question 3. What cybersecurity practices does Gecko Robotics
implement to ensure IP protected and to proactive mitigation of harms
against your company?
How does Gecko Robotics secure its digital twins to ensure they do
not inform the activities of potential cyber attackers, especially
nation-state actors?
Answer. Gecko Robotics maintains strict security requirements for
its on-premises data collection environment as well as its Cloud
environment for data processing and application delivery. These
protections help support the security of customer data and information,
including data and information provided by the DoD. To ensure
comprehensive security coverage, we leverage trusted partners. These
partners include Managed Security Service Partners (MSSP), Platform as
a Service (PaaS) providers for compliant infrastructure, and
independent security consultants for offensive security expertise and
annual penetration testing.
Gecko Robotics secures its cloud-hosting environment in a number of
ways designed to keep pace with the ever-evolving threat landscape;
these include adopting practices that align with frameworks approved by
the DoD, including NIST 800-171 and 800-172 and, where applicable,
partnering with third-party PaaS providers with authority to operate.
Question 4. What can the U.S. Government do to improve its
partnership with industry? Conversely, how can industry best serve the
U.S. Government?
Answer. Regarding the effective and ethical deployment of AI, the
U.S. Government can improve its partnership with industry by providing
industry with secure access to current, high-fidelity, high-volume
data. Using this data, industry can serve the Government with AI that
improves cybersecurity, national security, physical infrastructure,
human health, etc.
In order to generate this data for physical infrastructure--one of
the cornerstones of not just national security but the American way of
life--the U.S. Government must invest in technologies for accurate data
collection on critical assets. This means putting R&D funding toward
the development of hardware technologies (such as robots, drones,
sensors, etc.) that can collect high-fidelity, high-volume data. It
also means contracting with companies that can leverage these hardware
technologies on a regular basis to ensure accurate, updated data is
available for evolving AI development for U.S. Government efforts and
initiatives.
Specific actions we recommend the U.S. Government take include:

Providing adequate testing environments for AI-enabling
hardware development.--Under Executive Order 14110, DHS is an
important partner in ``developing and helping to ensure the
availability of testing environments, such as testbeds, to
support the development of safe, secure, and trustworthy AI
technologies . . . ''. DHS can provide qualified companies with
access to adequate testing environments to develop AI for
physical infrastructure.

Design funding programs for the realities of hardware
development.--Unlike software, which can be rapidly prototyped
and scaled, hardware development often demands more engineering
staff and longer testing periods. DHS can develop programs that
recognize and account for the unique requirements of hardware
development. For example, programs like DHS's Silicon Valley
Innovation Program (SVIP) provide huge opportunities to develop
hardware systems to develop hardware systems that can drive the
development of safe and reliable AI for national security.
However, the current headcount (
Opt into Majority VC ownership authority for DHS SBIR
program.--DHS's Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
program has to date not opted into the ``Majority VC
ownership'' authority (as specified in 15 U.S.C 638(dd)). This
means that many VC-backed companies developing AI or AI-
enablement technologies are ineligible to apply to this
competitive program. DHS should consider opting into this
authority.
Question 5. As a start-up company, do you face--or do you
anticipate facing--AI regulatory compliance challenges to complete your
work? How can, or is, AI helping you to fulfill these requirements?
Answer. Because of the scale and type of AI development at Gecko
Robotics, we do not anticipate facing AI regulatory compliance
challenges.
Question 6. How do you think the evolving AI regulatory landscape
will influence the decisions of entrepreneurs like yourself to take the
leap to start a company?
Answer. Like all entrepreneurs in the technology space, we are
eager to leverage AI for the benefit of our customers and our business;
however, the evolving AI regulatory landscape--and, at times, even the
evolving definition of AI--can make advanced AI utilization risky,
especially for a small business like ours.
Regulatory uncertainty requires all companies interested in
pursuing AI to continuously update their understanding of compliance
requirements and potential restrictions. Over the last several years,
regulatory bodies have developed, updated, and evolved their
understanding of AI and its risks. In response, they've released new
regulations and guidelines to protect consumer privacy, prevent misuse,
and ensure ethical standards are upheld. These new regulations and
guidelines have been important for supporting responsible AI
development and deployment. However, the shifting environment has
generated several challenges for small businesses:

Changing guidance and regulation creates a sense of
unpredictability, making it challenging to plan long-term AI
development strategies.--For a small business, this requires
continually updating our software development roadmap,
diverting substantial time and resources away from innovation
and growth.

Compliance with evolving regulations can require substantial
investment in legal, technical, and administrative resources.--
For a small company, these additional costs could be
prohibitive, potentially putting them at a disadvantage
compared to larger, more established firms that have more
robust compliance infrastructures.

Influencing evolving regulations is a time-consuming and
sometimes cost-prohibitive process for some small businesses.--
To ensure that the interests of small businesses are taken into
account, Gecko Robotics invests substantial time and resources
into staying informed about regulatory trends, participating in
industry groups, and conducting outreach to Congress to support
policy that is beneficial for all American companies and
consumers.
While these challenges are significant, the AI regulatory landscape
also presents opportunities for small businesses. Regulation, when done
effectively, can level the playing field by setting fair industry
standards, potentially curbing unfair advantages and promoting healthy
competition.
Question 7. From your experience working in the field, what types
of AI research and development (R&D) projects should the Government be
involved in, and what is the private sector best suited to solve? Are
there any areas where your company lacks understanding in AI?
Answer. The Government should be involved in AI R&D that affect
American companies and citizens, though to varying degrees. The
Government may choose to be directly involved in the AI R&D that affect
Government operations, regulation, and national security. The
Government may choose to be involved in other types of AI R&D
indirectly--for example, through the development of regulatory and
compliance frameworks and the enforcement of policy.
Gecko develops AI models to assist companies and governments in
making decisions regarding their physical infrastructure. We currently
lack deep understanding in the types of AI capabilities that the
Government is seeking to achieve for physical national security
infrastructure, including bridges, tunnels, power plants, etc. We would
be interested in partnering with the Government to bring AI R&D to
these key assets.
Question 8. The United States currently does not have a
comprehensive data privacy law. Instead, it has a ``patchwork''
approach that includes many different laws across States.
Have disparate data privacy laws posed--or do you anticipate that
they will pose, as AI models quickly evolve--challenges with safe and
secure AI development and deployment?
Answer. Because most data privacy laws pertain to data collected on
people (for example, personally identifiable information [PII] and
protected health information [PHI]), most data privacy laws do not
apply to Gecko Robotics, since our AI uses data collected from physical
infrastructure. However, we recognize how a patchwork approach to data
privacy may create a challenging compliance landscape for companies
that work in this space.
Question 9. How does Gecko Robotics foster collaboration and
compatibility among AI systems used by various national security
agencies to ensure seamless communication, data sharing, and
coordinated responses to emerging threats?
Answer. Gecko Robotics is not currently connected to AI systems
used by national security agencies.
Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Michael Sikorski
Question 1. How should policy makers think about AI ``risks''--
which ones should we worry about today, and which are perceived risks?
Answer. We believe policy makers should employ a risk-based
approach when considering AI guardrails that takes into account
differences in the use cases, the data processed in those use cases,
and the potential resulting impacts on individuals. There are
fundamental differences in risk between AI systems that, for example,
leverage consumer data to make or facilitate consequential decisions
with legal, material, or similar impact for individuals--as compared
with those that leverage security data to ensure the robustness and
resilience of networks.
When AI is used to make consequential decisions about credit,
housing, employment, health care, or insurance, for example, those
decisions have a significant impact on individuals. By contrast, when
AI is deployed to enable cybersecurity tools to stitch together
security data much more quickly and effectively than before, the result
is that society as a whole is better protected and all individuals
benefit.
We urge policy makers to carefully consider the varied nature of AI
use cases to ensure that any new guardrails do not unintentionally
inhibit the continued and expanded use of AI-powered tools for cyber
defense.
Question 2. What is your relationship with the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) on AI activities, and how do you
think this relationship is helped or hindered by CISA's AI framework?
Answer. We maintain a close relationship with CISA on a range of
activities and are proud to be a founding alliance member of CISA's
JCDC. We recently participated in a JCDC tabletop exercise that is
supporting development of an AI Security Incident Collaboration
Playbook spearheaded by JCDC. AI, a dedicated planning effort within
JCDC focused on building an operational community of AI providers, AI
security vendors, and other critical infrastructure owners/operators to
address risks, threats, vulnerabilities, and mitigations concerning AI-
enabled systems in national critical infrastructure.
We found this tabletop exercise to be valuable and look forward to
continuing to engage in these forums.
Question 3. We have yet to see whether AI defenders or attackers
will benefit the most from generative AI for cybersecurity. However,
several U.S. Government officials believe that defenders currently
maintain the advantage.
From your perspective, who stands to benefit the most from
generative AI--attackers or defenders? Please describe how you've seen
both attackers and defenders use generative AI.
Answer. As my written testimony highlighted, AI is of course being
leveraged by both attackers and defenders. Adversaries are always
evolving, with or without AI, and as a cybersecurity community we can
never get complacent.
With that said, our company is extremely encouraged by the
transformative benefits AI is already showing for cyber defense.
Because of AI, every day Palo Alto Networks is able to detect 2.3
million never-before-seen attacks. AI-powered SOCs have also reduced
our customers' mean time to respond from 2-3 days to under 2 hours.
It's evidence like this which underscores why Palo Alto Networks is
doubling down on its use of AI for cyber defense. All of our platforms
are now infused with Precision AI, which combines the best of machine
learning, deep learning, and the natural language processing
capabilities of generative AI to help defenders stay a step ahead of
attackers.
Question 4. There are many conversations globally about
establishing accepted practices for the development, deployment, and
use of artificial intelligence. However, ambitious adversaries, such as
China, Russia, and Iran, appear more concerned with technological
advancement than ethical use.
What are some practical steps companies can take to ensure they
harness AI responsibly without creating more vulnerabilities caused by
cautious building?
Answer. AI app proliferation is changing how enterprises operate
and necessitates an evolved security approach. We like to think of this
approach as Securing AI By Design. This approach requires the ability
to:

Secure every step of the AI app development life cycle and
supply chain.

Protect AI applications, models, and data from threats in
runtime.

Oversee employee AI usage to ensure compliance with internal
policies.
These principles are aligned with--and based on--the security
concepts already included in the NIST AI Risk Management Framework
(RMF). Palo Alto Networks would welcome the opportunity to continue
engaging with Members of the committee and staff about how we can
promote these principles for ecosystem-wide benefit.
Question 5. How challenging is it to create safeguards for
generative AI models? How should we determine if a model is ``good
enough'' for national security use cases to ensure we do not slow down
innovation?
Answer. While there is no silver bullet, we would encourage all AI
models in national security use cases to employ AI Security Posture
Management (AI-SPM). AI-SPM is a vital component in digital ecosystems
where AI plays a pivotal role. Both the adoption of AI and AI systems
themselves present unique vulnerabilities and attack surfaces that
demand mechanisms for the visibility, assessment, and mitigation of
risks associated with AI components within technology ecosystems.
AI-SPM entails securing AI models, algorithms, and systems and
addresses the unique challenges posed by AI technologies, such as
adversarial attacks, data poisoning, model stealing, bias, and
unauthorized access. It encompasses secure model training, privacy-
preserving AI techniques, defense against attacks, and explainability.
By implementing AI-SPM, organizations can proactively protect their AI
systems from threats, minimize data exposure, and maintain the
trustworthiness of their AI applications.
Question 6. From your experience working in the field, what types
of AI research and development (R&D) projects should the Government be
involved in, and what is the private sector best suited to solve? Are
there any areas where your company lacks understanding in AI?
Answer. As a company, we support public investment in AI research
to help ensure that the United States maintains a leadership role in AI
innovation. To that end, Palo Alto Networks supports opportunities and
resources for companies of all sizes to partner with Federal research
centers focused on AI R&D, including the National AI Research Resource
(NAIRR). The Federal Government should continue incentivizing R&D
activity and promote public-private partnerships and industry best
practices.
Question 7. How does Palo Alto foster collaboration and
compatibility among AI systems used by various national security
agencies to ensure seamless communication, data sharing, and
coordinated responses to emerging threats?
Answer. AI-powered tools can actually facilitate data sharing
because they can normalize and stitch together security data to make it
more actionable. For example, the AI-powered SOC on our company's own
networks ingests 59 billion events a day but is able to analyze and
triage that diverse universe of security data down to just 75 alerts
that require further analysis. Staying ahead of emerging threats will
benefit from deployment of similar capabilities so that national
security personnel can nimbly separate the signal from the noise.
Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Ajay Amlani
Question 1. Please describe why biometrics matter for the AI
industry. How does iProov think about data collection, management, and
retention?
Answer. At iProov, we are committed to utilizing AI and deep
learning to revolutionize the identity verification industry. Our
state-of-the-art algorithms, developed by our team of AI experts,
harness the potential of deep learning techniques to analyze and
interpret inherent human characteristics with market-leading precision.
By employing advanced methodologies such as convolutional neural
networks (CNNs), we have achieved remarkable accuracy in image
recognition tasks, enabling us to deliver robust biometric
authentication and identification systems. Because deepfakes are now
indistinguishable to the human eye, AI-powered solutions are now vital
in mitigating the risk they pose to remote identity verification.
In a rigorous process conducted by Ingenium Biometrics, a FIDO face
verification accredited lab, which consisted of no less than 10,000
tests, iProov's Dynamic Liveness achieved a flawless success record
with no attacks passing the system. These results set a new benchmark
for accuracy and reliability.
Our AI team of experts' key responsibility is continuously
iterating and enhancing our system to meet the demands of security,
performance, and inclusion, adhering to W3C WCAG 2.2 AA and ADA Section
508. This requires a deep understanding of the latest advancements in
AI and deep learning and the ability to translate business requirements
into technology design.
We recognize that the ethical use of AI is of paramount importance.
Our team ensures that our AI systems are developed and deployed
transparently, with clear accountability, and aligned with our values.
These values guide our decisions and actions, ensuring we deliver
secure, reliable, sustainable identity verification solutions.
The protection of biometric data is of utmost importance,
especially in the context of AI and digital identity verification. As a
leading provider of biometric verification services, we have
implemented comprehensive measures to ensure the security and privacy
of the data we collect, manage, and retain.
iProov has a thorough Security and Incident Management team, that
includes physical access, and reviewed on an annual basis as part of
its obligations to ISO27001.
iProov regularly conducts tabletop planning security exercises to
test the readiness and resilience of a particular department in the
event of a security incident.
iProov is regularly externally audited against key security
certifications, which include our security incident management
procedures. The following table details our most recent audit
certificates and reports:

ISO 27001 Certificate

ISO 27001 Statement of Applicability

SOC2 Report

CSA Star Level 2 Report

CSA Star QAIC Mapping.
The principles of transparency, minimization, consent, and
necessity guide our data practices. We collect biometric data solely to
provide secure verification services to our clients and their users.
Our platform employs advanced cryptographic controls, to safeguard the
biometric data entrusted to us. We adhere to stringent industry best
practices and security standards in our key management processes to
maintain the integrity and confidentiality of the data we handle.
Regarding data management, iProov takes a proactive stance by
following a rigorous Information Security Management System Software
Development Lifecycle (ISMS SDLC). This comprehensive framework
encompasses all aspects of our software development process, from
handling information security and ensuring source code quality to
identifying and addressing security vulnerabilities. We leverage
security tools provided by leading cloud platforms to fortify our
defenses against potential threats. Our ISMS SDLC ensures that data
security is embedded at every stage of our software development life
cycle, from conception to deployment.
Data retention is another critical aspect of our privacy-centric
approach. At iProov, we strictly limit the retention period of all data
in accordance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). We
understand that personal data, particularly biometric information, is
highly sensitive and must be handled with the utmost care. As such, we
have clearly-defined retention times for both personal data and special
category personal data, which are outlined in our contracts with
clients. By adhering to these retention policies, we minimize the risk
of data breaches and ensure that personal information is not retained
any longer than necessary.
In summary, iProov's commitment to leveraging the power of AI and
deep learning, combined with the expertise of our specialist AI team,
positions us at the forefront of the identity verification industry. We
are unwavering in our commitment to maintaining the biometric
industry's highest data privacy and security standards. Our robust data
collection, management, and retention practices are designed to protect
the sensitive information of our clients and their users while enabling
the secure and efficient deployment of AI-powered identity verification
solutions.
We will continue to invest in technologies and adhere to evolving
industry best practices to deliver authentication and identification
systems that are secure, reliable, and seamlessly integrated into our
users' lives. We remain dedicated to harnessing AI's potential as we
grow and evolve.
Question 2. How does iProov monitor and address identified
vulnerabilities in the company's AI and networks?
Answer. At iProov, we have implemented a comprehensive approach to
monitor and address vulnerabilities in our AI systems and networks
through our dedicated iProov Security Operations Center (iSOC). The
iSOC integrates advanced technology, standardized processes, and
highly-skilled security experts to proactively detect, respond to, and
mitigate potential threats to our biometric security platform. Fully
audited across a range of attack scenarios, our solution is tested to
National Security Standards by the U.K. Home Office, the Singapore
Government, the Australian Government, and the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security.
In addition, iProov-powered solutions conform to EN 319-401,
certified by independent auditors, including TUV Informationstechnik
GmbH and Ernst & Young for conformance to eIDAS Clause 24 1(d).
Our iSOC employs sophisticated anomaly detection algorithms that
continuously analyze production traffic from various devices,
platforms, and geographies to identify suspicious activities or
potential vulnerabilities. These algorithms utilize technologies such
as artificial intelligence, machine learning, and computer vision to
enhance the accuracy and efficiency of threat detection.
The iSOC follows a rigorous process that includes regular security
audits and assessments to identify vulnerabilities and areas for
improvement. This process is further strengthened by close
collaboration with our Threat Intelligence and Red Teams, ensuring that
the latest threat intelligence is incorporated into our monitoring and
detection mechanisms.
The Threat Intelligence team proactively monitors external threat
actor behavior, analyzes trends in attack patterns and tactics, and
conducts threat hunting to identify emerging threats. They collaborate
with industry partners and law enforcement agencies to share
intelligence and coordinate responses to novel attack methods.
Our Red Team, composed of experienced security professionals,
conducts sophisticated adversary simulation activities to test the
resilience of iProov's biometric security solutions thoroughly. They
assess a wide range of potential attacks, including presentation
attacks, deepfake, synthetic identities, face swap and injection
attacks, as well as traditional penetration testing, to identify any
vulnerabilities in our systems.
Based on the Red Team's findings, our Science Team, consisting of
experts in AI, MLOps Engineering, and Synthetic 3D Data Research, takes
appropriate action. If the Red Team determines that a new attack tool
or method could expose a vulnerability, the Science Team immediately
develops and deploys new security tools and technologies to counter the
threat. The turnaround time from alert to deployment typically ranges
from 24 to 72 hours, depending on the severity and nature of the
vulnerability.
This collaborative feedback loop, involving the iSOC analysts,
Threat Intelligence team, Red Team, and Science Team, ensures that
iProov's Biometrics-as-a-Service offering remains at the forefront of
biometric security. By continuously monitoring, identifying, and
addressing potential or future vulnerabilities in our AI systems and
networks, we maintain the highest level of security and performance for
our clients and their users.
This commitment to on-going security enhancement allows
organizations to confidently leverage the benefits of our biometric
authentication solutions while minimizing the risk of fraud and cyber
crime.
Question 3. Please describe your relationship with the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) on AI
activities. Does iProov align its technologies with CISA's Secure by
Design principles for AI?
Answer. At present we have no relationship with CISA, but we are
currently identifying opportunities to support their priority
objectives as they look beyond their 2023-2025 Strategic Plan. As we
provide security against deepfake (or digital injection) attacks to
operators of critical infrastructure, such as border control and
financial and government services, in major markets around the world,
including those of key U.S. allies (UK and Australia), as well as in
the United States, we are well-positioned to contribute. In addition to
sharing with CISA our experience of identifying new and novel AI-
generated threats, we can provide support on how identity verification
solutions can be most effectively designed and deployed to secure the
critical national infrastructure at the heart of the CISA focus.
iProov is a supporter of the goals underpinning the CISA Secure by
Design framework. Our solutions are designed to help our customers and
partners to deliver against these security goals. By way of example,
the focus on enhanced use of multi-factor authentication (MFA) is at
the very heart of what iProov delivers. It is our view that when
properly deployed MFA has served to improve the security of users and
organizations. We argue that the principles behind MFA remain robust
(something you know, something you have, something you are), the
application must be responsive to the needs of the use case and, in
particular, the risk faced in that use case. Passwords or even one-time
passcodes may be appropriate for low-risk use cases, but where services
are liable to sophisticated cyber attacks, including AI-generated
deepfakes, then the MFA solution must adapt to incorporate biometric
inherence (something you are) as standard. Moreover, biometric
authentication must incorporate Liveness detection as standard such
that a malicious actor cannot easily bypass the security using some
form of synthetic image. With regards to the pledge to reduce
vulnerabilities, our active Threat Intelligence capabilities enable us
to identify new and novel threats to our customers and partners, such
that we are able to design mitigations to those vulnerabilities at pace
and deploy them rapidly across our network.
Although we are not ourselves a signatory to the CISA Pledge, our
relationship with the DHS places a requirement on us to adhere to the
goals where appropriate. This shared commitment to meeting the highest
standards in cyber resilience is evidenced by the accreditations and
certifications we hold and against which we are regularly tested. In
addition to structured testing by NIST, iBeta, and FIDO, where we are
the only certified face verification solution provider, we are also
subject to independent red team penetration testing by expert groups
including Outflank and AIS. We are also tested regularly for resilience
by our partners and customers, including the Department of Homeland
Security and the Singapore Government's GovTech program.
Question 4. How can a biometric vendor like iProov help to combat
deepfakes? As deepfakes proliferate and become more believable due to
advances in AI, what should be the relationship between organizations
that use AI in the public and private sectors, including social media
companies, to detect mis-, dis-, and mal-information?
Answer. With the volume of AI-generated content increasing
exponentially, it is likely to be the case that a mix of policy and
technology solutions will be required to tackle disinformation, with
the exact mix determined by the use case. For so long as content
accreditation systems can be quickly overwhelmed (or indeed gamed by
AI, such that false accreditations will quickly materialize),
expectations on the likely success of such systems should be carefully
managed. That does not mean that there should not be experimentation
with such approaches. In cases where it is important to have
traceability of content back to its source, and for the end-user to
have confidence in the integrity of the source of the content then it
is likely that an automated biometric identity verification approach,
based on liveness and one-time biometrics, would be most appropriate.
Moreover, tying social media to ID would lead to an increase in
personal accountability for content and communications. Improving
levels of accountability would change the behaviors of many on social
media platforms. With specific regards to nation-state actors using
bots and digital manipulation techniques to try and influence the
outcome of elections and the political process, we believe that only ID
verification of account holders can solve this--there is no other way.
We do not underestimate the complexity of addressing the challenge
of delivering such an outcome in practice, given the scale and
regulatory obstacles. It may be advisable to identify and prioritize
those context(s) within which false images and content may be most
damaging and where the identification of false images is most
technically and economically feasible.
With regards to determining the validity of a media presenter, as
opposed to a piece of audio or text, the crucial first step is to be
aware that deepfakes and synthetic digital injection attacks (whereby
synthetic media is injected into the data stream, bypassing trusted
device authentication) are both real and increasingly common. U.S.
Government agencies have shown leadership in their awareness of these
threats.\1\ The availability of generative AI means that the technical
know-how barrier is evaporating, allowing less tech-savvy attackers
access to on-line tools to create false images, including 3D face
swaps, audio, and text, which have also become more sophisticated to
the point where they are impossible to discriminate with the naked eye
(near-human fidelity) or ear. Publicity and media coverage further
serves to drive curiosity and interest in testing the capabilities of
AI both by malicious actors and by the moral majority--those who would
never set out intentionally to act unlawfully.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Public-Private Analysis Exchange Program, ``Increasing Threat
of Deepfake Identities,'' https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/increasing_threats_of_deepfake_- identities_0.pdf, 2021.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second step is detection. Once these attack tools are
successful across certain platforms, they are then sold on to organized
groups. With reduced accessibility barriers, increased tool
sophistication, and a perception that tools to create deepfakes can be
``fun'' applications, the sheer volume of faked images and content can
prove overwhelming for those trying to identify and isolate the work of
malicious actors. It's alarmingly apparent that these threats are
challenging even for state-of-the-art machine-learning computer vision
systems. We now need to include other complementary, multimodal
approaches as imagery is becoming increasingly veridical--we can no
longer solely rely on the trained human eye or even computer vision.
Furthermore, privacy features on desktop and mobile devices are making
it challenging to verify device authenticity, allowing attackers to
conceal their identity and method of attack. Detection of a
presentation attack detection (PAD), whereby a mask, photo, or video
playing on a screen is presented to the camera in an attempt to create
a faked image, is relatively straightforward and well-understood.
Detection of injection-based attack vectors is more challenging, and
more sophisticated tools are required, such as looking at the metadata
or other information that comes from the device or detecting that the
imagery has been synthesized or modified in some way. However, this is
not straightforward. What's more, unlike PAD, there are no globally-
accepted standards pertaining to digital injection attack detection.
This has given malicious actors an advantage in the biometric arms race
as defenses blindly fail to keep up with novel attacks.
Question 5. The AI Executive Order permits the use of the Defense
Production Act to collect certain information for potential dual-use
foundation models, including model weights and the physical and
cybersecurity practices that protect model weights.
Do you have concerns about the concentration of sensitive or
proprietary information associated with your AI models? How do you
handle sensitive information at your company today?
Answer. As a leading provider of biometric authentication services,
we have implemented robust measures to ensure the security and
confidentiality of the data we process, including the data used to
train and optimize our AI models.
Under the E.U. and U.K. GDPR, we act as a processor for our
clients, who are the controllers of personal data. We adhere to the
purposes and retention periods authorized by our clients in their
written contracts with iProov. For facial imagery provided by end-users
(data subjects), the typical retention period is 30 days from
enrollment or deletion of the end-user in the case of an on-going
authentication service.
We have implemented a firewall to ensure that any personal data
from end-users, including facial imagery and the resulting biometric
template, is pseudonymized and cannot be directly associated with an
identifiable person by iProov. This pseudonymization helps protect the
privacy and security of the sensitive information associated with our
AI models.
Our 30-day data retention policy for pseudonymized imagery and
related data is carefully designed to balance the rights of data
subjects with their security expectations. This retention period allows
us to identify sophisticated attacks that may occur over an extended
period, typically ranging from 30 to 120 days, based on threat risk
factors. By retaining data for 30 days, we can effectively detect and
counter complex attack patterns while respecting data subjects' privacy
rights and reasonable expectations.
During this 30-day period, with the consent of our clients, we
process facial imagery using research methodologies intended to
optimize performance according to internationally approved standards
(ISO/IEC 30107-3:2017 or successor standards). This processing helps
minimize bias in our AI models, ensuring that factors such as
ethnicity, gender, and age do not adversely affect the performance of
our biometric authentication services.
In summary, while we acknowledge the potential concerns surrounding
the concentration of sensitive information associated with AI models,
iProov has implemented stringent measures to protect this information.
Our data retention policy, pseudonymized data, and adherence to
international standards and best practices for bias mitigation allow us
to effectively balance the security needs of our clients and end-users
with data subjects' privacy rights and expectations. We remain
committed to handling sensitive information with the utmost care and
diligence to maintain the trust and confidence of our clients and their
end-users.
Question 6a. In April, DHS announced the AI Safety and Security
Board (AISSB) to fulfill a requirement under the AI Executive Order,
which was issued in October 2023. The AISSB includes the biggest tech
companies, such as OpenAI and Google, as well as civil rights
organizations and sector-specific companies, such as Delta Airlines.
Is it possible to get a diverse group of stakeholders to discuss
``AI'', which does not have an agreed upon definition, and ``AI risks''
in the same way? If not, how should the AISSB tackle these issues?
Question 6b. What safety and/or security issues would you have the
AISSB focus on?
Answer. That there are differences in interpretations and
understanding of AI and AI risks can be healthy at this stage in the
development both of the industry and of the supporting policy
framework. For example, although the term AI is used commonly, formal
definitions are likely to be time-limited and dependent upon context.
Moreover, there is a slide scale of technologies covering the spectrum
of machine learning through to general purpose AI tools, and indeed
many technologies could potentially fit within multiple definitional
constraints depending on how it is used. Until there are settled
definitions which are built into a stable legal framework there is more
to be gained by promoting a diversity of viewpoint, rather than
striving for a fixed and narrow definition. Such diversity will
stimulate and drive a discussion and debate across parties, promoting
cross-learning and potentially triggering yet further innovating
thoughts. Through engagement with these diverse opinions and subsequent
debates, policy makers, agencies, and regulators will be better
informed on the potential opportunities to support innovation as well
as to introduce targeted interventions to mitigate likely harms.
As the committee has observed, there are real and present risks
associated with malicious use of generative AI tools to create fake
identities for the purpose of committing identity fraud, for spreading
disinformation, as well as other forms of unlawful and socially
disruptive acts. Our request is that the Board be directed to focus
primarily on identifying real and present risks, such as those posed by
deep fakes, and engage widely to identify routes to industry-led market
solutions. Where a market-led solution proves infeasible, the Board
should engage with policy makers, share the learnings from such a
process, and work collaborative in the development of policy
interventions where proven necessary.
Question 7. What cybersecurity practices does iProov implement to
ensure its IP is protected and to proactively mitigate harms against
the company?
Answer. iProov implements a comprehensive set of cybersecurity
practices to protect its intellectual property (IP) and proactively
mitigate potential harms against the company.
We adhere to various industry standards and regulations,
demonstrating our commitment to robust cybersecurity practices. These
include:

ISO 27001:2013 certification for its Information Security
Management System (ISMS)

Conformance with ISO/IEC 30107-3:2017 for Presentation
Attack Detection (PAD) testing

Conformance with ISO/IEC 19795-1:2006 for biometric
verification performance testing

IRAP (Information Security Registered Assessor Program)
audited in Australia, achieving the highest level of Identity
Proofing (IPD 3)

Compliance with European GDPR and UK Data Protection Act
2018

Conformance with eIDAS (electronic IDentification,
Authentication, and trust Services) regulations

SOC 2 Type II certification

Conformance with W3C WCAG 2.2 AA, and ADA Section 508
accessibility guidelines

FIDO Alliance face verification certification.
Secure Infrastructure and Data Center Practices
iProov uses major cloud infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
providers with stringent access and entry controls, including barriers,
entry logging, airlocks, closed-circuit television, and RFID entry with
booked access times, restrictions, and exit times.
iProov's hosted services are specifically built for resilience by
the cloud service providers with internal ``Availability Zones,'' each
with segregated power, network, HVAC, and backup systems. The centers
are not sited on floodplains or in areas where they are susceptible to
natural disasters. Each of the 3 main providers gives detailed
certification of their facilities via their websites. This includes SOC
2 reports.
All cloud providers have gone through iProov's procurement process,
undertaken due diligence checks, and have the required contracts in
place. Part of such checks ensures that adequate physical security
controls are in place.
Access Control and Management
iProov implements strict access control and management procedures
to restrict business data and resource access. This includes:

Authentication and authorization mechanisms

Access control rules and rights based on standard user
profiles and business requirements

Segregation of user access requests, authorization, and
administration

Adherence to the principle of least privilege

Regular review and amendment of user access rights

Timely removal and modification of access.
iProov has access control and access management procedures in place
to restrict who has access to business data and resources. Secure
access control principles are employed to ensure that users are who
they claim to be and that appropriate levels of access controls are
granted. iProov Ltd controls access to information based on business
and security requirements.
Access control can broadly fit into the following categories:
authentication, authorization, access, management, and audit.
Access control rules and rights to applications are expressed in
standard user profiles for each user or group of users and are clearly
stated, together with the business requirements met by the controls.
The security requirements of each business application are
determined by a risk assessment that identifies all information related
to the application and the risks to that information.
Management of access rights across the network(s) is done by
administrators. User access requests, authorization, and administration
are segregated. User access requests are subject to formal
authorization using the iProov System Access Log, which is subject to
periodic review and amendment.
iProov operates under the ``least privilege'' framework, whereby
access is only granted where and when deemed necessary. All users who
need to access iProov information have specific, predetermined access
rights to that information, operating systems, and applications that
conform to and are restricted by the Access Control Policy. Access to
the information and application system functions is restricted. User
account management includes the timely removal and modification of
access.
Users are only provided access to the network and network services
they have been specifically authorized to use. User registration, de-
registration, and access provisioning are in place. Privileges are
allocated only to those users requiring them and are reviewed on a
regular basis.
Patent Protection
iProov's technology is protected by over 29 patents, covering
various aspects of its facial verification, anti-spoofing, and user
experience methods. These patents help safeguard iProov's intellectual
property and prevent unauthorized use or replication of its technology.
Continuous Improvement and External Audits
iProov continuously aims to improve its technical security controls
through yearly external audits, multiple internal audits, and
compliance with various standards such as ISO 27001, IRAP, eIDAS, eID,
and SOC-2 Type II. These regular audits and assessments help identify
potential vulnerabilities and ensure that iProov's cybersecurity
practices remain up-to-date and effective in mitigating risks.
Research and Development
By implementing these comprehensive cybersecurity practices, iProov
demonstrates its commitment to protecting its intellectual property and
proactively mitigating potential harms against the company. The
combination of compliance with industry standards, secure
infrastructure, access control measures, patent protection, continuous
improvement through audits, and on-going research and development
efforts creates a resilient security framework that safeguards iProov's
technology and data.
Question 8. Can you describe the new challenges presented by
generative AI and how these differ from traditional machine learning?
Answer. Generative AI presents several new challenges that differ
from traditional machine learning in the context of remote identity
verification and biometric security:
(1) Realistic synthetic media generation.--Generative AI,
particularly in the form of deepfakes and face swaps, enables
the creation of highly realistic synthetic media. Unlike
traditional machine learning, which primarily focuses on
pattern recognition and classification, generative AI can
produce convincing fake images, videos, and audio that closely
resemble real individuals.
(2) Increased accessibility and ease of use.--Generative AI tools,
such as DeepFaceLive, Swapface, and Deepswap, are becoming more
accessible to threat actors, with many offering free tiers for
experimentation. This wide-spread availability makes it easier
for attackers to create sophisticated synthetic media without
significant financial investment, unlike traditional machine
learning, which often requires specialized knowledge and
resources.
(3) Combination with traditional cyber attack tools.--Threat actors
are combining generative AI-derived synthetic media with
traditional cyber attack tools, such as emulators and metadata
manipulation, to create new and difficult-to-detect attack
vectors. This combination of techniques presents a unique
challenge compared to traditional machine learning-based
attacks, as it exploits both the visual and technical aspects
of biometric verification systems.
(4) Rapid evolution and adaptability.--Generative AI techniques are
evolving at an alarming pace, with threat actors quickly
adopting and adapting new tools and methodologies. This rapid
evolution makes it challenging for identity verification
systems to keep up with the latest threats, as opposed to
traditional machine learning-based attacks, which may be more
static and easier to detect and defend against.
(5) Difficulty in detection.--Generative AI-based synthetic media,
such as deepfakes and face swaps, can be extremely difficult
and sometimes impossible for humans to detect consistently.
This poses a significant challenge for remote identity
verification processes that rely on human operators or less
advanced AI techniques, as they may struggle to identify and
prevent sophisticated generative AI-based attacks.
To address these challenges, biometric verification systems must
utilize multi-layered defense strategies. They must include advanced AI
techniques, such as passive challenge-response mechanisms with multi-
frame liveness detection, alongside biometric security experts to
proactively gather threat intelligence and monitor as well as test the
platform regularly to stay ahead of the rapidly-evolving generative AI
threat landscape. This requires a more dynamic and adaptive approach
compared to traditional machine learning-based security measures.
Question 9. From your experience working in the field, what types
of AI research and development (R&D) projects should the Government be
involved in, and what is the private sector best suited to solve? Are
there any areas where your company lacks understanding in AI?
Answer. In the field of digital identity verification, we do not
see a neat separation between the Government and private sectors in
terms of the pursuit of research and development opportunities. The
power of Government and their agencies to concentrate funding in
support of innovation is tried and tested and should be recognized and
respected. The work of the Department of Homeland Security to encourage
and reward innovation through open competitions and challenges for
cybersecurity solutions is largely responsible for the United States
continuing to play a global leadership role in the development of
robust border security technologies. Agencies should continue to
promote innovation through such open competitions, which are
particularly important where they are tied to subsequent procurement
exercises. The power of the Government and its agencies in the
procurement of cyber solutions is also significant for pump-priming
private-sector investment. The Government is able to produce at such
scale and contract for long-term relationships that private-sector
companies feel confident to invest in innovation and engage with new
and novel use cases. Similarly, the Government and its agencies play a
powerful role through to the testing framework for new technologies.
NIST testing for identity solutions is globally respected and every
notable solution provider competes vigorously for the top end of NIST
tables. This testing in itself is a driver of innovation and
competition and the committee should look at how NIST can be further
supported as the burden of demand for testing of AI applications
increases.
Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green for Jake Laperruque
Question 1. How should policy makers think about AI ``risks''--
which ones should we worry about today, and which are perceived risks?
Answer. AI poses a wide range of risks, especially in the national
security space where stakes are highest for safety and civil liberties
alike. Unfortunately, given the pace of innovation and lack of
transparency into Government activities in this space, the public does
not have a full picture into which types of systems and uses present
on-going harms or imminent risk, and which are purely theoretical.
Assessing where risks exist and what are the most significant problems
to take on is precisely why transparency and oversight measures--such
as the AI Oversight Board and annual public reporting described in my
testimony--are so crucial.
Overall, use of AI in the national security space presents
significant risks to public safety and civil liberties alike.
Responsible development and use is key to efficacy. If the Government
employs poorly-developed AI systems, asks AI systems to respond to
input data that is low-quality or beyond the role the system was
designed for, or puts too much weight on AI results absent human
review, it will lead agencies and personnel astray. In the homeland
security context, this will risk misuse of vital resources and
diverting focus away from genuine threats. It also risks innocent
individuals being unjustly subject to investigation, surveillance,
arrest, and other deprivation of rights.
Beyond addressing risk of error and overreliance, it's also vital
to take on the dangers of AI being used in a manner that undermines our
democratic values. Facial recognition surveillance has already been
weaponized in the United States to monitor peaceful protesters,\1\ a
commonly-employed tactic in China, Russia, and Iran that should never
occur here.\2\ Predictive policing has been shown to undermine due
process rights and endanger innocent individuals.\3\ The public has
little insight into whether these types of disturbing uses have also
occurred in national security contexts, or if adequate safeguards exist
to prevent them. Greater transparency and oversight is needed to ensure
AI does not undermine democratic values.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See, Joanne Cavanaugh Simpson and Marc Freeman, ``South Florida
Police Quietly Ran Facial Recognition Scans to Identify Peaceful
Protestors. Is That Legal?'', Sun Sentinel, June 26, 2021,  https://
www.sun-sentinel.com/2021/06/26/south-florida-police-quietly-ran-
facial-recognition-scans-to-identify-peaceful-protestors-is-that-legal/

\2\ For additional details, please see Section III of my written
testimony, https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/Jake-Laperruque-
5-22-24-AI-Hearing-Written-Testimony.pdf.
\3\ See, Pranshu Verma, ``The never-ending quest to predict crime
using AI,'' Washington Post, July 15, 2022, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/07/15/predictive-policing-
algorithms-fail/; see also, Matt Stroud, ``Heat Listed,'' Verge, May
24, 2021, https://www.theverge.com/c/22444020/chicago-pd-predictive-
policing-heat-list; see also, Aaron Sankin and Surya Mattu,
``Predictive Policing Software Terrible At Predicting Crimes,'' Markup,
October 2, 2023, https://themarkup.org/prediction-bias/2023/10/02/
predictive-policing-software-terrible-at-predicting-crimes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 2a. Pursuant to Executive Order 13960: ``Promoting the Use
of Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in the Federal Government,''
Federal agencies are required to create and make publicly available an
inventory of non-classified and non-sensitive AI use cases, to the
extent practicable and in accordance with applicable law and policy.
DHS has made use cases across the Department publicly available on its
website.
How has, or can, this public inventory shape industry AI efforts
going forward?
Answer. The public inventory is a positive step for promoting
necessary oversight of AI systems, and ensuring responsible use. A
comprehensive inventory will also impact industry AI efforts by
highlighting relevant needs and preferred-use scenarios. However, for
this public inventory to be effective, it needs to account for the
comprehensive set of agencies' uses of AI. The current Department of
Homeland Security (``DHS'') inventory \4\ contains disturbing gaps and
omissions that indicate this is not the case. For example, its
description of Immigration and Custom Enforcement's (``ICE'') use of
facial recognition is limited to Homeland Security Investigations, when
public reporting has confirmed uses for general immigration
enforcement.\5\ Similarly, the inventory only describes Custom and
Border Protection (``CBP'') use of facial recognition in terms of the
Biometric Entry-Exit program, but excludes any mention of use of this
AI tool by Border Patrol agents in field settings. Until public
inventories provide a genuine overview of all AI systems, they will not
provide the transparency and oversight this system was designed for.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ The full Department of Homeland Security public inventory,
``Artificial Intelligence Use Case Inventory,'' is available at https:/
/www.dhs.gov/data/AI_inventory.
\5\ Drew Harwell, ``FBI, ICE find State driver's license photos are
a gold mine for facial-recognition searches,'' Washington Post, July 7,
2019, https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/07/07/fbi-ice-
find-state-drivers-license-photos-are-gold-mine-facial-recognition-
searches/; see also, Nina Wang, Allison McDonald, Daniel Bateyko &
Emily Tucker, American Dragnet: Data-Driven Deportation in the 21st
Century, Centeron Privacy & Technology at Georgetown Law (2022) (``ICE
has used face recognition technology to search through the driver's
license photographs of around 1 in 3 (32 percent) of all adults in the
U.S.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The public inventory should also strive to provide greater
information on how broadly AI systems are available to personnel and
nature of their use. Understanding how AI systems are deployed can have
a significant impact on the AI industry, and whether stakeholders and
the public deem such use appropriate, in need of greater rules and
safeguards, or believe it should be discontinued. For example, the DHS
Inventory describes ``Mobile Device Analytics'' as one AI system used
by ICE for ``identifying pertinent evidence, relationships, and
criminal networks from data extracted from cellular phones'' as well as
``object detection (such as firearms, drugs, money, etc.)'' This tool
could supercharge warrantless surveillance if combined with DHS's
database of cell phones searched and copied during border searches:
Each year CBP downloads information (such as text messages, photos,
videos, communications logs) from up to 10,000 phones into a central
database, where such data is stored for 15 years and accessible by
2,700 personnel.\6\ Are Mobile Device Analytics AI systems applied to
this database? If so, how frequently, by how many personnel, and for
what range of purposes? In order to be effective, the public inventory
should not simply list types of AI systems deployed, but also give
insights into manner of use.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Jessica Lyons, ``US border cops harvest info from citizens'
phones, build massive database,'' Register, September 15, 2022, https:/
/www.theregister.com/2022/09/15/wyden_cbp_phone_database/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finally, the Government should take steps to provide transparency
on AI uses within Classified and Sensitive settings as well. Agencies
should strive to declassify as much relevant information as possible to
offer public overviews and summaries of AI uses, with full descriptions
provided to Congress. Additionally, the steps outlined in my written
testimony will promote transparency and oversight even for Classified
uses. Mandatory declassification review of key documents, such as
agency rules and AI efficacy assessments, will aid public understanding
and facilitate responsible use. Congress' required declassification
review and required publication of significant FISA Court opinions
demonstrates the feasibility and value of such a system. An AI
Oversight Board can also carefully examine use within Classified
settings, promote public awareness to the best degree possible, and
provide recommendations directly to agencies in areas where details
cannot be disclosed.
Question 2b. Are there any gaps in the DHS use case inventory that
could be addressed with AI-based solutions?
Answer. The Center for Democracy & Technology does not have any
specific AI use cases it recommends adding to the current DHS
inventory. The Government should always strive to improve systems and
harness technological innovations in pursuit of this goal, but do so in
a responsible manner that prioritizes civil rights and civil liberties.
As DHS and other agencies consider additional AI systems, it should
prioritize examining efficacy, reviewing civil rights and civil
liberties risks, and developing appropriate rules and safeguards before
acquisition and implementation. Our recent report offers detailed
recommendations on effective procurement practices for AI systems.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Hannah Quay-de la Vallee, Ridhi Shetty, and Elizabeth Laird,
The Federal Government's Power of the Purse: Enacting Procurement
Policies and Practices to Support Responsible AI Use, The Center for
Democracy & Technology (2024), https://cdt.org/insights/report-the-
federal-governments-power-of-the-purse-enacting-procurement-policies-
and-practices-to-support-responsible-ai-use/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 3a. Many companies are embracing generative AI. However,
Gartner found that there is still a significant gap for AI adoption
within enterprises that is largely driven by challenges ``estimating
and demonstrating the value of AI projects.''
Do you think the potential of generative AI, as depicted by the
media, is overhyped or accurate? Why or why not?
Answer. Overreliance on AI is a serious risk, not only in terms of
general automation bias--in which individuals tend to place excess
trust in answers from automated systems--but also in expecting systems
to yield fruitful results even when given poor quality input data or
used in a manner beyond their designed purpose. In reality, AI systems
are only as good as the data they are given, and garbage in leads to
garbage out. And even when AI systems are well-designed, given quality
input data, and used properly, human review from properly-trained
individuals is essential to ensuring AI is not relied on excessively.
As I described in my testimony, facial recognition shows the
dangers of failing to heed these fundamental lessons for responsible
use: Vendors sometimes frame their products as near-infallible, and
urge law enforcement to rely on low-quality images that are much more
prone to misidentifications. Police departments have been documented
engaging in baseless misuses of the technology, using CGI-generated
images, sketches, and lookalikes in place of individuals' actual faces.
Failure to assess and corroborate results has led to numerous
individuals being improperly arrested and jailed.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ For additional details, please see Section III of my written
testimony, https://cdt.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/Jake-Laperruque-
5-22-24-AI-Hearing-Written-Testimony.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These examples show the dangers of overhyping AI. If we do not
properly account for its limits and act accordingly, it will cause
serious and concrete harm to Americans' lives.
Question 4. How do we ensure that the future of AI policy--which
will impact the entire economy and national security--is not dominated
by Big Tech?
Answer. There are several steps the Federal Government can take now
to help ensure that the resources necessary to take advantage of
powerful AI are available broadly, rather than concentrated with a
small set of powerful technology companies.
First--as detailed in CDT's recent comments to the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration in its proceeding on
the risks and benefits of large AI models with publicly-available
weights--ensuring a vibrant ecosystem of openly-published models as a
competitor to closed, centrally-hosted services will help combat market
concentration in AI, much as open-source software has been an engine of
innovation and competition in other technologies for the past 3
decades.\9\ Therefore we urge Congress, as we urged the Commerce
Department, to support the development of such an ecosystem including
by preserving the open scientific discourse it requires, as well as to
be wary of proposals to broadly restrict the ability to publish AI
models and research based on speculative risks.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Kevin Bankston, Center for Democracy & Technology, ``CDT
Comments to the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration on Dual-Use Foundation Artificial Intelligence Models
with Widely-Available Model Weights as per Section 4.6 of the Executive
Order on the Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of
Artificial Intelligence,'' Docket No. 240216-0052, March 27, 2024,
https://cdt.org/insights/cdt-comments-to-ntia-on-open-foundation-
models/.
\10\ See also Letter of Civil Society Organizations and Academics
to Commerce Secretary Raimondo, March 25, 2024, https://cdt.org/
insights/cdt-joins-mozilla-civil-society-orgs-and-leading-academics-in-
urging-us-secretary-of-commerce-to-protect-ai-openness/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, the Government can help democratize the resources necessary
to do AI science--including research that would help developers build
AI more responsibly and contribute to a safer and more competitive open
model ecosystem--by funding new research and development activities and
institutions. For example, the CREATE AI Act (H.R. 5077) and the Future
of AI Innovation Act (S. 4178) both would Congressionally authorize 2
new valuable efforts to provide more public resources for AI model
development and testing including for safety and governance purposes.
Those two efforts, respectively, are the National AI Research Resource
at the National Science Foundation and the AI Safety Institute at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, each of which CDT
supports.
Third, we should prioritize responsible procurement policies, given
impact that the U.S. Government's role as a major purchase will have on
the industry. The United States Government awarded over $2 billion in
contracts to private companies that provide AI-reliant services in
fiscal year 2022, with total spending on AI increasing nearly 2.5 times
since 2017.\11\ Government procurement practices should be tailored to
carefully assess AI quality, ability to meet agency needs, and
comportion with policy safeguards and limits. This will facilitate AI
developers rising on merit, rather than succeeding simply due to status
as large incumbent actors. CDT has recommended a number of actions to
support responsible procurement practices, including measures to
support responsible AI considerations at the acquisition planning
stage, more effective pre-award vendor evaluation, and proper post-
award vendor monitoring both from within agencies and via oversight by
Congress, the Government Accountability Office, and the Office of
Budget and Management.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Hannah Quay-de la Vallee, Ridhi Shetty, and Elizabeth Laird,
The Federal Government's Power of the Purse: Enacting Procurement
Policies and Practices to Support Responsible AI Use, The Center for
Democracy & Technology (2024), https://cdt.org/insights/report-the-
federal-governments-power-of-the-purse-enacting-procurement-policies-
and-practices-to-support-responsible-ai-use/.
\12\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 5. What do you think the broader U.S. AI ecosystem can do
to maintain its lead in generative AI over China, which is currently
heavily regulating its AI?
Answer. It's vital that we evaluate AI through the proper lens:
Winning the ``AI Arms Race'' does not simply mean the fastest
deployment on the broadest scale, it means ensuring that AI
technologies promote democratic society and values. As I detailed in my
written testimony, China's weaponization of AI to promote
authoritarianism and undermine individuals rights provides a stark
warning: The government uses facial recognition to hamper protests,
oppress its Uygher minority, and conduct pervasive surveillance of low-
level offenses like jaywalking to build a ``Big Brother Is Always
Watching'' mentality.\13\ The United States must take a values-based
approach to its development and deployment of AI, and ensure that it
aids civil rights and civil liberties.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ Paul Mozur, ``In Hong Kong Protests, Faces Become Weapons'',
N.Y. Times, July 26, 2019, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/26/
technology/hong-kong-protests-facial-recognition-surveillance.html;
Paul Mozur, ``One Month, 500,000 Face Scans: How China Is Using A.I. to
Profile a Minority'', N.Y. Times, Apr. 14, 2019, https://
www.nytimes.com/2019/04/14/technology/chinasurveillance-artificial-
intelligence-racial-profiling.html; Alfred Ng, ``How China Uses Facial
Recognition to Control Human Behavior'', CNET, Aug. 11, 2020, https://
perma.cc/P6Y3-U7XV.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We should also prioritize transparency in systems and Government
applications of AI; this will not only ensure responsible use, but also
promote efficacy and innovation. We should prioritize open-source
systems, as well as transparency in how various AI technologies are
developed and used both in and outside Government. Doing so will
facilitate public engagement and input from a broader set of experts
and stakeholders. American innovation has always thrived by fostering a
marketplace of ideas, and AI technologies are no exception. If we wish
to prevail over our strategic rivals, the United States must ensure
that AI development occurs in an open environment, and with the goal of
supporting democratic values.
Question 6. As deepfakes proliferate and become more believable due
to advances in AI, what should be the relationship between
organizations that use AI in the public and private sectors, including
social media companies, to detect mis-, dis-, and mal-information?
Answer. More needs to be done to combat disinformation, especially
as AI technologies such as deepfakes will both allow disinformation to
be produced more easily, spread more quickly, and mislead individuals
more convincingly. Social media companies should invest more in
watermarking and content detection methods to ensure that AI-generated
content is properly flagged as quickly as possible. Beyond direct
investment, social media companies should support independent research
by providing access to relevant data and information, as my colleague
outlined in a comment last month to the National Institute of Standard
and Technology.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Kate Ruane, ``Comment on NIST AI 100-4,'' The Center for
Democracy & Technology, May 31, 2024, available at https://cdt.org/wp-
content/uploads/2024/06/5.31.24-CDT-Comment-on-NIST-AI-100-4.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Companies should also work to ensure that trust and safety
mechanisms can continue to operate at scale even as AI facilitates more
rapid production and dissemination of disinformation. In employing AI
as a defensive measure to combat disinformation, these efforts should
account for added challenges in evaluating different forms of content
and content in different languages. CDT research has demonstrated how
automated content moderation in general, and in particular in regard to
multimedia and multilingual content, has serious limits.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ See, Natasha Duarte and Emma Llanso, Mixed Messages? The
Limits of Automated Social Media Content Analysis, The Center for
Democracy & Technology (2017), https://cdt.org/insights/mixed-messages-
the-limits-of-automated-social-media-content-analysis/; see also
Dhanaraj Thakur and Emma Llanso, Do You See What I See? Capabilities
and Limits of Automated Multimedia Content Analysis, The Center for
Democracy & Technology (2021), https://cdt.org/insights/do-you-see-
what-i-see-capabilities-and-limits-of-automated-multimedia-content-
analysis/; see also Gabriel Nicholas and Aliya Bhatia, Lost in
Translation: Large Language Models in Non-English Content Analysis, The
Center for Democracy & Technology (2024), https://cdt.org/insights/
lost-in-translation-large-language-models-in-non-english-content-
analysis/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We should also strive to borrow past models that have proven
successful. Over the past decades the United States has built robust
systems to aid cybersecurity by facilitating sharing of useful
information among private-sector entities, and between the private
sector and the Government. Creating similar infrastructure to promote
rapid dissemination of relevant information to combat AI-generated
disinformation and threats could be beneficial as well.

[all]
