- BUILDING THE FLEET: ASSESSING THE DE- PARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY'S ROLE IN THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD'S ACQUISITIONS PROCESS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

BUILDING THE FLEET:  ASSESSING THE DEPART-
MENT  OF  HOMELAND  SECURITY'S  ROLE  IN
THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD'S ACQUISI-
TIONS PROCESS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME
SECURITY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 7, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-61
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

58-069 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Garcia, California
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee         Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
(ex officio)                       Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

STATEMENTS

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     2
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

WITNESSES

Panel I

Ms. Shelby Oakley, Director, Contracting and National Security
Acquisitions, U.S. Government Accountability Office:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Mr. Ronald O'Rourke, Specialist in Naval Affairs, Congressional
Research Service:
Oral Statement.................................................    40
Prepared Statement.............................................    42
Mr. Eric J. Labs, Senior Analyst, Naval Weapons and Forces, U.S.
Congressional Budget Office:
Oral Statement.................................................    49
Prepared Statement.............................................    51

Panel II

Vice Admiral Paul F. Thomas, Deputy Commandant for Mission
Support, United States Coast Guard:
Oral Statement.................................................    66
Prepared Statement.............................................    67
Mr. Randolph D. ``Tex'' Alles, Deputy Under Secretary,
Management, U.S. Department of Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    70
Prepared Statement.............................................    71

APPENDIX

Questions From Honorable Michael Waltz for Vice Admiral Paul
Thomas.........................................................    85
Question From Honorable Michael Waltz for Randolph D. ``Tex''
Alles..........................................................    86

BUILDING THE FLEET: ASSESSING THE DE-
PARTMENT  OF   HOMELAND   SECURITY'S
ROLE  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  COAST
GUARD'S ACQUISITIONS PROCESS

----------

Tuesday, May 7, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., at
Room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos Gimenez
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, and Thanedar.
Also present: Representatives Moylan, and Radewagen.
Chairman Gimenez. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Transportation and Maritime Security will come
to order. Without objection, the Chair may declare the
subcommittee in recess at any point. I seek your indulgence in
in my being late. I was held up on another matter.
Today's hearing will examine the Department of Homeland
Security's role in the United States Coast Guard's acquisitions
process. Without objection, the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Walsh; the gentleman from Guam, Mr. Moylan; and the gentlewoman
from American Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen; and the gentlewoman from
Alaska, Ms. Peltola, are permitted to sit with the subcommittee
and ask questions of the witnesses. So ordered.
Today's hearings we will examine the Department of Homeland
Security's role in the United States Coast Guard's acquisitions
process. Without objection, the gentleman from Florida, Mr.
Walsh, the gentleman from Guam--I think I have said that
before. OK.
As we begin today's hearing, it is with a heavy heart that
I take a moment to remember our late colleague Congressman
Donald Payne, Jr. A proud son of New Jersey, Congressman Payne
was a steadfast advocate for his constituents during his time
in Congress.
On the Homeland Security Committee, Congressman Payne
worked to bolster the Department of Homeland Security's ability
to protect Americans, respond to emergencies, and safeguard our
communities. He collaborated with his colleagues across the
aisle to make necessary reforms to the Department's operations,
including the Department of Homeland Security Interoperable
Communications Act which helped the Department facilitate more
reliable communications between personnel of different
Department components during daily operations, planned events,
and emergencies.
Additionally, his leadership of the Homeland Security for
Children Act, now, which was signed into law in 2022, ensured
the Department is accounting for the unique vulnerabilities to
children during natural disasters and acts of terrorism.
Furthermore, he distinguished this subcommittee not only with
his persistent advocacy, but also with his signature bowtie
that elevated the sartorial character of the hearing room.
We were saddened to hear of his tragic passing, and I think
I speak for all the subcommittee Members by stating that we
will miss his persistent advocacy and genteel presence on the
dais. Our thoughts and prayers are with his families and
friends, especially his wife Beatrice and their triplets Donald
III, Jack, and Yvonne.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, the gentleman from
Michigan, Mr. Thanedar, for his remarks.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez for yielding, and
thank you for your kind words about our late colleague. I would
like to echo everything you said.
Congressman Payne was a true public servant in the best
sense. He was humble, hardworking, and kind. His work on
emergency preparedness, infrastructure investments, health
care, and the security of our Nation's children will have a
lasting impact for many years to come.
Congressman Payne sat on this subcommittee for most of his
time in Congress. When it came to issues facing the TSA and the
Coast Guard he always placed front-line workers front and
center. He never missed an opportunity to thank Transportation
Security officers, Federal air marshals, Coast Guard service
members and other front-line workers and their service, and he
backed up his words with action.
His support was instrumental to securing pay raises and
improved labor rights for TSA employees. He also sponsored the
Securing Public Areas of Transportation Facilities Act of 2018,
which was passed into law as part of the TSA Modernization Act
later that year.
His bill was helped guide the efforts of TSA and its
security partners to protect public areas of airports, train
stations, bus depots, and other transportation facilities. I
was honored to work alongside Congressman Payne and get to know
him. He will be sorely missed by his family, friends,
colleagues, constituents, and staff.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
To honor Congressman Payne, I ask all subcommittee Members,
staff, witnesses, and the guests to rise and join me in a
moment of silence.
Thank you. Please be seated.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. Today our
subcommittee is discussing the Department of Homeland
Security's role in the Coast Guard's acquisition process. To
carry out its 11 statutory missions, the Coast Guard depends on
a variety of assets from small boats and unmanned aerial
vehicles to 400-foot-long vessels and complex fixed- and
rotary-wing aircraft. These assets must be able to operate in
the most austere and challenging environments and carry out
dangerous maneuvers to save lives, protect our coastline, and
our waters, pursue and arrest criminal actors, and enforce U.S.
laws.
It is, therefore, critical that the Coast Guard be able to
acquire the assets necessary to perform their duties and
replace older assets with new, more capable assets as the
surface and air fleet age.
The Coast Guard is currently in the process of replacing
several mission-critical assets and new cutters. When
completed, the new national security cutters, offshore patrol
cutters, the fast response cutters will replace 90 existing
cutters and assume responsibility for 7 of the Coast Guard's 11
statutory missions.
Additionally, the polar security cutter will bolster the
aging Coast Guard icebreaker fleet and 3 heavy icebreakers will
replace the Coast Guard's sole heavy icebreaker, which is
approaching almost 50 years in age.
The Coast Guard works hand-in-hand with the domestic
industrial base to meet the needs of the service. Among these
critical acquisition programs there are certainly some success
stories. The Coast Guard has so far commissioned 54 out of the
71 planned fast response cutters and expanded the areas of
operations for these new cutters to the Persian Gulf and the
Indo-Pacific. Shipbuilders are delivering the new FRCs on
schedule and at a rate of 2 per year.
Additionally, the Coast Guard will soon commission its 10th
out of 11 planned national security cutters and the 11th NSC is
currently under construction. The NSCs are already fulfilling
critical missions requirements in the Indo-Pacific and
elsewhere around the world.
However, Coast Guard has experienced major setbacks with
both the polar security cutter and the offshore patrol cutter
programs. The first polar security cutter was originally
supposed to be operational this year, but the Coast Guard has
not yet begun construction on the first cutter.
Among the factors contributing to the significant delay has
been the lack of experience the Coast Guard and the domestic
industrial base have in building icebreaking ships. While
several allied countries such as Canada, Finland, and South
Korea have extensive experience building icebreakers and ice-
capable vessels, no heavy icebreaker has been constructed in
the United States in almost 50 years. The Coast Guard has not
commissioned an icebreaker of any kind since 2006.
This lack of experience is demonstrated in the development
of ship design for the PSC, which to date is still not at the
level necessary to begin construction.
The Coast Guard has experienced significant issues with the
offshore patrol cutter program as well. Between 2017 and 2019,
estimates for the ships weight increased by more than 20
percent. Additionally, a 2023 Government Accountability Office
report found that the OPC program, as well as the PSC program,
did not follow standard practices in developing the ship's
design and technology.
These issues have caused delays to the construction
schedule for the OPCs and have raised the overall cost of the
program as well as the maintenance cost required to keep the
cutters the OPC will replace on-line for longer.
I am growing increasingly concerned that the Coast Guard
cannot accurately estimate the cost of its shipbuilding
programs. We have seen massive cost increases to the PSC
program from the initial estimate the Coast Guard had provided
Congress when standing up the program.
That is why last fall Chairman Green and I requested to the
Congressional Budget Office to conduct a cost estimate of the
PSC program. According to the preliminary findings presented by
Dr. Eric Labs, the PSC program cost will be almost 60 percent
higher than the Coast Guard's current estimate.
Furthermore, as I mentioned earlier, existing challenges
indicate that the OPC program costs will increase substantially
from initial estimates.
I understand that the Coast Guard is operating on a
significantly smaller budget than its Navy counterparts,
despite being tasked by Congress to develop, deploy, and
maintain cutters that are equivalent in size and complexity to
all but the largest of Navy ships.
The Coast Guard's entire budget request for fiscal year
2025 was $13.8 billion with $1.5 billion dedicated for
procurement, construction, and improvements. In comparison, the
Navy's budget request for fiscal year 2025 includes $77 billion
for procurement alone, roughly 51 times greater than the Coast
Guard's procurement budget.
That said, as the Coast Guard prioritizes the PSC and OPC
programs which will require the service to administer larger
procurement budgets than they are used to, it is imperative
that Coast Guard manages these programs effectively and
efficiently. During my time as Chairman of this subcommittee
the message we receive from stakeholders is clear. The demand
for Coast Guard services is increasing and will continue to
increase in the future.
Bringing these cutters on-line on time and on budget will
determine whether Coast Guard will be able to meet the growing
demands for their assets, manpower, and expertise.
Therefore, if we want to stem the flow of narcotics into
our country, stop illegal fishing by the Chinese distance water
fishing fleet, or maintain a consistent, credible presence in
the Arctic to deter our geopolitical adversaries, the Coast
Guard acquisitions program must deliver what Congress has
tasked the services to do.
I thank our two panels of witnesses for appearing before
our subcommittee today to discuss this critical topic, and I
look forward to your testimony.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]

Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez

Today, our subcommittee is discussing the Department of Homeland
Security's role in the Coast Guard's acquisitions process.
To carry out its 11 statutory missions, the Coast Guard depends on
a variety of assets, from small boats and unmanned aerial vehicles to
400-feet-long vessels and complex fixed- and rotary-wing aircraft.
These assets must be able to operate in the most austere and
challenging environments and carry out dangerous maneuvers to save
lives, protect our coastline and our waters, pursue and arrest criminal
actors, and enforce U.S. laws.
It is therefore critical that the Coast Guard be able to acquire
the assets necessary to perform their duties and replace older assets
with new, more capable assets as the surface and air fleet age.
The Coast Guard is currently in the process of replacing several
mission-critical assets with new cutters.
When completed, the new National Security Cutters, Offshore Patrol
Cutters, and Fast Response Cutters will replace 90 existing cutters and
assume responsibility for 7 of the Coast Guard's 11 statutory missions.
Additionally, the Polar Security Cutters will bolster the aging
Coast Guard icebreaker fleet, and 3 heavy icebreakers will replace the
Coast Guard's sole heavy icebreaker, which is approaching 50 years of
service.
The Coast Guard works hand-in-hand with the domestic industrial
base to meet the needs of the service.
Among these critical acquisition programs, there are certainly some
success stories.
The Coast Guard has so far commissioned 54 out of the 71 planned
Fast Response Cutters and expanded the areas of operation for these new
cutters to the Persian Gulf and the Indo-Pacific.
The shipbuilder is delivering the new FRCs on schedule at a rate of
2 per year.
Additionally, the Coast Guard will soon commission its 10th out of
11 planned National Security Cutters, and the 11th NSC is currently
under construction.
The NSCs are already fulfilling critical mission requirements in
the Indo-Pacific and elsewhere around the world.
However, the Coast Guard has experienced major setbacks with both
the Polar Security Cutter and Offshore Patrol Cutter programs.
The first Polar Security Cutter was originally supposed to be
operational this year, but the Coast Guard has not yet begun
construction on the first cutter.
Among the factors contributing to this significant delay has been
the lack of experience the Coast Guard and the domestic industrial base
have in building icebreaking ships.
While several allied countries such as Canada, Finland, and South
Korea have extensive experience building icebreakers and ice-capable
vessels, no heavy icebreaker has been constructed in the United States
in almost 50 years, and the Coast Guard has not commissioned an
icebreaker of any kind since 2006.
This lack of experience is demonstrated in the development of ship
design for the PSC, which to date is still not at the level necessary
to begin construction.
The Coast Guard has experienced significant issues with the
Offshore Patrol Cutter program as well.
Between 2017 and 2019, estimates for the ship's weight increased by
more than 20 percent.
Additionally, a 2023 Government Accountability Office report found
that the OPC program--as well as the PSC program--did not follow
standard practices in developing the ship's design and technology.
These issues have caused delays to the construction schedule for
the OPCs and raised the overall cost of the program, as well as
maintenance costs required to keep the cutters the OPCs will replace
on-line for longer.
I am growing increasingly concerned that the Coast Guard cannot
accurately estimate the cost of its shipbuilding programs.
We have seen massive cost increases to the PSC program from the
initial estimate Coast Guard provided Congress when standing up the
program.
This is why, last fall, Chairman Green and I requested the
Congressional Budget Office to conduct a cost estimate of the PSC
program.
According to the preliminary findings presented by Dr. Eric Labs,
the PSC program's cost will be almost 60 percent higher than the Coast
Guard's current estimate.
Furthermore, as I mentioned earlier, existing challenges indicate
that the OPC program's cost will increase substantially from initial
estimates.
I understand that the Coast Guard is operating on a significantly
smaller budget than its Navy counterparts, despite being tasked by
Congress to develop, deploy, and maintain cutters that are equivalent
in size and complexity to all but the largest Navy ships.
The Coast Guard's entire budget request for fiscal year 2025 was
$13.8 billion, with $1.5 billion dedicated for procurement,
construction, and improvements.
In comparison, the Navy's budget request for fiscal year 2025
includes $77 billion for procurement alone, roughly 51 times greater
than the Coast Guard's procurement budget.
That said, as the Coast Guard prioritizes the PSC and OPC programs,
which will require the service to administer larger procurement budgets
than they are used to, it is imperative that Coast Guard manages these
programs effectively and efficiently.
During my time as Chairman of this subcommittee, the message we
have received from stakeholders is clear: the demand for Coast Guard
services is increasing and will continue to increase in the future.
Bringing these cutters on-line on time and on budget will determine
whether Coast Guard will be able to meet the growing demand for their
assets, manpower, and expertise.
Therefore, if we want to stem the flow of narcotics into our
country, stop illegal fishing by the Chinese distance water fishing
fleet, or maintain a consistent, credible presence in the Arctic to
deter our geopolitical adversaries, the Coast Guard acquisitions
programs must deliver what Congress tasks the service to do.
I thank our two panels of witnesses for appearing before our
subcommittee today to discuss this critical topic, and I look forward
to your testimonies.

Chairman Gimenez. At this time I will yield to the Ranking
Member for his opening statement.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Thank you to our witnesses on both panels for joining us
today and sharing your expertise on this important topic.
The Coast Guard's shipbuilding efforts and other
acquisition programs play a critical role in protecting U.S.
national security. The Coast Guard has an aging fleet of
surface and aviation vessels.
In the Arctic, the Coast Guard is challenged to maintain an
adequate presence due to a lack of modern icebreakers. The
Coast Guard's two existing icebreakers, the Polar Star and the
Healy, are operating well past their service lives and are not
sufficient on their own to meet the Coast Guard's needs.
In the Indo-Pacific, the Red Sea, and elsewhere around the
globe, the Coast Guard's aging assets are similarly stretched
thin by increased demands.
The Coast Guard is undergoing a historic recapitalization
of its fleet, working to acquire modern vessels that will
enhance capabilities and mission readiness. This large-scale,
complex effort will take long-term investment and commitment
from those of us in Congress, as well as the consistent support
and oversight of the Department of Homeland Security.
Already the Coast Guard has successfully acquired and
deployed a large number of new cutters through the national
security cutter and fast response cutter program. However, the
service has faced significant challenges in developing,
designing, and building new icebreakers through the polar
security cutter program, as well as new multi-mission cutters
through the offshore patrol cutter program.
These programs have faced a host of challenges, including a
global pandemic, supply chain disruptions, natural disasters,
contractor inexperience, and a strong labor market which is
driving increased labor cost. As a result, both programs have
seen significant delays and cost increases. Some of these
challenges could not have been predicted while others likely
should have been better accounted for within calculated risk
assumptions.
Going forward, DHS and the Coast Guard must work together
with partners in the U.S. Navy and the shipbuilding industry to
build up an industrial base capable of regularly producing
world-class cutters and other vessels according to predictable
schedules and budgets.
These efforts will be critical to not just the success of
the polar security cutter and offshore patrol cutter programs
but to building Great Lakes icebreakers, waterway commerce
cutters, arctic security cutters, and other cutters not yet
envisioned.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today and
about how we can learn lessons from the past few years to
improve Coast Guard acquisition programs and ensure effective
DHS oversight.
I thank our witnesses, and I yield back, Mr. Chair.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar

May 7, 2024

The Coast Guard's shipbuilding efforts and other acquisition
programs play a critical role in protecting U.S. national security. The
Coast Guard has an aging fleet of surface and aviation vessels. In the
Arctic, the Coast Guard is challenged to maintain an adequate presence
due to a lack of modern icebreakers.
The Coast Guard's two existing icebreakers, the Polar Star and the
Healy, are operating well past their service lives and are not
sufficient on their own to meet the Coast Guard's needs. In the Indo-
Pacific, the Red Sea, and elsewhere around the globe, the Coast Guard's
aging assets are similarly stretched thin by increased demands.
The Coast Guard is undergoing a historic recapitalization of its
fleet, working to acquire modern vessels that will enhance capabilities
and mission readiness. This large-scale, complex effort will take long-
term investment and commitment from those of us in Congress, as well as
the consistent support and oversight of the Department of Homeland
Security.
Already, the Coast Guard has successfully acquired and deployed a
large number of new cutters through the National Security Cutter and
Fast Response Cutter programs. However, the service has faced
significant challenges in developing, designing, and building new
icebreakers through the Polar Security Cutter program, as well as new
multi-mission cutters through the Offshore Patrol Cutter program.
These programs have faced a host of challenges, including a global
pandemic, supply chain disruptions, natural disasters, contractor
inexperience, and a strong labor market which is driving increased
labor costs. As a result, both programs have seen significant delays
and cost increases. Some of these challenges could not have been
predicted, while others likely should have been better accounted for
within calculated risk assumptions.
Going forward, DHS and the Coast Guard must work together with
partners in the U.S. Navy and the shipbuilding industry to build up an
industrial base capable of regularly producing world-class cutters and
other vessels according to predictable schedules and budgets. These
efforts will be critical to not just the success of the Polar Security
Cutter and Offshore Patrol Cutter programs, but to building Great Lakes
icebreakers, Waterways Commerce Cutters, Arctic Security Cutters, and
other cutters not yet envisioned.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today about how we can
learn lessons from the past few years to improve Coast Guard
acquisition programs and ensure effective DHS oversight.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Ranking Member Thanedar.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

May 7, 2024

The Department of Homeland Security plays an important role in
overseeing component acquisition activities and driving program
effectiveness and accountability. The Coast Guard's acquisition
portfolio is particularly immense and complex, as the service seeks to
recapitalize an aging fleet of surface and aviation assets. The Coast
Guard has struggled to meet shipbuilding budgets and deadlines, as some
of its largest acquisition programs have far exceeded initial cost
estimates and delivery schedules.
The Polar Security Cutter program, for example, is currently in
breach status, as the program has fallen out of compliance with the
schedule and cost basis set forth in its acquisition program baseline.
In addition, the Offshore Patrol Cutter program--the Coast Guard's
largest acquisition program and highest investment priority--is
likewise off-schedule and over budget.
In recent years, the Coast Guard has faced a variety of challenges.
The COVID-19 pandemic interrupted business processes and global supply
chains, increasing the costs of materials. Natural disasters have
impacted shipyards, including when Hurricane Michael tore through the
southeastern United States in 2018 and damaged the Offshore Patrol
Cutter shipbuilder's facilities.
The Coast Guard has grappled with an inexperienced U.S. industrial
base, which has not produced a heavy icebreaker in nearly 50 years,
leading to delays in producing complex ship designs. Most recently, a
strong economy has increased wages for workers, leading to a rise in
labor costs associated with shipbuilding. Though these challenges have
been unpredictable to some degree, we can be certain that more
challenges lie ahead.
DHS and the Coast Guard must develop robust acquisition and
shipbuilding practices that accurately account for the likelihood of
unforeseen circumstances and setbacks. Accurate cost estimates and
delivery schedules are critical to the Coast Guard's mission readiness,
as ballooning costs and repeated delays have cascading impacts across
the service. With top-line budget levels set in place, investing
unplanned additional funds into acquisition programs means removing
funds from other priorities.
The Coast Guard has a wide variety of funding needs, from shore
infrastructure to housing to recruiting and retention incentives.
Developing acquisition programs that reliably stick to baseline
schedules and cost estimates will allow DHS and the Coast Guard to
prioritize and invest systematically, ultimately improving the safety
and security of our Nation's maritime environment.

Again, I am pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today on this critical topic. I ask that
our witnesses please rise and raise their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you and please be
seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Ms.
Shelby Oakley serves as the director of contracting and
national security acquisitions with the Government
Accountability Office, Mr. Ronald O'Rourke serves as the
specialist in naval affairs for the Congressional Research
Service, and Mr. Eric Labs serves as a senior analyst for naval
forces and weapons for the Congressional Budget Office. I thank
each of our distinguished witnesses for being here today.
I now recognize Ms. Oakley for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF SHELBY OAKLEY, DIRECTOR, CONTRACTING
AND NATIONAL SECURITY ACQUISITIONS, U.S. GOVERN-
MENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE

Ms. Oakley. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member
Thanedar, and Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for the
opportunity to talk about Coast Guard shipbuilding programs and
their challenges. I am a relative newcomer to DHS and Coast
Guard acquisitions. I have spent the majority of my GAO career
assessing acquisitions at NASA and DOD, in particular Navy
shipbuilding.
Given my unique experience, I can say that some of the
fundamental challenges and disappointing outcomes I see with
Coast Guard acquisitions are not unique. However, I will also
say that the Coast Guard and DHS are not doing themselves any
favors or the taxpayers any favors when they point to factors
outside of their control as the primary cause for these
outcomes.
Coast Guard should do more to address what it can control.
For example, GAO's extensive body of work on DHS and Coast
Guard has resulted in 40 recommendations aimed at improving how
it manages its acquisitions. As of today, about half of these
recommendations remain unaddressed or we have already closed
them because the Coast Guard didn't take action in time for
them to make a difference.
Given that Coast Guard ships cost billions to acquire and
they play a vital role in securing our homeland, my statement
will focus on what the Coast Guard needs to do to improve
outcomes for its existing and future shipbuilding programs.
First, I will cover the main challenges that have plagued
the Coast Guard's highest-priority programs, OPC and PSC, and
missed opportunities for improvement.
Second, I will discuss leading practices that GAO has
recently identified to help provide DHS and Coast Guard with a
new path forward for achieving better outcomes in its ship
programs.
Both the OPC and PSC have struggled with achieving a stable
design to support construction. This is a key leading practice
to achieve predictable outcomes.
For OPC we found that DHS and Coast Guard allowed the
program to repeatedly proceed through design points intended to
prevent programs from moving forward when they are not ready.
This happened despite significant risks and our recommendations
to the contrary.
For example, OPC was authorized to start construction on
the first 4 ships without fully developing a critical
technology or completing key portions of the design. For PSC,
we found that the program continues to struggle with design
even after 5 years. Several factors that should have been red
flags from the start have contributed to this, including a lack
of heavy polar icebreaker expertise in the industrial base and
the complexity of the design.
Additionally, the shipbuilder and Coast Guard
underestimated how many design changes they would need to make
to meet Coast Guard specifications and made costly design
errors, such as designing the lowest deck of the ship at the
wrong height. Both programs are not meeting their original cost
and schedule goals and are now reevaluating the feasibility of
their current estimates.
Specifically, the OPC lead ship delivery is delayed almost
4 years and costs have increased by $11 billion and the PSC
lead ship is delayed by about 5 years and costs have increased
by at least $2 billion and potentially more as my CBO colleague
will testify.
In the mean time, the current fleet is aging and crews are
having to work harder to keep existing ships operational while
they wait for the new ships.
Our work on leading practices for acquisitions, which has
spanned decades, presents opportunities for the Coast Guard to
improve. For this work we gathered and vetted practices from
successful commercial companies to identify how they deliver
innovative products that meet cost and schedule expectations.
The bottom line, when thoughtfully applied, the practices
leading companies follow for designing and constructing ships
improve outcomes, even when cultural and structural differences
yield a different sets of incentives, priorities, or
requirements.
At a very high level, companies establish realistic,
executable business cases. They use their processes, tools, and
expertise to continually reevaluate their business cases to
ensure that programs are on track and will take quick action
when the business case deteriorates.
These practices and the many open recommendations I
discussed earlier provide a good starting point for the Coast
Guard to consider new approaches to acquiring its capabilities
to meet its important missions. It is safe to say no one is
happy with the results the Coast Guard is seeing and change is
needed.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of
the subcommittee this completes my oral statement. I would be
pleased to respond to any questions. I also want to take a
moment to express my condolences about Mr. Payne.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Oakley follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Oakley.
I now recognize Mr. O'Rourke for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF RONALD O'ROURKE, SPECIALIST IN NAVAL
AFFAIRS, CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE

Mr. O'Rourke. Thank you and my condolences also regarding
Mr. Payne.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today. With your permission I would like to
submit my testimony for the record and summarize it here
briefly.
As requested, my testimony focuses on the polar security
cutter or PSC program. Estimated PSC procurement costs have
increased about 39 percent since the contract award 5 years
ago, but still appear to be significantly underestimated.
Three potential sources of cost growth, if fully realized,
could increase PSC costs another 30 to 40 percent and 2 other
sources of cost growth could increase them further toward the
figures in CBO's testimony.
The Coast Guard could respond to this potential cost growth
by granting contract relief to the PSC shipbuilder through a
request for equitable adjustment or using Pub. L. 85-804, as
was done for the builder of the first 4 offshore patrol
cutters.
Mr. Chairman, as you mentioned, the Coast Guard originally
aimed to have the first PSC delivered in 2024, but the ship's
estimated delivery date has been delayed repeatedly and is now
expected to occur no earlier than fiscal year 2029. A parent
design strategy used for the PSC program was intended to reduce
the PSC's design time, but 5 years after contract award the
expected reduction in design time does not appear to have been
realized, suggesting that the parent design might now more
closely resemble what I refer to as a PDINO, meaning a parent
design in name only.
Limited numbers of available naval architects and design
engineers also appear to have contributed to delays in maturing
the PSC design.
At this stage one option for substantially accelerating the
construction of polar icebreakers would be to complete the
maturation of the PSC design and begin building PSCs at the
program's current shipbuilder Bollinger, and at some later
point introduce a second shipbuilder to build additional PSCs
in parallel to those being built by Bollinger. Given the Coast
Guard's requirement for a total of 8 to 9 polar-capable
icebreakers, including 4 to 5 PSCs and 4 to 5 medium polar
icebreakers, one possible approach might be to introduce a
second shipbuilder to build the fourth and fifth PSCs while
Bollinger completes the first 3.
Another possible approach would be to have Bollinger build
all 4 or 5 PSCs while accelerating the start date of the time
line for designing and building the medium polar icebreakers.
These are not the only possible options.
A 2017 National Academies' report recommended using a
common basic design for both the PSCs and the medium polar
icebreaker. Coast Guard, however, has testified that it wants
the new medium polar icebreakers to have a shallower draft than
the PSC. This could make it difficult to employ a common basic
design for both types of icebreakers.
Building PSCs in parallel at two shipyards or accelerating
the start of the time line for designing and building the
medium polar icebreakers or increasing annual OPC procurement
quantities so as to replace the medium endurance cutters more
quickly could require substantially increasing annual funding
levels in the Coast Guard's procurement account.
Substantially increasing that account might also make the
use of block by contracting, which can reduce ship procurement
costs, appear budgetarily less risky to Coast Guard officials.
Since fiscal year 2010, funding for the Coast Guard's
procurement account has remained relatively flat in nominal
terms, while the Navy shipbuilding budget has more than
doubled. The amount requested for the Coast Guard's procurement
account for fiscal year 2025 equates to about $1.1 billion in
constant fiscal year 2010 dollars. The Coast Guard testified in
2013 that an annual procurement funding level of about $1
billion would almost create a death spiral for the Coast Guard.
The budget displays for the procurement account in the
Coast Guard's annual budget book lack certain basic information
about the Coast Guard's shipbuilding programs, including
estimated per hull total procurement costs and scheduled
delivery dates. These omissions can impede the ability of
Members and their staff to identify and track year-to-year
changes in per-hull procurement costs and delivery dates, which
in turn can make it more difficult to conduct effective
oversight of these programs.
Congress may consider whether to direct the Coast Guard to
include in its annual budget justification book budget displays
for its shipbuilding and aircraft procurement accounts that are
modeled after those in the Navy's annual budget justification
books, which include this kind of information.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, thank you again
for the opportunity to appear before you today, and I will be
pleased to respond to any questions the subcommittee may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. O'Rourke follows:]

Prepared Statement of Ronald O'Rourke

May 7, 2024

introduction

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, thank you for the
opportunity to appear before you today to testify on ``Building the
Fleet: Assessing the Department of Homeland Security's Role in the
United States Coast Guard's Acquisitions Process.'' As part of my work
for Congress as the CRS specialist for naval issues, a position I have
held since 1984, I have been tracking Coast Guard shipbuilding programs
since 1998 (i.e., for the last 26 years).\1\ I currently maintain CRS
reports on the Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program;\2\ the National
Security Cutter (NSC), Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC), and Fast Response
Cutter (FRC) programs;\3\ as well as the Waterways Commerce Cutter
(WCC) program.\4\ My biography is in the Appendix at the end of this
statement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See CRS Report 98-830 F, Coast Guard Integrated Deepwater
System: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke (first
version October 5, 1998).
\2\ CRS Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar
Icebreaker) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald
O'Rourke.
\3\ CRS Report R42567, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background
and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
\4\ CRS In Focus IF11672, Coast Guard Waterways Commerce Cutter
(WCC) Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As requested, my testimony focuses primarily on the PSC program. I
initiated the CRS report on what is now referred to as the PSC program
in 2008, and have since updated it periodically (usually multiple times
each year). I last testified before this subcommittee on July 18, 2023,
at a hearing on strategic competition in the Arctic.\5\ My work on the
PSC program supports my efforts as the head of the CRS Arctic team and
the coordinator of the CRS overview report on the Arctic, which CRS
initiated in 2010.\6\ Parts of this testimony are adapted from the CRS
report on the PSC program and the CRS report on the NSC, OPC, and FRC
programs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ CRS Testimony TE10084, Strategic Competition in the Arctic, by
Ronald O'Rourke.
\6\ CRS Report R41153, Changes in the Arctic: Background and Issues
for Congress, coordinated by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
polar security cutter (psc) program
Two key issues for the Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program are cost
growth and schedule delay.
Cost Growth
Coast Guard and Navy estimates of PSC procurement costs have
increased about 39 percent since the April 2019 PSC program contract
award:

At a March 28, 2019, hearing on the Coast Guard's proposed
fiscal year 2020 budget, then-Coast Guard Commandant Admiral
Karl Schultz testified that as of that date, the cost of the
first PSC was estimated at $925 million to $940 million, and
that the cost of the second and third PSCs would be in the
range of $700 million each,\7\ producing an estimated three-
ship total of about $2,325 million to $2,340 million (i.e.,
about $2.3 billion).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Source: CQ transcript of the hearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

As shown in the CRS report on the PSC program, the most
recent estimate provided by the Coast Guard to CRS is for the
first PSC to cost $1,297 million (i.e., about $1.3 billion),
the second PSC to cost $921 million, and the third PSC to cost
$1,017 million (i.e., about $1.0 billion), producing an
estimated three-ship total $3,235 million (i.e., about $3.2
billion),\8\ a total that is about 39 percent higher than the
total from the March 28, 2019, testimony.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Source: U.S. Coast Guard email to CRS, March 26, 2024, which
stated that costs shown are from the PSC 2021 LCCE v3 (Life Cycle Cost
Estimate, version 3). The Coast Guard stated in the email that the 2021
LCCE v3 is the Coast Guard's current model for estimated PSC
procurement costs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even with this 39 percent increase, PSC procurement costs still
appear to still be significantly underestimated. At least 5 potential
factors could increase estimated PSC procurement costs from the March
2019 figures to figures that are significantly above the current
estimate:

The actual PSC design is larger than the Government's
indicative design.--The design chosen for the PSC is about 35
percent larger in terms of light-ship displacement than the
indicative design (i.e., the Government's in-house notional
design) that informed earlier Navy and Coast Guard cost
estimating for the program. Adjusting for this larger design
might incur an approximate 35 percent increase in estimated PSC
procurement costs over the costs estimated at the time of the
April 2019 PSC contract award.

The Navy has frequently underestimated lead ship costs.--As
detailed by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO)\9\ and the
Government Accountability Office (GAO),\10\ the costs of lead
ships in Navy shipbuilding programs have exceeded the Navy's
estimates. Cost growth on Navy lead ships, CBO analysis shows,
has ranged from a few percent to about 150 percent, with the
weighted average figure for the 19 ship classes examined by CBO
being 25 percent, and the unweighted average being 40
percent.\11\ Many of these 19 cases involve lead ships whose
light-ship displacements were not underestimated, meaning that
the cost growth resulted from factors other than the one
described in the previous bullet point.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See CBO, An Analysis of the Navy's Fiscal Year 2024
Shipbuilding Plan, October 2023, p. 34 (Figure 10).
\10\ See Government Accountability Office, Navy Shipbuilding[:]
Past Performance Provides Valuable Lessons for Future Investments, GAO-
18-238SP, June 2018, p. 8.
\11\ See CBO, An Analysis of the Navy's Fiscal Year 2024
Shipbuilding Plan, October 2023, p. 34 (Figure 10).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Recent inflation in shipbuilding.--Shipbuilding, like other
sectors of defense procurement and the U.S. economy in general,
has experienced significant inflation since the start of the
COVID-19 pandemic due to supply chain disruptions and other
impacts. The Navy states ``the residual effects of inflationary
pressures of the past few years, workforce challenges, plus
increased labor and supply costs across the defense enterprise,
all drove costs associated with our shipbuilding account up
roughly 20 percent over the last couple of years.''\12\ This
inflation has increased the estimated procurement costs of
multiple Navy shipbuilding programs. Within Coast Guard
shipbuilding, the estimated unit procurement cost of an FRC has
increased from $60 million in the Coast Guard's enacted fiscal
year 2021 appropriation to $100 million in the Coast Guard's
fiscal year 2024 unfunded requirements list and fiscal year
2025 budget submission, although not all of the increase is
necessarily due to the recent inflation in shipbuilding.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Department of the Navy, Highlights of the Department of the
Navy Fiscal Year Budget, 2024, page 1-12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Potential need for additional increases in worker wages and
benefits.--Shipyards and associated supplier firms face
challenges in recruiting and retaining new workers, in part
because wages and benefits in service and retail jobs have
grown more in recent years than have wages and benefits at
shipbuilders and supplier firms.\13\ As a result, workers are
now more likely to choose service and retail jobs, where the
work, while paying less than shipbuilding work, is more likely
to be done in air-conditioned indoor settings, involve less
heavy lifting or risk of serious injury, and take place in
locations offering easier daily commutes.\14\ Reestablishing a
larger differential in wages and benefits between shipbuilding
jobs and service and retail jobs could require substantially
increasing total wages and benefits for shipbuilding workers.
Such a change could, in turn, substantially increase
procurement costs for ships such as the PSC, since shipyard
labor can account for roughly 40 percent of a military ship's
total procurement cost. Increases in worker wages and benefits
could also result from shipyards along the Gulf Coast competing
against one another for available shipbuilding workers.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See, for example, Paul McLeary and Lee Hudson, ``Navy
Shipyards Compete with Fast Food, and Are Losing,'' Politico Pro, April
9, 2024.
\14\ Ibid.
\15\ A January 22, 2024, press report states:
Rear Adm. Chad Jacoby, the assistant commandant of the Coast Guard
for acquisition, said this month workforce challenges--specifically,
needing more highly trained welders and design engineers--are
contributing to delays on the Polar Security Cutter program at
Bollinger Mississippi, formerly VT Halter Marine.
``If you look across all of our construction programs, every
shipyard says they're going to hire 1,000 or 2,000 more people prior to
executing the contracts that we have in place. They all happen to be on
the Gulf Coast, so if you add up all those numbers, it's probably
physically impossible for every one of those individual shipyards to
hire 2,000 more people'' to support on-time ship deliveries, Jacoby
said on a Jan. 11 panel at the Surface Navy Association annual
conference.
He told Defense News after the panel he is specifically concerned
about Bollinger Mississippi in Pascagoula and its Polar Security
Cutter; Eastern Shipbuilding Group in Panama City, Florida, which is
building the first four Offshore Patrol Cutters; Austal USA in Mobile,
Alabama, which will build the next 11 OPCs; and Birdon America, a
Denver-based company that will build the Waterways Commerce Cutters
with a number of Louisiana-and Alabama-based companies.
``It is one workforce across many States,'' the admiral said of the
Gulf Coast region. ``As each shipyard says they're going to hire
people, they're definitely competing against each other.''
(Megan Eckstein, ``Coast Guard Ship Programs Facing Delays amid
National Worker Shortage,'' Defense News, January 22, 2024.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Labor hours and absorption of fixed overhead costs.--
Construction delays due to lower-than-anticipated shipyard
worker productivity, supply chain issues, or other causes could
increase the cost of the PSC because of the ship requiring a
larger-than-anticipated number of labor hours to build (if
worker productivity is an issue), and because the ship would
absorb a portion of the shipyard's monthly fixed overhead costs
for an increased number of months (an effect somewhat like the
meter in a taxi continuing to run even when the taxi is stuck
in traffic).
A simple (not compounded) sum of the potential percentage cost
increases described in the first 3 bullet points above (using the 25
percent and 40 percent figures from the second bullet) comes to a
potential percentage cost increase, if all 3 factors were to come fully
into play, of 80 percent to 95 percent above the March 2019 figures.
Increasing the March 2019 figures by 80 percent would result in an
estimated cost of $1,665 million to $1,692 million (i.e., about $1.7
billion) for the lead ship and $1,260 million (i.e., about $1.3
billion) each for the second and third ships, producing an estimated
three-ship total of $4,185 million to $4,212 million (i.e., about $4.2
billion). This total is about 30 percent higher than the currently
estimated total of $3,235 million.
Increasing the March 2019 figures by 95 percent would result in an
estimated cost of $1,804 million to $1,833 million (i.e., about $1.8
billion) for the lead ship and $1,365 million (i.e., about $1.4
billion) each for the second and third ships, producing an estimated
three-ship total of $4,534 million to $4,563 million (i.e., about $4.5
billion to $4.6 billion). This total is about 40 percent higher than
the currently estimated total of $3,235 million.
The cost figures in the 2 previous paragraphs do not include any
increases cost resulting from the factors outlined in the fourth and
fifth bullet points above.
Percentage increases in estimated ship procurement costs comparable
to the potential 80 percent-95 percent increase discussed above have
recently occurred in certain Navy shipbuilding programs. The estimated
procurement cost of the lead ship in the Navy's TAGOS-25 ocean
surveillance ship program increased about 82 percent between the Navy's
fiscal year 2023 and fiscal year 2024 budget submissions;\16\ the
estimated procurement cost of the lead ship in the Navy's medium
landing ship (LSM) program increased 43 percent between the Navy's
fiscal year 2024 and fiscal year 2025 budget submissions;\17\ and the
estimated procurement cost of the lead ship in the Navy's light
replenishment oiler (TAOL) program increased 202 percent between the
Navy's fiscal year 2024 and fiscal year 2025 budget submissions. An
April 2024 CBO report on the procurement costs of LSMs estimates that
LSMs will cost roughly 127 percent to 187 percent more than the Navy
estimates.\18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ For more on the TAGOS-25 program, see CRS In Focus IF11838,
Navy TAGOS-25 Ocean Surveillance Shipbuilding Program: Background and
Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
\17\ For more on the LSM program, see CRS Report R46374, Navy
Medium Landing Ship (LSM) (Previously Light Amphibious Warship [LAW])
Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
\18\ Congressional Budget Office, Acquisition Costs of the Navy's
Medium Landing Ship, April 2024, p. 1. For further discussion, see CRS
Report R46374, Navy Medium Landing Ship (LSM) (Previously Light
Amphibious Warship [LAW]) Program: Background and Issues for Congress,
by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
A procurement cost for the first PSC that is closer to $2 billion
than to $1 billion would be comparable to the procurement cost of a
Navy LPD-17 Flight II class amphibious ship, which is about $2.0
billion. The LPD-17 Flight II design a little larger than the PSC
design and has more expensive combat system equipment than the PSC.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ Another consideration in comparing cost estimates for the
first PSC and the LPD-17 Flight II design is that the first PSC is at
the top of the learning curve for building the PSC design, while the
cost of the LPD-17 Flight II design reflects learning curve benefits
from producing earlier LPD-17 Flight I class ships. For more on the
LPD-17 Flight II class program, see CRS Report R43543, Navy LPD-17
Flight II and LHA Amphibious Ship Programs: Background and Issues for
Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Coast Guard could respond to potential PSC program cost growth
by granting contract relief to the PSC shipbuilder, Bollinger
Mississippi Shipbuilding, through a request for equitable adjustment
(REA) or pursuant to Pub. L. 85-804 (as done for the builder of the
first four OPCs, Eastern Shipbuilding Group).\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ For more on Pub. L. 85-804 and the contract relief granted in
the OPC program to Eastern Shipbuilding Group under that law, see CRS
Report R42567, Coast Guard Cutter Procurement: Background and Issues
for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Schedule Delay
The PSC program has fallen far behind its original schedule. The
Coast Guard originally aimed to have the first PSC delivered in 2024,
but the ship's estimated delivery date has been delayed repeatedly and
is now expected to occur no earlier than fiscal year 2029.
A principal cause of the delay has been the time needed to achieve
design maturity (i.e., to complete the detail design of the ship). The
parent design strategy used for the PSC program (i.e., the strategy of
creating the PSC design by modifying the design of an existing polar-
capable ship) was intended by the Coast Guard and Navy to reduce the
PSC's design time. Five years after contract award, the expected
reduction in design time does not appear have been realized. The time
needed to mature the PSC design suggests that the parent design used
for the PSC program--the design for the new German polar icebreaker
Polar Stern II--might now more closely resemble a parent design in name
only (PDINO).\21\ In this regard, the PSC program appears somewhat
similar to the Navy's Constellation (FFG-62) class frigate program,
which the Navy initiated as a program that would use a parent design,
but which observers might now characterize as having moved over time
toward a PDINO situation.\22\ Limited numbers of available naval
architects and design engineers within the United States also appear to
have contributed to delays in maturing the PSC design.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ The phrase parent design in name only (with the resulting
acronym PDINO) is only one possible shorthand way of referring to the
situation. One possible way to pronounce the acronym PDINO would be pa-
DEE-no.
\22\ For more on the FFG-62 program, see CRS Report R44972, Navy
Constellation (FFG-62) Class Frigate Program: Background and Issues for
Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke. On the issue of the FFG-62's parent
design strategy, the report states:
An April 2, 2024, press report states: ``At one point the
Constellation design shared about 85 percent commonality with the
original [Italian-French] FREMM [Fregata Europea Multi-Missione parent]
design, but the alterations [incorporated into the FFG-62 design] have
brought that commonality down to under 15 percent, a person familiar
with the changes told USNI News.'' If the FFG-62 design shares less
than 15 percent commonality with the FREMM design, then some observers
might characterize the FFG-62 program as having moved over time toward
what might be termed a parent design in name only (PDINO) design
approach.
\23\ The January 22, 2024, press report quoted in footnote 15
mentions states (emphasis added): ``Rear Adm. Chad Jacoby, the
assistant commandant of the Coast Guard for acquisition, said this
month workforce challenges--specifically, needing more highly trained
welders and design engineers--are contributing to delays on the Polar
Security Cutter program at Bollinger Mississippi, formerly VT Halter
Marine.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With PSC design maturation now approaching 80 percent--the minimum
typically targeted by the Navy before beginning construction of a lead
ship--a principal option for substantially accelerating the
construction of polar icebreakers for the Coast Guard would be to
complete the maturation of the PSC design, begin building PSCs at the
program's current shipbuilder, Bollinger Mississippi Shipbuilding, and
at some later point introduce a second shipbuilder to build additional
PSCs in parallel to those being built by Bollinger. The Coast Guard has
testified that its most recent fleet mix analysis calls for a total of
8 to 9 polar-capable icebreakers, including 4 to 5 heavy polar
icebreakers (i.e., PSCs), and 4 to 5 medium polar icebreakers. Given
these figures and Bollinger's current contract to build up to 3 PSCs,
one possible approach might be to introduce a second shipbuilder to
build the fourth and fifth PSCs while Bollinger completes the first 3.
Another possible approach would be to have Bollinger build all 4 or 5
PSCs while accelerating the start date of the time line for designing
and building the medium polar icebreakers. This second approach could
accelerate the date for completing the larger total of 8 to 9 heavy and
medium polar icebreakers. These 2 alternatives are not the only
possible approaches.

arctic security cutter (asc) program

Of the 4 to 5 medium polar icebreakers called for in the Coast
Guard's fleet mix analysis, one is to be the Commercially Available
Polar Icebreaker (CAPI)--an existing, privately-owned ship that the
Coast Guard plans to purchase and modify into a Coast Guard medium
polar icebreaker, using funding appropriated for that purpose in the
Coast Guard's fiscal year 2024 budget. The ship to be purchased and
modified is Aiviq, a U.S.-registered ship that was originally built to
serve as an Arctic oil-exploration support ship, and which has an
icebreaking capability sufficient to serve as a Coast Guard medium
polar icebreaker.\24\ The other 3 to 4 medium polar icebreakers are to
be new-construction ships referred to as Arctic Security Cutters
(ASCs).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ For further discussion of the CAPI program and Aiviq, see CRS
Report RL34391, Coast Guard Polar Security Cutter (Polar Icebreaker)
Program: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As discussed in the CRS report on the PSC program, one possible
acquisition strategy for polar icebreakers would be to build PSCs and
ASCs to a common basic design (i.e., the PSC design). A
Congressionally-mandated July 2017 report from the National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) on the acquisition and
operation of polar icebreakers concluded that notional operational
requirements for new medium polar icebreakers would result in ships
similar in size to new heavy polar icebreakers. (The Coast Guard's
current medium polar icebreaker, Healy, is somewhat larger than Polar
Star.) Given this probable similarity in size, the NASEM report
recommended building a single medium polar icebreaker to the same basic
design as 3 new heavy polar icebreakers. This approach, the report
concluded, would reduce the cost of the medium icebreaker by avoiding
the cost of developing a new design and by making the medium polar
icebreaker the fourth ship on an existing production learning curve
rather than the first ship on a new production learning curve.\25\ The
same general approach could be applied to procuring 4 to 5 PSCs and 3
to 4 ASCs.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\25\ National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,
Division on Earth and Life Studies and Transportation Research Board,
Acquisition and Operation of Polar Icebreakers: Fulfilling the Nation's
Needs, Letter Report, with cover letter dated July 11, 2017, pp. 2, 4-
6. See also Calvin Biesecker, ``Coast Guard Leaving Options Open for
Future Polar Icebreaker Fleet Type,'' Defense Daily, April 12, 2018.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At a November 29, 2023, hearing before the House Homeland Security
Committee, Vice Admiral Peter Gautier, Coast Guard Deputy Commandant
for Operations, stated that the Coast Guard in coming years will need
to have ``a mix of heavy icebreakers like the Polar Star and the Polar
Security Cutters that we're building now, and medium icebreakers like
the Healy that have shallower drafts and can get into tighter spaces
and shallower areas.''\26\ Procuring ASCs as ships with shallower
drafts could make it difficult or impossible for PSCs and ASCs to be
built to a common basic design: A ship's draft is a basic design
characteristic; reducing the PSC design's draft enough to meet the
Coast Guard's requirements might necessitate design changes that would
effectively make it a different design.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\26\ Source: CQ transcript of hearing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
offshore patrol cutter (opc) program

Cost Growth
GAO testified in July 2023 that Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC)
program's ``acquisition cost estimate increase increased from $12.5
billion to $17.6 billion between the program's 2012 and 2022 life-cycle
cost estimates. The Coast Guard attributes the increase [of about 40
percent] to many factors, including restructuring the stage 1
contract--for OPCs 1 through 4--and recompeting the requirement for
stage 2--OPCs 5 through 25--in response to a disruption caused by
Hurricane Michael, and increased infrastructure costs for homeports and
facilities, among other things.''\27\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard
Recapitalization[:] Actions Needed to Better Manage Acquisition
Programs and Address Affordability Concerns, statement of Marie A. Mak,
Director, Contracting and National Security Acquisitions, Testimony
Before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of
Representatives, July 27, 2023, GAO 23-106948, p. 9.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Of the five factors discussed earlier in connection with a
potential increase in PSC procurement costs, two of them in in
particular--recent inflation in shipbuilding and the potential need for
additional increases in worker wages and benefits--could further
increase estimated OPC procurement costs.

Annual Procurement Quantities
As discussed in the CRS report on the National Security Cutter
(NSC), OPC, and Fast Response Cutter (FRC) programs, the current OPC
procurement profile, which reaches a maximum projected annual rate of 2
ships per year, would deliver OPCs many years after the end of the
originally planned service lives of the Coast Guard's existing medium-
endurance cutters. GAO testified in July 2023 that under the OPC
program's current procurement schedule, the Coast Guard's 14 Reliance-
class 210-foot medium-endurance cutters would be replaced when they
would be (if still in service) about 60 to 65 years old, and the Coast
Guard's 13 Famous-class 270-foot medium-endurance cutters would be
replaced when they would be (if still in service) about 34 to 52 years
old.\28\ These ages, particularly for the Reliance-class cutters, would
be high, raising questions concerning the ships' future operational
availability and ability to perform missions cost-effectively.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\28\ Government Accountability Office, Coast Guard
Recapitalization[:] Actions Needed to Better Manage Acquisition
Programs and Address Affordability Concerns, statement of Marie A. Mak,
Director, Contracting and National Security Acquisitions, Testimony
Before the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation,
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, House of
Representatives, July 27, 2023, GAO 23-106948, Figure 4 on p. 14.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Coast Guard officials have testified that the service plans to
extend the service lives of the medium-endurance cutters until they are
replaced by OPCs. Operating aged medium-endurance cutters will incur
maintenance and repair costs, particularly during the ships' final
years of intended service. Even with investments in their capabilities,
the ships may remain less capable in certain regards than OPCs.
One possible option for addressing this situation would be to
increase the maximum annual OPC procurement rate from the currently
planned 2 ships per year to 3 or 4 ships per year. Such an increase
could result in the final (i.e., 25th) OPC being delivered a few to
several years sooner than under the currently-planned maximum rate.
Increasing the maximum procurement rate for the OPC program could,
depending on the exact approach taken, reduce OPC unit acquisition
costs due to improved production economies of scale. Such an increase
might also expand opportunities for using competition in the program.
Notional alternative approaches for increasing the OPC procurement rate
to 3 or 4 ships per year include:

increasing the production rate to 3 or 4 ships per year at a
single shipyard--an option that would depend on that shipyard's
production capacity;

using 2 shipyards for building OPCs to a single OPC design;

using 2 shipyards for building OPCs to 2 designs, with each
shipyard building OPCs to its own design--an option that would
result in two OPC classes;\29\ and
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Operating two OPC classes could be viewed as similar to how
the Coast Guard currently operates two primary classes of medium-
endurance cutters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

building additional NSCs in the place of some of the planned
OPCs--an option that might include de-scoping equipment on
those NSCs where possible to reduce their acquisition cost and
make their capabilities more similar to those of the OPC.
The fourth alternative above could be pursued in combination with 1
of the first 3 alternatives.

block buy contracting

Using block buy contracting--a form of multi-year contracting used
in a few Navy shipbuilding programs--could reduce procurement costs for
PSCs, ASCs, or OPCs by perhaps 5 percent to 10 percent.\30\ The Coast
Guard typically uses contracts with options for its shipbuilding
programs. Although a contract with options may resemble multi-year
contracting, it operates more like a series of annual contracts.
Contracts with options do not achieve the kinds of reductions in
acquisition costs that are possible with multi-year contracting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\30\ For more on block buy contracting, see CRS Report R41909,
Multiyear Procurement (MYP) and Block Buy Contracting in Defense
Acquisition: Background and Issues for Congress, by Ronald O'Rourke.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Section 311 of the Frank LoBiondo Coast Guard Authorization Act of
2018 (S. 140/Pub. L. 115-282 of December 4, 2018) provides permanent
authority for the Coast Guard to use block buy contracting with
economic order quantity (EOQ) purchases (i.e., up-front batch
purchases) of components in its major acquisition programs. The
authority is codified at 14 U.S.C. 1137.
Using multi-year contracting involves accepting certain tradeoffs,
including the following:

reduced Congressional control over year-to-year spending;

reduced flexibility changing Coast Guard acquisition
programs in response to unforeseen changes in strategic or
budgetary circumstances (which can cause any needed funding
reductions to fall more heavily on acquisition programs not
covered by multi-year contracts);

a potential need to shift funding from later fiscal years to
earlier fiscal years to fund economic order quantity (EOQ)
purchases (i.e., up-front batch purchases) of components;

the risk of incurring penalty payments to shipbuilders if
multi-year contracts are terminated due to unavailability of
funds needed for the continuation of the contracts; and

the risk that materials and components purchased for ships
to be procured in future years might go to waste if those ships
are not eventually procured.
The Navy since the 1990's has made extensive use of multi-year
contracting in its ship and aircraft procurement programs. The Coast
Guard, in contrast, has to date not used multi-year contracting in a
major ship or aircraft procurement program. Given the relatively small
size of the Coast Guard's Procurement, Construction, and Improvements
(PC&I) account (see next section), the second trade-off listed above
may be of particular concern to the Coast Guard in deciding whether to
use multi-year contracting.

coast guard procurement, construction, and improvements (pc&i) account

Three of the options presented in this testimony--building PSCs in
parallel at 2 shipyards, accelerating the start of the time line for
designing and building ASCs, and increasing annual OPC procurement
quantities--would require substantially increasing annual funding
levels in the Coast Guard's Procurement, Construction, and Improvements
(PC&I) account (or providing additional funding for Coast Guard ship
procurement through the Navy's shipbuilding account, which has been
done in the past).\31\ Increasing the PC&I funding level might also
make the use of block buy contracting appear budgetarily less risky to
Coast Guard officials.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\31\ Funding from the Navy's shipbuilding account funded about 89
percent of the procurement cost of Healy, as well as the procurement 33
of the Coast Guard's 49 Island-class 110-foot patrol boats (the cutters
being replaced by FRCs). Prior-year funding for the PSC program
includes $300 million in funding from the Navy's shipbuilding account
($150 million each in fiscal year 2017 and fiscal year 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Since fiscal year 2010, in nominal terms (not adjusted for
inflation), funding for the Coast Guard's PC&I account has remained
relatively flat while the Navy's shipbuilding account has more than
doubled. The Navy's shipbuilding account increased from $13.844 billion
in fiscal year 2010 (enacted) to $32.378 billion in fiscal year 2025
(requested), a nominal increase of about 134 percent. The Coast Guard's
PC&I account, by comparison, was $1.536 billion in fiscal year 2010
(enacted) and is $1.564 billion in fiscal year 2025 (requested). After
accounting for inflation, the requested fiscal year 2025 figure for the
PC&I account amounts to about $1,095 million (i.e., about $1.1 billion)
in fiscal year 2010 dollars, which is 29 percent less in real
(inflation-adjusted) terms than the fiscal year 2010 enacted
figure.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Fiscal year 2025 dollars were converted into fiscal year 2010
dollars using the DOD deflator for procurement excluding pay, fuel, and
medical in Department of Defense, National Defense Budget Estimates for
Fiscal Year 2025, April 2024, p. 61 (Table 5-5).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As noted in the CRS report on the NSC, OPC, and FRC programs, at a
May 14, 2013, hearing on the Coast Guard's proposed fiscal year 2014
budget before the Homeland Security Subcommittee of the Senate
Appropriations Committee, then-Coast Guard Commandant Admiral Robert
Papp testified that an annual PC&I funding level of about $1 billion
per year ``almost creates a death spiral for the Coast Guard because we
are forced to sustain older assets--older ships and older aircraft--
which ultimately cost us more money, so it eats into our operating
funds, as well, as we try to sustain these older things.''

budget displays

The budget displays for the PC&I account in the Coast Guard's
annual budget-justification book lack certain basic information about
the Coast Guard's shipbuilding programs, including estimated per-hull
total procurement costs and scheduled delivery dates. These omissions
can impede the ability of Members and their staff to identify and track
year-to-year changes in per-hull procurement costs and delivery dates,
which in turn can make it more difficult to conduct effective oversight
of these programs. Congress may consider whether to direct the Coast
Guard to include, in its annual budget justification book, budget
displays for its shipbuilding (and aircraft) procurement programs that
are modeled after those in the Navy's annual budget-justification
books, which include this kind of information.

conclusion

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, thank you again for the
opportunity to appear before you today, and I will be pleased to
respond to any questions the subcommittee may have.

Appendix.--Biography

Mr. O'Rourke is a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the Johns Hopkins
University, from which he received his B.A. in international studies,
and a valedictorian graduate of the University's Paul Nitze School of
Advanced International Studies, where he received his M.A. in the same
field.
Since 1984, Mr. O'Rourke has worked as a naval analyst for the
Congressional Research Service of the Library of Congress. He has
written many reports for Congress on various issues relating to the
Navy, Coast Guard shipbuilding, China's naval forces, U.S.-China
strategic competition in the South and East China seas, U.S. defense
strategy, defense acquisition policy, the international security
environment, and the Arctic. He regularly briefs Members of Congress
and Congressional staffers, and has testified before Congressional
committees on many occasions.
In 1996, he received a Distinguished Service Award from the Library
of Congress for his service to Congress on naval issues.
In 2010, he was honored under the Great Federal Employees
Initiative for his work on naval, strategic, and budgetary issues.
In 2012, he received the CRS Director's Award for his outstanding
contributions in support of the Congress and the mission of CRS.
In 2017, he received the Superior Public Service Award from the
Navy for service in a variety of roles at CRS while providing
invaluable analysis of tremendous benefit to the Navy for a period
spanning decades.
Mr. O'Rourke is the author of several journal articles on naval
issues, and is a past winner of the U.S. Naval Institute's Arleigh
Burke essay contest. He has given presentations on naval, Coast Guard,
and strategy issues to a variety of U.S. and international audiences in
government, industry, and academia.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
I now recognize Mr. Labs for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ERIC J. LABS, SENIOR ANALYST, NAVAL WEAP-
ONS AND FORCES, U.S. CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE

Mr. Labs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, would express my
condolences at the passing of Congressman Payne.
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of
the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify about
the procurement costs of the Coast Guard's heavy polar
icebreaker program known as the polar security cutter.
In consultation with committee staff, I have focused this
short statement on providing a summary of the Congressional
Budget Office's report on the polar security cutter, which
Chairman Green and Chairman Gimenez requested. That report is
currently being drafted, and we expect to publish it this
summer.
In February 2024, the Coast Guard notified the Congress
that the first polar security cutter would experience cost
growth of more than 20 percent and that the ship's production
will be delayed by another year. As both the Congressional
Research Service and the Government Accountability Office have
noted, in the 5 years since the contract for the first ship was
awarded, development and design of the polar security cutter
has progressed slowly and little work on building the first
ship has been completed.
In that time, the Coast Guard's design estimate of the
ship's lightship displacement, a key indicator of cost, grew by
40 percent while its cost estimate for a three-ship program
increased by just 16 percent. Regardless of the contract
structure, that was going to be an untenable situation.
While the lead ship's design is still incomplete, the
service is hoping that the shipyard will be able to begin
substantial construction on the lead ship early next year with
an estimated delivery date in 2029. The Coast Guard expects to
release a revised estimate of the cost of the three-ship polar
security program later this year.
At the committee's request, CBO conducted an independent
cost assessment of the polar security cutter. The results of
our analysis indicate that the procurement costs of the first
polar security cutter would be about $1.9 billion. Subsequent
ships would average about $1.6 billion each in constant 2024
dollars.
Thus, the procurement costs of the current program of
record for 3 polar security cutters would be about $5.1
billion. That amount is 60 percent greater than the Coast
Guard's most recent publicly-released estimate, which was
provided to CBO by the Coast Guard in March. Of course, a
program greater than 3 ships would cost additional money.
Let me briefly provide some background on how CBO conducted
its estimate. When it comes to assessing the costs of new naval
shipbuilding programs, including those of the Coast Guard, CBO
estimates are derived from a model that largely uses a ship's
weight to calculate its cost. Essentially, CBO estimated the
costs of the new polar security cutters in the same way it
estimates the costs of new naval ships.
CBO identified ships acquired in the past that were similar
to the polar security cutter and calculated the cost-to-weight
ratio of the most analogous ship. The agency then used that
ratio as a critical input into estimating the cost of the new
ship.
CBO found that the best historical analog for the polar
security cutter was the Coast Guard's existing medium
icebreaker, the Healy. Built in the 1990's, the Healy, though
medium icebreaker, displaces about 16,000 tons of water when
fully loaded. It is larger than the Polar Star, a heavy
icebreaker built in the early 1970's, that displaces 13,200
tons when fully loaded.
Even though the Polar Star has more installed shaft
horsepower, which among other things makes it a heavy
icebreaker, the polar security cutter would be significantly
larger than them both with a full load displacement of about
23,000 tons and would have improved capabilities compared to
its predecessors.
In conducting its analysis, CBO started with the estimated
cost per 1,000 tons of lightship displacement of the polar
security cutter using data on the ship provided by the Coast
Guard. Lightship displacement is the weight of the water a ship
displaces without its crew, stores, ammunition, or fuel or
other liquids.
CBO then adjusted it to account for current industry
conditions and the inexperience of U.S. shipyards in building
icebreakers, as well as the efficiencies that shipyards gain as
they produce additional ships of a given type. CBO applied
those adjustments to the estimated cost of the first ship of
the class to estimate the cost of all subsequent polar security
cutters.
Finally, CBO adjusted its estimates to reflect its
expectation that the cost of labor and materials would continue
to grow at a rate that is 1 percentage point faster in the
naval shipbuilding industry than in the economy as a whole, as
they generally have for that past several decades.
The CBO estimate does not represent an upper bound, but
rather represents our best analysis of what the PSC should
realistically cost. There are reasons to believe that the final
price of the ship could be lower than what CBO estimates, but
there are also reasons to believe why the final price could be
higher than what CBO estimates.
I hope you find this information helpful, and I am happy to
answer any questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Labs follows:]

Prepared Statement of Eric J. Labs

April 30, 2024

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify about the
procurement costs of the Coast Guard's heavy polar icebreaker program,
known as the Polar Security Cutter (PSC) program. In consultation with
committee staff, I have focused this short statement on providing a
summary of the Congressional Budget Office's report on the PSC program,
which Chairman Green and Chairman Gimenez requested. That report is
currently being drafted, and we expect to publish it this summer.
CBO's findings are as follows:

The procurement cost of the first PSC would be about $1.9
billion. Subsequent ships would average about $1.6 billion
each. (All costs in this statement are expressed in 2024
dollars.)

Given those costs, the procurement cost of 3 PSCs would be
about $5.1 billion. That amount is 60 percent greater than the
Coast Guard's most recent publicly-released estimate for the
procurement cost of 3 heavy icebreakers, which was provided to
CBO by the Coast Guard in March 2024.
CBO's estimates are largely derived from a model that uses a ship's
weight to calculate its costs.

background

The Coast Guard currently has two operational polar icebreakers:
the Polar Star, a heavy polar icebreaker, and the Healy, a medium polar
icebreaker. The descriptors ``heavy'' and ``medium'' refer to the
thickness of the ice that the ships can break on a continuous basis at
3 knots, not the size or weight of the ships themselves.
The Polar Star is 48 years old; the Coast Guard keeps it operating
in part by scavenging parts from its nonoperational sister ship, the
Polar Sea. The Healy is 24 years old. No U.S. shipyard has built a
heavy or medium icebreaker since those ships entered service.
In 2013, the Coast Guard proposed a plan to replace its two
operational icebreakers with 6 new polar ice-breakers: 3 heavy polar
icebreakers and 3 medium polar icebreakers. The Coast Guard's most
recent analysis of its goals for the mix of ships in its fleet calls
for increasing the number of new polar icebreakers to a total of 8 or
9: 4 or 5 heavy polar icebreakers and 4 or 5 medium polar icebreakers.
The PSC is the Coast Guard's proposed new heavy polar icebreaker;
after delays in the design of the ship, the service expects that it
will soon approve the start of general construction. The new medium
icebreaker that the service plans to build at some point in the future
has been designated as the Arctic Security Cutter. The medium
icebreaker will have a shallower draft (the length from the waterline
to the bottom of the ship) and will therefore be able to conduct
patrols and visit ports in areas that are inaccessible to the deeper-
drafted heavy icebreaker.
The increase in the number of polar icebreakers desired by the
Coast Guard is driven by increased commercial activity and economic and
geopolitical competition in the Arctic. Given those developments, the
service believes that the year-round continuous presence of one polar
icebreaker in the East Arctic and another in the West Arctic, as well
as a half-time presence of another polar icebreaker in the Antarctic,
is necessary. The Coast Guard has stated that maintaining a presence of
2.5 heavy and medium icebreakers in the polar regions will require a
total of 8 to 9 ships when accounting for maintenance and rotating ship
patrols.
In April 2019, the Coast Guard awarded a fixed-price incentive
contract for the detail design and construction of the first PSC (the
lead ship) to VT Halter Marine, Inc., now Bollinger Mississippi
Shipyard.\1\ The Coast Guard is working with the Navy to manage the
program and acquire the ships.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Detail design in shipbuilding occurs after a preliminary or a
contract design that aims to meet the requirements of the authority
purchasing a ship (in this case, the Coast Guard) is established.
Detail design involves the development of all the drawings, documents,
and calculations that will determine the final internal layout and
configuration of the ship.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In February 2024, the Coast Guard notified the Congress that the
PSC lead ship would experience cost growth of more than 20 percent and
the ship's production would be delayed by more than a year. In the 5
years since the contract was awarded, development and design of the PSC
has progressed, but little work on building the first ship has been
completed. In that time, the Coast Guard's estimate of the ship's
lightship displacement--a key indicator of costs, described below--grew
by 40 percent, while its cost estimate for a three-ship program
increased by just 16 percent. The service hopes that the shipyard will
begin substantial construction on the lead ship early next year, with
an estimated delivery date in 2029. The Coast Guard also expects to
release a revised estimate of the cost of the three-ship PSC program
later this year.

cbo's analysis

CBO estimated the costs of the new PSCs in the same way it
estimates the costs of new naval ships.\2\ Specifically, CBO identified
ships acquired in the past that were similar to the PSC and calculated
the cost-to-weight ratio of the most analogous ship; the agency then
used that ratio to estimate the cost of the PSC.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ For an explanation of how CBO models the cost of new ships, as
well as a detailed example of that process applied to a particular
ship, see Congressional Budget Office, How CBO Estimates the Costs of
New Ships (April 2018), www.cbo.gov/publication/53785.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CBO found that the best analogue for the PSC was the Healy. Built
in the 1990's, the Healy, though a medium icebreaker, displaces about
16,000 tons of water when fully loaded (that is, when carrying crew,
stores, ammunition, and fuel and other liquids); it is larger than the
Polar Star, a heavy icebreaker built in the early 1970's that displaces
13,200 tons when fully loaded. The PSC would be significantly larger
than them both, with a full-load displacement of about 23,000 tons, and
would have improved capabilities compared with its predecessors.
CBO first estimated the cost per thousand tons of lightship (rather
than full-load) displacement of the PSC, using data on the ship
provided by the Coast Guard. (Lightship displacement is the weight of
the water a ship displaces without its crew, stores, ammunition, or
fuel or other liquids.) CBO then accounted for the reduction in average
overhead costs that occurs as a shipyard builds multiple ships of the
same type simultaneously and the efficiencies that shipyards gain as
they produce additional ships of a given type. CBO applied those
adjustments to the estimated cost of the first ship of the class to
estimate the costs for all subsequent PSCs. Finally, CBO adjusted its
estimates to reflect its expectation that the costs of labor and
materials would continue to grow at a rate that is 1 percentage point
faster in the naval shipbuilding industry than in the economy as a
whole, as they generally have for several decades.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Congressional Budget Office, The Shipbuilding Composite Index
and Its Rates of Change Compared With Economy-wide Inflation Rates
(April 2024), www.cbo.gov/publication/59026.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I hope you find this information helpful, and I am happy to answer
any questions you may have.
Eric J. Labs prepared this testimony, with guidance from David Mosher
and Edward G. Keating. In keeping with CBO's mandate to provide
objective, impartial analysis, this testimony makes no recommendations.
Jeffrey Kling and Robert Sunshine reviewed the testimony, Christine
Browne edited it, and R.L. Rebach prepared it for publication. The
testimony is available at www.cbo.gov/publication/60168.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Labs.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning, and I recognize myself for 5 minutes
of questioning.
I don't know if it was you, Mr. Labs, but somebody said
that the Coast Guard is hoping--hoping--to begin construction
later this year, but didn't they hope to have the first
icebreaker in operation this year?
Mr. Labs. Yes, Mr. Chairman, I did use the word ``hoping''.
It was the best term I think I could come up with under the
circumstances of the troubled history of this program. So
delays in the past are no guarantee that those delays are not
going to continue in the future.
Chairman Gimenez. Where are they, if anybody--anybody can
answer this, where are they on the design? How close are they
to beginning construction on the icebreaker?
Ms. Oakley. The most recent information that we have on
that is they are about 67 percent complete with their
functional design. GAO's best practices would say that you
should have 100 percent of your basic and functional design
complete by the time you begin construction, including systems
that run throughout the ship called distributive systems.
So the Coast Guard I know is hoping to make the case to
start construction by the end of the year and so 67 percent to
100 is quite a lot of work to happen over the remainder of the
year to hit that marker. Even at their own marker of 95
percent, which is different than ours, it is a significant
amount of work remaining.
Chairman Gimenez. You are saying that they are at 67
percent design completion----
Ms. Oakley. Mm-hm, yes.
Chairman Gimenez [continuing]. After 5 years?
Ms. Oakley. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez. That is completely--do you have any
estimate on the private sector? I come from Miami. Royal
Caribbean, Carnival, Norwegian, they are based out of Miami.
They design their ships in Miami and they do a really good job
designing ships on time, on budget. It is money, OK? For them
it is money. All right.
So do you have any estimate how long it takes for, say,
Norwegian or Royal to design one of their new ships? Just
design and I am not talking about construction, but do you have
any was on the private sector side of this?
Ms. Oakley. I don't have exact numbers but it is certainly
not 5 years, and it is certainly not the case that they
overpromise how quickly they are going to be able to do it
because it is money, right? These companies need to be able to
start booking trips on these ships.
Chairman Gimenez. Right.
Ms. Oakley. So our work looking at leading commercial
shipbuilders and buyers across the world has found that they
are able to predictably design and pump out ships by following
some of the best practices that we talk about like completing
their design, relying on existing designs, and limiting their
modifications of those designs to, you know, certain areas of
the ship that are most important for meeting their business
case.
There are a number of other practices that our work has
identified, but it is a completely different mindset and
completely different set of outcomes.
Chairman Gimenez. They also have, you know, really
impressive technology, computer-aided design. Do we have such
capability or are we still doing stuff, you know, with on a
board and you are drawing, you know, with pencil and eraser and
a ruler? How are we designing ships? Are we also using computer
design and do we use the latest in that technology in trying to
help us design our ships?
Ms. Oakley. I think we are a little further behind in the
U.S. shipbuilding industrial base companies themselves in the
types of tools and practices that they use for digitally
designing the ships, although they have made some progress. The
things that we have seen from companies is that those digital
tools and those digital designs allow them to understand the
impact of their changes and it allows them to understand their
progress and it allows multiple people, including decision
makers, to understand the progress of the ship in real time.
It is a big distinction, but it is a distinction that
enables them to have efficiency and effectiveness in their
design efforts.
Chairman Gimenez. Well, I am a landlubber so I know about
this stuff, OK? Do you think there is intellectual curiosity on
the part of not only the Coast Guard but our armed services in
looking at what the private sector is doing, how they design
their ships, how they procure their ships, and trying to learn
from them? Or do you think it is, no, we know better because,
you know, we are the Coast Guard, we are the Navy? We know how
to do this, and we don't really need the private folks to tell
us what to do or show us what to do.
Ms. Oakley. Yes, in my experience I can't comment as much
on the Coast Guard aside from recent statements by the
commandant, but the Secretary of the Navy is very focused on
taking what he can from these leading companies and applying it
to commercial shipbuilding.
I think there is, unfortunately, an attitude within the
Government that we have too many roadblocks to be able to do
what commercial companies do. We are the Government. We have
all these policies and regulations and they can't be overcome
without really critically assessing how we could apply these
practices and what we could take to be more efficient.
The other thing I will say really quickly is that some of
these practices require investment, right? Being able to set up
digital tools and infrastructures to be able to support this
will require enterprise-wide investment, both on the part of
the Navy, the Coast Guard, and the shipbuilders that we have
yet to really see supported and incentivized.
Chairman Gimenez. Well, my time is up and I am actually
over on my time, but I will be coming back for a second round
because I do have some follow-up questions for you. Thank you.
Now I recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Well, the DHS and Coast Guard has confronted a host of
challenges in its polar security cutter and offshore patrol
cutter programs. Some of these challenges were truly
unforeseen, such as the global pandemic causing unprecedented
supply chain disruptions.
Others were unfortunate but perhaps within the realm of
what can be reasonably expected to occur over the course of a
long-term acquisition program such as hurricane-causing
disruptions to the shipyard and challenges in finding a
sufficient work force.
Now, I ran small businesses for many, many years and, you
know, one of proper planning, cost control are things that is
just second nature for a small business because there is not
resources, funding available to do things so everything needs
to be planned. Everything needs to be, you know, down to the
last dollar everything needs to be planned.
Now, you know, Congress wants to, and committed to, you
know, providing the technology modernization the agencies need
is essential for our national security, but we also need to
have some assurance that that funding is utilized properly in
an efficient manner, you know.
The old saying, whatever happened to measure twice and cut
once, right? Whatever happened to that? Why is these delays
happening? Why are we redoing work? Why aren't we planning
everything right the first time so that we don't end up redoing
work and costing the taxpayer all this expenses? Any one of you
want to comment on that?
Ms. Oakley. So I think some people don't want the answer of
what a realistic business case could look like, right? When you
think about the risks that were present on both of these
programs from the very beginning, inexperienced shipbuilders'
lack of experience with designing polar icebreakers in the case
of that, bad business systems to be able to track progress and
understand outcomes. These were all huge risks that were
apparent at the beginning of the program that should have been
factored into what the Coast Guard thought it was going to take
in terms of time and funding to be able to execute them.
But there is obviously a pressure to fit within a budget,
right, and I think, unfortunately, that then leads to optimism
in those business cases. Pushing forward with an optimistic
business case has never in my experience worked out to get you
something any quicker or any cheaper. It usually ends up
costing probably what you thought it was going to cost and
taking probably what you thought and how long you probably
thought it was going to take.
It is just that it wasn't planned from the beginning to be
that. So in that old adage of if you want it bad you get it
bad, I think that that is what we are seeing in a lot of these
programs. It is not unique to the Coast Guard. Major
acquisitions across the Federal Government all fall victim to
this, and I think as decision makers within the agencies and
within Congress we need to press these agencies to come with
more realistic business cases so that we understand what we are
getting into once the money starts flowing and it is hard to
turn it off.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Thank you.
Anybody else? How do we assure Congress, the taxpayer, the
American people that we have the capability to change from
these practices to something moving from hope and optimism to
proper planning and, you know, competency? How can you assure
that? What would it take to go to a level of competency where
taxpayers, Congress will feel assured that the funds will be
used properly?
Mr. Labs. Actually, I don't know how to change the
incentives but I do know that the incentives in the bureaucracy
in the Navy, in the Coast Guard, and other departments do need
to change so that there is not this preference or prevalence
toward the optimism that Ms. Oakley talked about.
I share her perspective on that. I think there is a culture
of optimism that creeps into new shipbuilding programs and new
procurement programs in general for a variety of reasons that
may be perfectly innocent along the way. Lots of little
decisions get taken along the way that they don't compare to
sort-of what historical reality has been and as a result what
comes out the other end is way too optimistic.
Somehow we have to change the incentives so that we don't
necessarily go with the lowest bidder because the lowest bidder
might not be submitting a realistic cost estimate and they are
trying to get the program locked in. Once it is locked in, then
you have got a future where you are going to have to deal with
that one way or another.
But focusing on those incentives is one of the strategies
that I think that Congress should look at.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Oakley, Mr. O'Rourke, Mr. Labs, we are going to be
focused on the polar security cutter with my questioning here
because Bollinger Shipyards is a constituent in the State of
Louisiana. They have taken on the responsibility of completing
this vessel.
Shall we say it was quite a mess that they have inherited
and they are shouldering that burden, so we are going to dig
into the cost of this thing and how it was so outrageously
underestimated and what the design concerns have been
throughout the inception of this incredibly expensive program
that we are in the process of dealing with Congressionally.
What will the cost be?--and we need realistic estimates.
So we have the Government Accountability Office here, the
Congressional Research Service here, and the Congressional
Budget Office here for some, and I am very glad you are here
and I appreciate you being here. We should be able to get
answers here and specifically with regards to are we doing
everything we can to help Bollinger Shipyards complete this
program? It's an important program for the for the security of
the United States, the polar security cutter.
On the last page of the CBO report Mr. Labs has stated that
generally speaking for decades naval cost for labor and
materials runs higher than the commercial industry shipbuilder.
Is that correct?
Mr. Labs. The cost of labor and materials in naval
shipbuilding runs higher than inflation in the economy as a
whole, not commercial shipbuilding, but the economy as a whole.
Mr. Higgins. So without getting into the weeds of the
culture of the Pentagon regarding spending over there, we just
accept that for some reason the world's biggest shipbuilder has
greater impact from inflation, including in shipbuilding, than
the rest of the Nation's shipbuilding industry?
Mr. Labs. I am not sure I quite understand your question,
Congressman.
Mr. Higgins. OK. It is an assessment of your report----
Mr. Labs. Yes.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. Saying that it is more expensive
for the Navy to build a ship because of labor and materials----
Mr. Labs. Correct. Yes, sir.
Mr. Higgins [continuing]. OK, than the commercial industry,
but they are the world's largest shipbuilders so one would--you
know, a regular American would think that the world's largest
shipbuilder might have more efficient programs and systems.
Again, not to get into the weeds of Pentagon shipbuilding.
Ms. Oakley, on page 21 of the GAO report, stepping into
what was Halter Marine's project, it was their contract to
build the PSC, the polar security cutter, said that Halter
likely overestimated the extent to which you could leverage the
original design and underestimated the magnitude of design
changes.
You go on to speak of the complexity of the design work,
late design revisions, and when Bollinger took over the program
they had to, obviously, embed their own design experts into the
existing teams to try and work through these things. Is that
correct?
Ms. Oakley. Correct.
Mr. Higgins. So we had design changes since inception and
challenges that threaten this very important program.
Ms. Oakley. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. Somehow we just allowed that to move forward
and then Bollinger purchased Halter Marine. Now Bollinger has
that to fix, and we are going to help him.
So, Mr. O'Rourke, in the CRS report you state 5 primary
reasons for massive increases in the PSC program estimated
expense from the original estimates.
No. 1, the actual PSC design is larger than the
Government's original design of what they anticipated, about 35
percent. Obviously, if they are going to have a 35 percent
larger vessel, larger displacement is going to cost a lot more.
No. 2, the Navy has frequently underestimated lead ship
lost. The CBO average is 25 to 40 percent in a broad study
across 19 programs an average of 25 to 40 percent
underestimated cost at inception for Navy shipbuilding. Our
shipbuilders have to deal with this down the line. They are
being told by the Navy, well, you are over cost. You are over
cost when in reality historically the model seems to be that
the United States Navy underestimates costs.
No. 3, recent inflation in shipbuilding, you say, ``The
residual effects of inflationary pressures over the past few
years and work force challenges plus increased labor and supply
costs across the defense enterprise all drove costs associated
with our shipbuilding up roughly an additional 20 percent.''
No. 4, potential need for increases in workers' wages and
benefits. Shipyards and associated supplier firms face
challenges in recruiting and retaining new workers.
Finally, schedule delays which move to design. You state
that a principal cause of delay has been the time needed to
achieve design maturity, meaning to complete the detailed
design of the ship.
So we have issues in the way we are rolling out
shipbuilding in America and the polar security cutter is no
exception to those issues. But we are responsible to address
the larger issues because we cannot continue to pretend that
the original estimates for a shipbuilding project is going to
fall within the parameters that are presented to Congress for
funding.
So we have questions we are going to submit in writing to
Ms. Oakley, Mr. O'Rourke, and Mr. Labs, and we hope for a
timely response on those written questions that we will submit
to you. I thank you for being here. My time has expired and I
yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentlelady from American Samoa, Mrs.
Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. ``Talofa lava,'' good morning. I want to
thank Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member Thanedar for allowing
me to join the subcommittee today.
Thank you to the panel for appearing. My question is for
Ms. Oakley. Your statement emphasizes the importance of
maturing and finalizing a ship's design before the contractor
starts construction. This seems like common sense.
In your opinion, why has completing the design before
starting construction been so hard for the Coast Guard to do on
its major shipbuilding programs?
Ms. Oakley. I think it comes back to the incentives that
are there to continue to push forward with the program to meet
the unrealistic cost and schedule baselines that are set up. So
when you kind-of have an unexecutable program from the very
beginning you begin to make decisions that add risk. The
decision to move forward with construction without the design
being complete is certainly something that adds risk to a
program.
Again, this isn't something that is unique to the Coast
Guard but it is certainly something that we have seen across
many shipbuilding programs, this kind of focus on, well, we
have enough complete to move forward. Then design changes
happen and they reverberate through things that have already
been constructed, and that is where the real challenges lie.
So by completing 100 percent of the basic and functional
design in the systems that run throughout the ship, the design
of the systems that run throughout the ship, it reduces that
risk that there is going to be change and therefore then you
can reliably predict how quickly you are going to be able to
construct the ship.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mrs. Radewagen.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Guam, Mr.
Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member. I,
too, am saddened for the loss of our colleague, Rep. Payne, but
I am also grateful for all the work he has done for this
committee.
Mr. Chairman, I will be speaking on issues of such
importance for my district and the general safety and security
of the Pacific region. The U.S. Coast Guard serves a critical
role in the Indo-Pacific region, from preventing illegal,
unreported, and unregulated fishing, IUU, to countering the
Chinese Communist Party relying on influence in providing much-
needed aid during humanitarian missions to the Pacific
countries. The Coast Guard serves as our Pacific Swiss Army
knife.
The IUU fishing represents a critical threat to our
national security and the health of fisheries. The Coast Guard
leads law enforcement efforts to effectively counter these
threats and stop the blatant incursions of our sovereign
waters.
The existing fast response cutters also serve to prevent
illegal migration to Guam, particularly the Chinese nationals
that could very easily penetrate the island's defense and spy
as a spy for their home nation.
However, it is clear that the Coast Guard needs more
cutters in Guam to properly accomplish their stated mission in
the region. Captain Nicholas Simmons, the commander of the U.S.
Coast Guard force's Micronesian Sector Guam, has said that Guam
maritime search-and-rescue region is two-thirds the size of the
continental United States that they patrol with 3 ships and 300
people.
While we are grateful to hear the following that this year
the Coast Guard reauthorization of two more FRCs are on the
way, the region can and must be served by more than just 5
small vessels.
So my question No. 1, Mr. O'Rourke, is Guam has been called
the tip of the spear for the United States in the Indo-Pacific
region and for good reason. The people at the Republic of
China's maritime militia and distant water fishing operations
pressure our allies and threaten regional security. So how does
increasing the Coast Guard's capability, capacity in the region
directly respond to the threat that China poses?
Mr. O'Rourke. The Coast Guard has identified a need for
increasing its operations and presence in the Indo-Pacific
region to counter China and to serve other U.S. interests in
the region. You mentioned one of those, which is EEZ,
enforcement, fisheries enforcement both for U.S. EEZ waters and
those of the Pacific Island countries.
In connection with that, the Coast Guard has identified a
need, for among other things, 6 additional fast response
cutters to be assigned out into that region. Of those 6, 2 were
funded in last year's appropriation and another 2 are requested
for procurement in this year's appropriation.
The Coast Guard has also moved another older medium
endurance cutter out into the region and engages in a wide
range of not always well-reported or well-understood engagement
activities with many of the countries in that region.
All these things are directed at serving not just law
enforcement missions but also broader U.S. interests in
countering China and strengthening our relationships with the
countries in that region.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. O'Rourke.
In the little time here just a couple more questions for
you, please, sir? The FRCs are required to undergo maintenance
every 4 years. This requires making a long journey back to
Honolulu to dry dock and undergo repair.
In your opinion, would the Coast Guard and the Navy benefit
from a ship repair capacity on Guam and in the form of a dry
dock?
Mr. O'Rourke. That is possible, yes. It would depend on the
costs, but, yes, avoiding the longer transits back to the
continental United States could increase time on station if the
maintenance could be done locally rather than back in CONUS.
Mr. Moylan. Quickly just for my last question, this goes to
Ms. Oakley, what are the top 3 most important things DHS and
Coast Guard can do to improve the outcomes for their
shipbuilding programs and get the capabilities out to the
operators?
Ms. Oakley. First, I think DHS in its oversight role of the
Coast Guard can demand the Coast Guard to present better
business cases for its programs that are based on realistic
assessments of risk. That would include not only what you can
do from a requirements perspective, but also from a cost and
schedule perspective as well.
Second, I would say that the Coast Guard needs to begin to
look toward these commercial companies that I mentioned before
and identify how they could begin to incentivize their builders
that they work with in the broader industrial base to operate
more in that space, more how these commercial builders operate.
I think there that the Congress also plays a role, too.
There are demands and accountability that the Congress can ask
for from the Coast Guard and from DHS about the basis for its
programs and what the realistic assessment is of those programs
before they are approved such that, you know, once that funding
spigot is turned on it is not usually turned off pretty
quickly.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you.
I am going to start a second round. I do have some follow-
up questions, and I will start with myself and then I will
yield to the Ranking Member.
Ms. Oakley, it seems to me like when the Air Force is
procuring a new fighter or a new plane they put out the
requirements, the mission of that plane, what the performance
they expect out of that plane, and then they put those
requirements out and then companies will come back with their
design that then accomplishes that mission, correct?
It appears that the Navy and the Coast Guard don't do it
that way for ships anyway. Do they put out a, these are the
requirements of the ship. This is the size that we want to ship
to be, how many people are going to be on it. This is the
mission of the ship, how fast we want it to be.
What capability do we want and then put it out to, you
know, the shipbuilding industry and then they come back with a
design that says this is accomplished and then they evaluate
the designs and pick the winner. Do they do that or is it some
something different here?
Ms. Oakley. They do do that, yes. There is an effort there
at the beginning to kind-of put, here is what we want, can
anybody do it, out there, right? That is the----
Chairman Gimenez. You said beginning.
Ms. Oakley. Yes, at the beginning.
Chairman Gimenez. You said beginning to do that.
Ms. Oakley. No, no, no, no.
Chairman Gimenez. They are beginning to do that or they did
that already?
Ms. Oakley. They did do. They do do that, yes.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. So tell me how it is that 5 years
after they did that----
Ms. Oakley. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez [continuing]. And supposedly come back
with a design that fits all the capabilities and all that, they
still haven't started construction on this thing? Tell me how
that is possible.
Ms. Oakley. Yes. I think that the Coast Guard is the victim
of the atrophied industrial base. I know that I mentioned, you
know, things outside of their control. This is certainly one of
the things outside their control.
The number of shipyards in the United States that build
ships in general has completely declined since the 1990's and
in particular, as you mentioned----
Chairman Gimenez. Could I stop you there for a second?
Ms. Oakley. Mm-hm.
Chairman Gimenez. All right. So I went back to you have a
design, you have the capabilities, the specifications, how many
people, OK. Did they put that out and did somebody come back
with here is the design, here is the ship?
Ms. Oakley. Here is what we can do. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez. What we can do.
Ms. Oakley. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. That means that there was a
shipbuilder that said this is what we can do.
Ms. Oakley. Mm-hm.
Chairman Gimenez. So where is this industrial base thing
all about because you wouldn't have had somebody come back to
you and say, hey, we can build this ship but really can't build
a ship? Was it fantasy or what?
Ms. Oakley. It happens all the time, unfortunately, in
Government acquisitions where contractors come back and say
they can meet these requirements because they know, again, as I
have mentioned a few times, once the spigot turns on, once the
contract is let, it is unlikely to be canceled, right?
So when you think about, yes, we can do it, here is what we
can do, this is where it is incumbent on the Coast Guard and on
DHS to critically evaluate what it is that they are getting
from the contractor and how realistic it is that a contractor
that has never built a polar icebreaker before in an industrial
base that hasn't built a polar icebreaker in 50 years, how
likely it is going to be that they are going to meet these
costs and schedule goals and these targets for what the
capability is going to provide? That is----
Chairman Gimenez. Ms. Oakley, Ms. Oakley, I don't have a
problem with that. I do have a problem that not one rivet has
been put on anything on this. I don't know if they still use
rivets, I don't know, OK, or nobody has welded anything
together yet.
I could see you starting the program. I could see you
starting building a ship and then say, hey, wow, we are having
difficulty with this, this, and this, but we haven't even
started building this ship 5 years after somebody was awarded a
contract to deliver something they said they could deliver.
Ms. Oakley. Yes. For the polar security cutter they are
building prototype units so some things are being built right
now on the ship prototype blocks that they are using to learn
about the specialized welding techniques that they have to use
for the steel that is required for a polar icebreaker.
So there is some initial construction that is going on
right now. My question about that for the Coast Guard that I
would be interested in, if I were you, is how are they learning
from that and how are they incorporating that into their
construction plan going forward for how long and how much it is
going to take?
Chairman Gimenez. OK. This is not convincing me, OK,
because this is not like, gee, we are building a spaceship to
go to Saturn. Nobody has ever built one before, OK?
So we are building an icebreaker----
Ms. Oakley. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez [continuing]. Which a bunch of countries,
even friendly to us, build icebreakers, right?
Ms. Oakley. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez. They know the welding techniques and they
know all the steel that is necessary. Are we trying to reinvent
a wheel here that has already been invented all around the
world?
Ms. Oakley. It is true that, you know, many of our allies
around the world are building icebreakers and have built
icebreakers and are pretty effective at it. We did not take
that approach.
We are obviously, you know, needing to use a U.S. shipyard
to build these ships, and I think that that capability, since
we haven't done it in a long time, is needing to be built back
up. That is what I was getting at with the industrial base.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. My time has expired.
I now yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Just a quick question, I just want to understand the
procurement process. How were these contractors chosen? What is
the process? Is the procurement do the applications come from
all over the world or is this only domestic producers? What is
the whole process like?
Mr. O'Rourke. So, in general and for the PSC program there
was an operational requirement that the Coast Guard spent many
years defining. They put that out for bidding. It was an open
competition.
They received bids from at least three shipbuilders. All
the bidders were required to show what parent design they were
proposing to use as the basis for the new cutter, and the Coast
Guard evaluated the bids that it received, the three at least
that were reported publicly and chose the one that it thought
best.
That was Halter's design. Halter said their parent design
would be the German icebreaker Polarstern II, which was a new
polar research ship for Germany. Halter said that they went
through 6 or 7 design spirals to take the German design and
turn it into what they were presenting to the Coast Guard in
the bidding process.
The Coast Guard evaluated that proposal along with the
others that it received and chose Halter. So there was a
requirement that the Coast Guard actually spent many years to
define and make very specific. This was done at a time when the
polar security cutter wasn't getting a lot of funding so there
wasn't much else the Coast Guard could do except study the
requirements to a very fine degree.
Then they received the bids. They went with the one that
they thought was the best. It was the Halter design and what
turned out, apparently, is that the Halter design, even having
gone through the design spirals and after receiving the design
from Germany, turned out to need a lot more change than they
thought.
The volume of design work to then get to a mature design
turned out to be much greater than was anticipated and then
that was exacerbated by limits on the numbers of naval
architects and naval engineers that could be applied to working
that design task down. That is why things have proceeded so
slowly and gradually since then.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. Thank you.
Mrs. Radewagen or Mr. Moylan, do you want a follow-up? OK.
The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from American Samoa, Mrs.
Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So, Dr. Labs, your estimate that you present to us today
pins the total cost of the PSC program almost 60 percent higher
than the Coast Guard's current estimate.
You have a long record of assessing the Navy's shipbuilding
programs. Is it common that your estimates are that much higher
than the Navy's original estimate?
Mr. Labs. You are right, Congresswoman, I have been doing
this for a long time. Sometimes my estimates are that higher,
that much higher than the Navy's, sometimes even higher.
I recently put out an estimate on the Navy's medium landing
ship that has essentially doubled what the Navy's current
estimate is. Back in the 2000's they estimated a new destroyer
program at 50 percent higher than what the Navy was estimating.
It took 15 years, but the Navy has estimated the final cost of
that ship ultimately reached very close to what my initial
estimate was back in the mid-2000's.
So yes, there has been a range of numbers. It will vary
from ship program to ship program, but 60 percent is not
common, but it is not unheard-of.
Mrs. Radewagen. So, Dr. Labs, on average how does CBO
estimates usually compare with the Navy's original estimate for
a given program? It looks like you have partially answered
that. Is there a pattern?
Mr. Labs. Well, I think the pattern that I have observed
over the years is that CBO consistently has estimates that are
higher than the Navy's. The vehicle in which this is most often
done is through the annual shipbuilding analysis that CBO is
required to do by statute of the Navy's 30-year shipbuilding
plan.
I go through those programs one by one, ship program by
ship program. What you see from one year to the next is that I
will put out an estimate and one year's analysis and then a
couple years down the road the Navy will be changing their
estimates along the way so that those gaps get closer. I,
generally speaking, have not substantially overpriced a ship
yet that I am aware of, certainly not a lead ship program.
All too often what happens is that even though I have an
estimate that is a good deal higher than the Navy's, it is just
as frequently possible that I am still underestimating the cost
of that ship program. The PSC is one of those examples today
where even using the Navy's or the Coast Guard's own
information.
If you look, for example, at their first life-cycle cost
estimate analysis where they had a 13,000-ton lightship
displacement ship for, you know, about a little more than a
billion dollars, if you looked at that metric and then applied
that cost metric to the current design, you could come up with
an estimate that is higher than the CBO estimate is today.
So that is the way I would answer your question at this
point.
Mrs. Radewagen. Mr. O'Rourke, you also have spent
significant time in your career assessing Navy and Coast Guard
shipbuilding programs. What causes the Coast Guard's estimates
to come in so much lower than the actual cost?
Does the Coast Guard's track record in shipbuilding mirror
the Navy's in terms of programs coming under or over budget,
ships being delivered on time or late, and the overall programs
being managed well or poorly?
Mr. O'Rourke. To build on what Eric said and to get to the
question that you put to Eric, it has been my observation over
the years in observing the differences between the CBO's
estimates, Eric's estimates, and the Navy's that eventually the
answer is going to settle a lot more closer to Eric's than it
will to the Navy's. It may take some time, but you asked if
there was a pattern? In my observation that is the pattern. It
is going to be closer to what Eric says. It may take some time
to get there, but that has been the pattern.
Now, as for why you have services underestimating costs, I
would say that there are 3 reasons, and Ms. Oakley mentioned
one of them and Eric also commented on it, which is that at the
start of a program if there is a range of uncertainty about
what a ship might cost there is an incentive to set the number
at the lower end of the range so as to help get the program
started and established.
A second cause, I believe in looking at this over many
years, is that when people in the program offices bring
programs forward they are allowed to talk about how doing it
differently this time will save money in one regard or another,
a new shipbuilding process, the CAD/CAM technology that was
mentioned earlier, for example, or different manufacturing
techniques.
They can identify those and take credit for them and roll
them into the cost estimates. What they can't identify ahead of
time and roll into the cost estimate is what may go wrong
because they don't know what that is.
So they are allowed to fold in the stuff that can lower the
cost. They are not really at liberty to then put a wedge in for
stuff that will go wrong and, as a result, the estimate tends
to be biased toward the optimistic for that reason as well.
Eric gets around----
Chairman Gimenez. The gentlewoman's time has expired.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Guam, Mr.
Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. O'Rourke, speaking about numbers, this year's budget
for the Coast Guard was $1.5 billion. What would be a more
realistic number do you think that they need to adequately
fulfill their mission and, I am sorry, their acquisition needs?
Mr. O'Rourke. Right, what funding level in the Coast
Guard's procurement account would more adequately take care of
their needs? The Coast Guard itself testified to that several
years ago, and the figure they provided at that time was $2
billion to $2.5 billion. If you were to adjust that into
today's dollars that would be more like $2.5 billion to $3
billion a year.
A figure of $3 billion a year would be twice what the
request is this year.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The witnesses are dismissed and
the committee will stand in brief recess while the clerks
arranged for the second panel of witnesses.
[Recess.]
Chairman Gimenez. The committee will come to order. I am
pleased to welcome our second panel of witnesses.
I ask that the witnesses please rise and raise your right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you and please be
seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our second panel of
witnesses. Vice Admiral Paul Thomas serves as the U.S. Coast
Guard's deputy commandant for mission support. Mr. Randolph Tex
Alles, did I pronounce that right, Alles? Alles, serves as the
undersecretary for management for the Department of Homeland
Security. I thank each of our distinguished witnesses for being
here today.
I now recognize Vice Admiral Thomas for 5 minutes to
summarize his opening statements.

STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL PAUL F. THOMAS, DEPUTY
COMMANDANT FOR  MISSION  SUPPORT, UNITED STATES
COAST GUARD

Admiral Thomas. Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, distinguished Members of the subcommittee, my
written testimony has been provided and I request to have it
entered into the official record.
Chairman Gimenez. Without objection.
Admiral Thomas. On behalf of our commandant, I want to
first offer my deepest condolences to the family, friends, and
colleagues of Representative Payne. We are deeply appreciative
of his steadfast support of our Coast Guard and our Coast Guard
women and men.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak about the Coast
Guard's on-going activities to recapitalize the service's
assets and capabilities and efforts to meet increasing mission
demands across the Nation and around the world for our Coast
Guard.
Over the next 10 years to answer increased call for the
service's unique capabilities, the Coast Guard will field new
assets, expand our enduring presence in critical areas like the
Arctic and the Indo-Pacific, build new infrastructure, and grow
our work force to operate these assets.
To do so, the Coast Guard, under the guidance of the
Department of Homeland Security, is investing in a multi-
billion dollar portfolio of acquisition programs to meet the
Nation's needs of today and tomorrow. We are guided by a
comprehensive framework of acquisition policies informed by
statutory and regulatory requirements and leveraging the best
practices identified by GAO and others as we oversee our
acquisition programs.
To meet the growing needs for Coast Guard presence and to
protect the Nation's strategic objectives in the polar regions,
the Coast Guard and the U.S. Navy have established an
integrated program office to design and deliver a fleet of 3
polar security cutters. This arrangement leverages each
service's experience and expertise in large, complex vessel
acquisition programs.
The integrated program office has awarded a contract for
the detailed design and construction of the lead polar security
cutter. Detailed design activities are under way and the prime
contractor has begun limited activities to support early
production through a prototype fabrication assessment program.
Even with this innovative production process we know that
we cannot build these national assets alone. The defense
industrial base plays a critical role in supporting our
national security and economic prosperity.
We are not just investing in the polar security cutter
here. We are investing in national capability to build and
field large, complex vessels, the capability the Nation needs
to meet demands around the world.
However, we face large-scale economic and geopolitical
challenges to do so. While Americans have long prided ourselves
on our ability to do big and complex things, the world has
changed and we have work to do.
The defense industrial base underwent significant
consolidation over the last 2 decades in an attempt to reduce
costs and operate more efficiently. An unintended consequence
of this consolidation was the erosion of the defense industrial
base expertise and capacity to produce military vessels,
despite the demand signal for recapitalization and growth of
our fleets.
Additionally, much of the global expertise in ship design
has moved overseas, placing an even greater burden on our
domestic shipbuilders. Moreover, lagging investment in capital
infrastructure at our shipyards has eroded our Nation's ability
to produce the largest, most complex ships, such as the polar
security cutter.
Today's challenges go beyond the infrastructure investment
though. Equally concerning, America's defense industrial base
is encountering some of the same challenges our services are
with regard to recruiting and retaining a work force.
The increased demand for highly-trained welders,
pipefitters, and other trades, along with design engineers and
technical experts is just one example of how work force
challenges are contributing to delays and cost increases across
the Coast Guard shipbuilding portfolio.
With a concentration of shipyards supporting Coast Guard
and Navy programs on the Gulf Coast of our Nation, competition
between shipyards for labor amplifies the challenge.
I appreciate the continued bipartisan support of this
committee, and I look forward to continue to work with you on
advancing our recapitalization efforts. Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before you today and for all that you do
for the women and men of the United States Coast Guard. I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Vice Admiral Thomas follows:]

Prepared Statement of Vice Admiral Paul F. Thomas

May 7, 2024

introduction

Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. Thank you for your continued
oversight and strong support of the U.S. Coast Guard. I am honored to
appear before you today to update you on our on-going efforts to
recapitalize the Nation's legacy fleet of polar icebreakers. This work
is a part of a larger, comprehensive effort to deliver mission
capability across the Coast Guard's surface and aviation fleets;
Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Cyber, Intelligence,
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (C5ISR) systems; and shore
infrastructure.
Our Commandant speaks regularly about the need to adapt to the
ever-increasing pace of change. To keep up with the changing world
around us, we must provide our total workforce with modern assets,
systems, and infrastructure to support mission execution. In line with
this direction, the Service continues to invest in a multibillion-
dollar portfolio of acquisition programs established to identify and
deliver the right capabilities for the Service. At the same time, the
Coast Guard continues to prioritize investments in shore
infrastructure, where every mission begins and ends: the facilities,
piers, runways, and buildings that are as necessary for operations as
our ships, boats, aircraft, and C5ISR systems.
Indeed, recapitalization remains a top priority for the Commandant
and the Service, and today's efforts to invest in tomorrow's needs will
shape the Coast Guard and impact national security for decades. This
subcommittee's continued support has helped us make tremendous
progress, and it is critical that we continue to deliver assets to the
field that improve mission execution and provide the capabilities the
Nation needs. Simply put, we must act today to be prepared for
tomorrow.
Significant investment is needed to advance our Nation's interests
in the Arctic, and I embrace the trust Congress and the American people
have placed in the Coast Guard. The Service will continue to prioritize
actions that safeguard U.S. interests while promoting safe, secure, and
environmentally responsible maritime activity in the Arctic.

enduring mission needs in the polar regions

As 1 of only 8 Arctic Nations, the United States has both sovereign
rights and responsibilities to safeguard our interests in the Arctic.
Similarly, the United States has strong interests in the Antarctic
region. The Coast Guard has been the lead Federal agency in assuring
surface access to the Polar Regions since 1965, meeting the Nation's
most critical mission needs in the high latitudes.
In the Arctic, we are witnessing a dramatic transformation of the
physical, operational, and geostrategic environment. Climate change is
opening up new access to Arctic waters, and Arctic activity is
increasing and evolving at a rapid pace, from a surge in oil and gas
exploration a decade ago to growth in types and locations of vessel
transits, including an expansion of environmental tourism. Dynamic and
accelerated changes in the Arctic environment create new opportunities
and challenges.
In addition to the challenges posed by increased access, the Arctic
is a region of increasing strategic competition with the potential to
elevate geopolitical tensions. In the U.S. Arctic, the Coast Guard is
engaging more often with a growing number of strategic partners and
competitors. Among the competitors, the Service is observing an
increased presence by the People's Republic of China and the Russian
Federation. Both nations have declared the Arctic a strategic priority;
both have made significant investments in new or refurbished
capabilities; and both are attempting to exert direct or indirect
influence across the region using instruments of national power.
Likewise, the Coast Guard is a critical mission enabler in the
Antarctic region, supporting scientific and U.S. objectives in the
region by conducting the annual Operation Deep Freeze, which involves
breaking a navigable channel through miles of ice up to 21 feet thick
to allow fuel and supply ships to reach McMurdo Station, the U.S.
Antarctic Program's logistics hub and largest station.

delivering enhanced capability

Coast Guard polar icebreakers are the foundation of U.S.
operational presence and influence in the Polar Regions. These multi-
mission cutters provide assured, year-round access not only for Coast
Guard missions, but also in support of critical activities that protect
key U.S. interests in the high latitudes.
With the strong support of this subcommittee, we are moving forward
with the acquisition of the Nation's first new heavy polar icebreakers
in nearly 5 decades. The Polar Security Cutter (PSC) is one of the top
acquisition priorities for the Coast Guard. When fully operational,
PSCs will provide the global reach and icebreaking capability necessary
to project U.S. presence and influence, conduct Coast Guard missions in
the high latitudes, and advance our national interests in the Arctic
and Antarctic regions.
The Coast Guard has established an Integrated Program Office (IPO)
with the Navy to leverage each service's experience and expertise in
large, complex vessel acquisition programs. The roles and
responsibilities for each service are well-defined, and the acquisition
is following established processes and procedures under the Department
of Homeland Security's (DHS) acquisition framework.
The Coast Guard and Navy remain committed to attaining the
necessary design maturity prior to beginning production activities.
This approach ensures shipyard readiness and mitigates overall schedule
risk. Detail design activities are on-going, and long lead-time
material for the lead ship has been delivered to the shipyard. The IPO
has adopted an innovative and incremental approach to support early
production, Prototype Fabrication Assessment (PFA), which is based on
Navy best practices. By prioritizing and starting construction on up to
8 low-risk modules, PFA allows the shipbuilder to progressively build
workforce capability, test new processes and equipment, and reduce
production risk. Four modules are currently under construction. These
modules have achieved near-100 percent design maturity and present very
low risk of re-work. These modules, unlike work done under special
studies previously authorized, are part of the first PSC.
As the first heavy polar icebreaker to be constructed in the United
States in nearly 50 years, we recognize the challenges associated with
this effort, especially given the Defense Industrial Base's lack of
recent experience and available infrastructure to design and build such
a complex vessel. The Defense Industrial Base is a critical component
of the United States' economic prosperity and national security, and
the Coast Guard recognizes the strategic need to preserve national
shipbuilding capacity. Bollinger Mississippi Shipyard is one of few
U.S. shipyards with the capacity and capability to build and launch
large Government and commercial vessels, and we are committed to
working together to produce the PSC.
Earlier this year, the Coast Guard notified Congress that the PSC
program would exceed cost and schedule thresholds, in accordance with
statutory and policy requirements. The program is in the process of
reviewing cost and schedule projections provided by the PSC prime
contractor to formally establish new cost and schedule parameters in
the acquisition program baseline. This work is occurring in parallel
with on-going program activities to support delivery of the PSC fleet
as quickly as possible.
PSCs will provide the global reach and icebreaking capability
necessary to project U.S. influence, conduct Coast Guard missions in
the high latitudes, and advance our national interests in the Arctic
and Antarctic regions. Continued investment is key to meeting our
Nation's growing needs in these rapidly-evolving and dynamic areas of
responsibility.

addressing needs in the near-term

To maintain heavy polar icebreaking capability until the PSC class
is delivered, the Coast Guard established an effort to complete a
service life extension on Coast Guard Cutter Polar Star, the Nation's
only operational heavy polar icebreaker. The cutter recently began the
fourth of 5 planned annual work periods to enable continued operation
of the aging cutter and availability for the annual breakout of
national facilities in Antarctica's McMurdo Sound and other missions in
the high latitudes.
Likewise, the Service has initiated a service life extension
program for Coast Guard Cutter Healy, the Service's only operational
medium polar icebreaker, which was commissioned in 1999. The 5-year
phased production builds upon the lessons learned from Polar Star's
service life extension and is planned to be completed between 2026 and
2030. When complete, this effort will recapitalize a number of major
systems while addressing significant operational degraders to maintain
the Coast Guard's required heavy icebreaking capability.
In addition to the on-going maintenance and service life-extending
work in the Service's current fleet and with the subcommittee's
support, the Coast Guard received funding in the fiscal year 2024
Homeland Security appropriation to procure a commercially-available
polar icebreaker. The purchase of a commercially-available polar
icebreaker is an effective strategy to increase operational presence in
the near term and add long-term national capacity in the Arctic. Under
the authority granted by the Don Young Coast Guard Authorization Act of
Fiscal Year 2022, the Coast Guard intends to acquire a domestically-
produced commercially-available polar icebreaker through a streamlined
acquisition process that aligns with DHS and Coast Guard policy
requirements. Initial activities will be directed at achieving initial
operational capability, followed by a series of phased modifications to
achieve full operational capability between annual Arctic operations.

conclusion

The physical, operational, and geopolitical environment in the high
latitudes continues to change rapidly, driving demand for Coast Guard
presence, influence, and missions. The Coast Guard has served in these
regions for more than 150 years and is central to a U.S. whole-of-
Government approach to ensuring national interests in the Polar Regions
are protected. The continued support of the administration and Congress
for a modernized and capable polar fleet and increased Coast Guard
capacity and capabilities in the high latitudes will fortify the
Nation's position at this critical juncture.
Since 1790, the Coast Guard has safeguarded our Nation's maritime
interests and natural resources on our rivers, in our ports, on the
high seas, and around the world. Each day, the Coast Guard carries out
its missions to protect lives, protect the environment, secure our
maritime borders, and facilitate commerce. Our mission support and
acquisition enterprises are, likewise, working each day to plan and
deliver the assets and capabilities needed to support these critical
missions.
The cutters, aircraft, boats, C5ISR systems, and shoreside
infrastructure we acquire today will provide vital capability for
decades to come. We are committed to maximizing the Nation's return on
these important investments. Thank you for the opportunity to testify
before you today and for all you do for the women and men of the Coast
Guard. I look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Vice Admiral Thomas.
Now I recognize Mr. Alles for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF RANDOLPH D. ``TEX'' ALLES, DEPUTY UNDER
SECRETARY,  MANAGEMENT,  U.S. DEPARTMENT  OF  HOME-
LAND SECURITY

Mr. Alles. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee, it is a privilege to
appear before you today to discuss how the management director
of the Department supports recapitalization of the Coast Guard
fleet.
I would also like to express my condolences to the
committee for the loss of Mr. Payne, a tragic, tragic
situation.
As noted, I serve as the deputy under secretary for
management and I have since July 2019. In that capacity I
oversee the Department-wide management and oversight of all
mission support functions, such as information technology,
budget, and financial management procurement, acquisition,
human capital, security, and asset management.
In my role as the deputy under secretary of management I am
also the chief acquisition officer for the Department. The
management director works collaboratively with the Coast Guard
overseeing the acquisition of maritime and aviation fleets
needed by our front-line personnel to protect the homeland.
As chief acquisition officer of the Department, I recognize
the critical role effective acquisition management plays in
meeting mission needs.
Being proactive in security efforts across the Department's
various mission sets requires the acquisition community to work
hard to streamline efforts without sacrificing our ability to
execute the Department's missions.
DHS acquisition programs vary in size, scope, and cost.
Collectively, the Department's acquisition program portfolio
works together to provide security for our Nation's borders
both land and maritime.
As the commandant of the Coast Guard has previously
conveyed, we have never experienced a greater demand for Coast
Guard services, and we anticipate this demand to grow in the
future. At the Department we are focused on facilitating the
delivery of capabilities to meet these demands and confront the
dynamic and complex challenges faced by Coast Guard personnel.
We need new and more cable cutters, aircraft, boats, and
command-and-control and communication systems that are required
to support mission execution domestically in some of the most
challenging environments around the world, including the polar
regions, the Indo-Pacific region, and the Persian Gulf.
Recapitalization of the Coast Guard is an important
priority of the Department, and we were focused on effective
program oversight and governance to ensure the investment in
our critical assets has the greatest opportunity to meet the
mission needs at an affordable cost and in a timely manner to
support our personnel.
These acquisitions require executable strategies that
consider the need to plan and scope acquisitions before work
begins, to oversee the design and production processes, and
prepare future crews and the maintenance community for the
delivery of future operational capabilities.
By teaming with component acquisition executives, program
managers, and other acquisition professionals, the Department's
goals to enhance these acquisition activities which provide the
appropriate number of checks and balances to promote better
outcomes and achieving program success.
Among the active Coast Guard shipbuilding the average DHS
is currently governing 6 of these programs as major
acquisitions, either as Level 1 programs, meaning that they
exceed $1 billion, or Level 2 programs with a life-cycle cost
exceeding $300 million.
These programs are also in various stages of the
Department's acquisition life-cycle framework from established
programs at the tail end of production, such as our national
security cutters and fast response cutters to more recent
programs that are in the earlier phase of acquisition, such as
the polar security cutter and the waterway commerce cutters.
The Coast Guard's new shipbuilding programs include on-
going construction at 5 private shipyards across the United
States with the preponderance of the activities for building
the major cutters centered in the Gulf Coast region of
Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida.
We recognize that the shipbuilding industry as a whole is
facing pressure from diminished industrial base capacity. The
main issue is limiting private shipbuilders and the long-term
lies in the lack of personnel, rising costs of materials, and
fluctuating acquisition priorities.
Along with the rest of the industry, our Coast Guard
programs are also seeing challenges caused by these issues. As
legacy cutters continue to age, maintaining the older ships
will be more of a challenge due to cost and obsolescence. With
that in mind, we continually strive to improve our acquisition
process with a focus on meeting mission performance at an
affordable cost within the required schedule.
Thank you again for your attention to the important mission
and for the opportunity to discuss the management directorate's
governance of critical Coast Guard shipbuilding efforts. I look
forward to answering your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Alles follows:]

Prepared Statement of Randolph D. ``Tex'' Alles

May 7, 2024

introduction

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee: It is a privilege to appear before you
today to represent the Department of Homeland Security (DHS or the
Department) and its Management Directorate.
My name is Randolph ``Tex'' Alles, and I have served as the Deputy
Under Secretary for Management (DUSM) since July 2019. In my capacity
as DUSM, I oversee Department-wide management and oversight for all
mission support functions, such as Information Technology, budget and
financial management, procurement, acquisition, human capital,
security, and asset management. In addition to my role as DUSM, I serve
as the chief acquisition officer for the Department.
I am pleased to be joined today by my colleague from the United
States Coast Guard (USCG), Vice Admiral Paul Thomas, deputy commandant
for mission support. The Management Directorate works collaboratively
with the USCG to oversee the acquisition of maritime and aviation
fleets needed by our front-line employees to protect our homeland.
As chief acquisition officer for the Department, I recognize the
critical role effective acquisition management plays in meeting mission
needs. Being proactive in security efforts across the Department's
various mission sets requires the acquisition community to work hard to
streamline efforts without sacrificing our ability to execute the
Department's missions. DHS's acquisition programs vary in size, scope,
and cost. Collectively, the Department's acquisition program portfolio
works together to provide security for our Nation's borders, both land
and maritime.
As the Commandant of the USCG has previously conveyed, we have
never experienced a greater demand for USCG services, and we anticipate
this demand to grow in the future. At the Department, we are focused on
facilitating the delivery of capabilities to meet these demands and
confront the dynamic and complex challenges faced by USCG personnel.
New and more capable cutters; aircraft; boats; and command, control,
and communications systems are required to support mission execution
domestically and in some of the most challenging environments around
the world, including the Polar Regions, Indo-Pacific region, and
Persian Gulf.
Recapitalization of the USCG is an important priority of the
Department, and we are focused on providing effective program oversight
and governance to ensure that investment in our critical assets has the
greatest opportunity to meet the mission needs, at an affordable cost,
and in a timely manner to support our personnel.

the homeland security acquisition enterprise

As the chief acquisition officer of the Department, I am
responsible for the management, administration, and oversight of the
Department's acquisition programs and acquisition management systems. I
am proud to lead a talented team of professionals that facilitate the
acquisition of necessary capital assets, infrastructure, and systems
across all of the Department's operational components. These
acquisitions require executable strategies that consider the need to
plan and scope acquisitions before work begins; to oversee the design
and production processes; and to prepare future crews and the
maintenance community for the delivery and future operation of new
capabilities. By teaming with the component acquisition executives,
program managers, and other acquisition professionals, the Department's
goal is to enhance these acquisition activities, while providing the
appropriate number of checks and balances to promote better outcomes in
achieving program success.

u.s. coast guard shipbuilding

Among the active USCG shipbuilding efforts, DHS is currently
governing 6 of these programs as major acquisitions, either as Level 1
programs with life-cycle costs exceeding $1 billion or Level 2 programs
with life-cycle costs exceeding $300 million. These programs are in
various stages of the Department's Acquisition Lifecycle Framework,
from established programs at the tail end of production, such as our
National Security Cutters (NSC) and Fast Response Cutters (FRC), to
more recent programs in an earlier phase of the acquisition life cycle,
such as the Polar Security Cutters (PSC) and Waterway Commerce Cutters
(WCC).
Of the USCG's white-hull cutter fleet, the NSC is the largest and
most technologically sophisticated. The USCG accepted delivery of the
10th NSC on October 13, 2023, and construction of the 11th and final
NSC is currently under way in Pascagoula, Mississippi. We also continue
to deliver FRCs into the fleet. Just this March, USCG accepted delivery
of the 56th of the planned 65 FRCs. The fiscal year 2024 appropriations
provided funding for another 2 FRCs which we plan to put under contract
soon.
The Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) remains a top acquisition priority
for the Department and is vital to recapitalizing the capability
provided by our legacy fleet of 210-foot and 270-foot Medium Endurance
Cutters (MEC). The program is progressing, with production of OPCs 1-4
under way with the Stage 1 contractor. Additionally, we are continuing
with design activities on the Stage 2 contract, which will lead to the
future production of up to 11 additional OPCs. As a bridging strategy
to maintain mission capabilities until the OPCs are delivered, USCG has
undertaken a service life extension program that will address key
systems and component obsolescence on board the legacy MECs, many of
which already exceed 50 years in service.
We are also investing in the acquisition of the Nation's first new
heavy polar icebreakers in over 4 decades. PSC design activities are
on-going, and initial long lead-time material has been delivered to the
shipyard. Recognizing the critical need for these assets, the USCG is
working closely with the prime contractor to mitigate schedule risks
and ensure production readiness. When fully operational, PSCs will
provide the global reach and icebreaking capability necessary to
project U.S. sovereignty and influence, conduct missions in the high
latitudes, and advance our national interests in the Arctic and
Antarctic regions. The USCG Cutter POLAR STAR is the Nation's only
remaining heavy polar icebreaker. She was commissioned in 1976, along
with her sister ship, POLAR SEA. The PSC will be considerably larger at
22,900 tons displacement compared to the 13,200-ton displacement of the
previous polar icebreakers, to meet modern habitability and
environmental standards and provide additional multi-mission spaces.
On October 5, 2022, the USCG awarded the WCC contract for the
design and future production of the river buoy tender and inland
construction tender variants. The contract includes options for
production of up to 27 cutters, and a separate effort is planned to
deliver 3 inland buoy tenders to achieve a total fleet of 30 WCCs. The
prime contractor began design activities earlier last year. Investment
in our inland fleet is critical to the continued operation of the
Nation's Marine Transportation System, which accounts for more than $4
trillion in annual economic activity. The legacy fleet is approaching
obsolescence, and maintenance costs are rising. Continued progress
toward delivering these new assets and replacing the legacy fleet,
which has an average age of over 55 years, is critical to maintaining
the USCG's capability to execute this important mission.

shipbuilding challenges

The USCG's new shipbuilding programs include on-going construction
at 5 private shipyards across the United States, with a preponderance
of the activities for building the major cutters centered in the Gulf
Coast region of Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida. We
recognize that the U.S. shipbuilding industry as a whole is facing
pressure from a diminished industrial base capacity. The main issues
limiting private shipbuilders in the long term lies in lack of
personnel, rising costs of materials, and fluctuating acquisition
priorities. Along with the rest of the industry, our USCG programs are
also seeing challenges caused by these issues. Two of our highest-
priority programs--the OPC and PSC--have faced, and are continuing to
face, significant schedule delays and cost increases.
While it is common to see cost growth on first-in-class ships
across the industry, the OPC program experienced unprecedented events
early in the design process. The catastrophic effects of Hurricane
Michael in 2018 as well as COVID-19-era inflation have resulted in the
acquisition cost estimate increasing significantly since the initial
estimate in 2012. We have increased Department-level oversight of the
OPC Program, and I am briefed by the program manager regularly to stay
up-to-date on the program status. The USCG is working closely with the
OPC shipbuilders to establish an updated baseline and schedule to
determine what it will realistically take to get the first and follow-
on OPCs in operation.
The PSC program is now years behind the original schedule, without
having attained the level of maturity we require prior to authorizing
the start of construction. In addition to the general lack of U.S.
experience designing and building polar icebreakers, the prime
contractor suffered from organizational instability and has undergone
managerial restructuring following its acquisition by a competitor
shipyard in 2022. With the new management in place, we are now
expecting to complete the Critical Design Review later this year,
allowing us to start construction soon thereafter. In addition to
enhancing our oversight and analysis of design metrics, in May 2022, I
approved the USCG's plan to begin construction on up to 8 prototype
units of the cutter that will eventually be incorporated into the
construction of the first icebreaker. These prototype units are
intended to allow the yard to exercise their fabrication processes in a
controlled environment and are expected to reduce future production and
schedule risk. Four of the 8 prototype units are now under construction
and are, as we hoped, yielding valuable lessons for the craft workers
to incorporate into the future full production. Additionally, the USCG
received $125 million in fiscal year 2024 appropriations for the
acquisition of a commercially-available icebreaker to increase its
near-term presence in the Arctic. We are streamlining the processes to
acquire this capability with the goal of providing some degree of
operational presence in the Arctic within the next 24 months.

conclusion

Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, thank you again for your attention to this
important mission and for the opportunity to discuss the Management
Directorate's governance of critical USCG shipbuilding efforts. As the
legacy cutters continue to age, maintaining the older ships will be
more of a challenge due to cost and obsolescence. With that in mind, we
continually strive to improve our acquisition process with a focus on
meeting mission performance, at an affordable cost, and within the
required schedule. I look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Alles.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning, and I recognize myself for my 5
minutes of questioning.
Vice Admiral, where does the buck stop? We have got a
cutter, I mean, I am sorry. We have an icebreaker that we put
out a contract for 5 years ago. We have not even started
construction on it, so where does the buck stop? Whose fault is
that and what have we done to resolve this issue?
Admiral Thomas. Congressman, I appreciate your frustration
because I share it. You know, in the case of the polar
icebreaker you had a conversation earlier in the last panel
about how it really works.
You know, the Coast Guard does not design the ship. We let
a contract that includes the detailed design of that ship. Our
first contractor early on, I believe, decided they were going
to try to get out of this deal and they essentially stopped
designing the ship. They made very, very little progress. They
talked about their subcontractor not delivering, et cetera.
Now that we have a new prime contractor we are making very
good progress on that detail design. We have taken some action
to restructure the contract to put additional resources after
it, more engineers for example.
There were a lot of roadblocks, but right now the buck
stops with me, and I am focused on getting to a detail design
and construction because our Nation needs the ship and our
Nation needs the shipyard. That is our focus.
Chairman Gimenez. Give me a time. When will you be done
with design? When will construction stop?
Admiral Thomas. We----
Chairman Gimenez. I am going to hold you to it, so what is
the time?
Admiral Thomas. We intend to begin construction late this
year.
Chairman Gimenez. What is late this year?
Admiral Thomas. Probably in December. We are currently
building prototype modules that will become part of the ship.
We will not be at the level of design maturity that the GAO
would like to see when we do that.
Chairman Gimenez. In December I will call you back, and I--
--
Admiral Thomas. We are----
Chairman Gimenez [continuing]. And I will call you back in
December, OK? We are going to see where we are with this
icebreaker.
The offshore patrol cutter, I suppose we are having trouble
with that. How many of these are we procuring?
Admiral Thomas. Well, we currently have a program of record
of 25 ships. We have awarded the Stage 1 contract for hulls 1
through 4 and those are being built at Eastern Shipbuilding,
Ship Group. Then we have a contract for----
Chairman Gimenez. For hulls 1 through 4 are they started
construction?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir. All 3 are under construction and
hull 1 is in the water. She will be delivered in May of next
year.
Chairman Gimenez. When was the original contract given?
Admiral Thomas. That ship will be--well, the----
Chairman Gimenez. The original contract, when was the
original contract?
Admiral Thomas. The original contract delivery date was in
May 2024. I don't remember. I have got that here, but the
ship----
Chairman Gimenez. Is that for the first ship, May 2024?
Admiral Thomas. The ship will be late, just like most of
the ships----
Chairman Gimenez. Is the program late?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, sir. That program is behind schedule
and over target budget, and we are working to adjust that.
Chairman Gimenez. For both the Navy and the Coast Guard I
am hearing the same the same thing, that the industrial base,
that we have lack of skilled workers in the industrial base. Is
that your assessment, welders, et cetera, the things that we
actually need to build to a ship, the people that we actually
need to build the ships? Are we short of those kind of skill
sets here in the United States?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, we are, sir, and that is one of the
reasons why the estimates vary so wildly because----
Chairman Gimenez. Oh, now hold on. That is just a yes or no
answer to that. OK. So what is the Coast Guard, what is the
Navy doing about that?
Admiral Thomas. The Navy has some authorities to actually
do something about that, including spending money to train
people in key trades that they need particularly for building
submarines. The Coast Guard doesn't have those authorities
although we do work closely with the Navy so that they
understand our needs as well. They target those monies to the
trades that we need as well.
Chairman Gimenez. Do you think you need that authority?
Admiral Thomas. As I said, right now we work very closely
with the Navy and we leverage their authority so I think we are
OK. If we were to have the authority then we would need the
same appropriations that the Navy has in order to have the
money to actually----
Chairman Gimenez. Do those skill sets exist around the
world?
Admiral Thomas. There are labor challenges in shipbuilding
around the world.
Chairman Gimenez. Around the world. OK.
Admiral Thomas. At least in the Western world.
Chairman Gimenez. Fair enough. OK. Vice Admiral, I will be
bringing you back in December. I still will be here in
December, OK? I am going to probably be here after that, too.
Admiral Thomas. OK.
Chairman Gimenez. But in December for sure I will be here
and so we will be having this conversation again about the
cutter and then also these programs that are falling behind.
I just feel it is completely inexcusable that a contract
was let 5 years ago and we haven't even started construction on
this, especially when supposedly the design was built, was
already--it is here is the design, here is the ship. Here we go
and then nothing. If somebody was giving you trouble and
delaying you, we should have known about that.
So with that, my time is expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Several questions here. I wonder if we have enough of an
expertise in-house, shipbuilding expertise, expertise to
oversee the shipbuilder's expertise to evaluate their
submissions, expertise to monitor it. Do we have enough in-
house expertise? If not, what can you do to build such an
expertise so we can effectively monitor these acquisitions and
oversight?
Admiral Thomas. Well, one of the reasons that we have an
integrated project office with the Navy is so that we can
leverage their expertise as well as the Coast Guard expertise,
particularly given the complexity of the polar security cutter
in this case. You know, our expertise is typically around
smaller vessels.
As a Nation we need to make sure we don't lose this
expertise. We need to support STEM programs because we are not
building the engineers as a Nation that are near-peer
competitors are building, and so that is a concern across
shipbuilding across the maritime or the military industrial
base. It is a real concern. I appreciate you noticing that.
Mr. Thanedar. Well, not only domestically United States but
world-wide, where can we go get this expertise if we need to?
Admiral Thomas. Well, I mean, in the case of polar security
cutter, you know, I think the Chairman mentioned earlier that,
you know, there is real expertise in icebreakers in places like
Finland. That is where we went when we first put out the
proposal and we had to choose an indicative design.
We said we want something like this. They came back and we
didn't provide them a design. We said here are the
requirements. Here is one that it is pretty close. They came
back and said we want to use this design over here and then,
you know, by the way, the ship that they chose for the parent
design has actually never been constructed and that is why the
detail design has taken so long.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Now, Admiral Thomas, I represent
much of Detroit, Michigan. My constituents depend upon maritime
commerce and tourism on the Great Lakes. In fact, 55 percent of
the Great Lakes regional economy is dependent on key shipping
channels according to Coast Guard.
We have heard a lot about polar security cutter program,
how the Coast Guard struggles to respond to mission needs in
the Arctic, but is the same true on the Great Lakes where Coast
Guard rely on a fleet of aging vessels?
What mix of small, medium, and heavy icebreakers does the
Coast Guard believe it will need in the Great Lakes? What can
Congress do to support the Coast Guard's Great Lakes
icebreaking effort and acquisitions?
Admiral Thomas. Well, thank you for the question. The Coast
Guard is committed to recapitalizing our system of icebreakers
on the Great Lakes because it takes a system. It takes the
small, medium, and the large in order to, you know, get those
ships all the way to the pier.
We believe that we need about 2 heavies, and in this case a
heavy would be equivalent to the Mackinaw, which is currently
there, and about 11 of what is currently a 140-foot, you know,
tug and about 8 of the smaller ones that can work closer to the
piers.
We have, you know, we have gotten some support from
Congress and particularly to build another Great Lakes heavy
icebreaker. We got enough money in the budget last year to
begin the acquire phase of the acquisition program, analyze and
acquire.
We are going to need another $20 million to finish that
phase, but we have started.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. Thank you so much, Admiral.
I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The Ranking Member yields back.
I recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Thomas, Mr. Alles, thank you for being here today.
Admiral Thomas, you have got 39 years in the rearview mirror in
your uniform, sir. Thank you for your service. My understanding
is that you will be retiring soon, and we wish you the best.
I am an old Army veteran NCO and a couple of my district
staff members are prior Army combat veteran, another NCO and a
lieutenant colonel, so we were predisposed to love Army in my
office and but in my district in south Louisiana we have so
much interaction with the Coast Guard.
The last 8 years have been a real awakening. The old Army
veterans in my office said just how squared away the Coast
Guard is. So if you have been there for 39 years, my brother,
then you are partly responsible for just how impressive the
United States Coast Guard is, so thank you for that service.
Regarding these vessels and getting them finished and
built, figuring out what is wrong, we are going to do that. We
are going to work together.
Congress is going to work with the Coast Guard and the
Navy. We are going to identify what the problems have been. We
are going to iron them out.
You have an excellent shipbuilder on the polar security
cutter now in Bollinger Shipyards so we are going to fix these
issues. I thank you for your service, sir.
Admiral, clearly in the last panel we identified some
challenges that we must overcome with two major vessel
programs, including the polar security cutter. Can you please
describe the relationship between the Navy, the Department of
Defense, and the Coast Guard as it pertains to the polar
security cutter? Like, who is in charge? Which Government
entity has the ultimate decision-making authority when it comes
to interacting with the shipbuilder? Can you clear that up for
America?
Admiral Thomas. Well, first, Congressman, thank you. It has
been a privilege to serve for 39 years, and I am retiring in
July so I just signed my relief up to meet the Chairman in
December.
But, you know, the Coast Guard and the Navy work very, very
closely on the polar security cutter. The Coast Guard really is
driving the, you know, the requirements and the design review,
and we have a joint office with the Navy down at the shipyard.
The Navy helps us. It is a Navy contract, not a Coast Guard
contract, so that is really where the Navy plays the biggest
role is in contract modifications. But we tell them what we
would like to see and they have been very helpful in that
regard.
Mr. Higgins. So contract modification, you said that is the
major role that the Navy plays? That the Coast Guard is driving
what the needs are for the design but the Navy is responsible
for actual contract modification with the shipbuilder. Is that
accurate?
Admiral Thomas. We work together on that, so the Coast
Guard is driving the train with regard to what it is going to
take to get this ship and that includes regular meetings with
the ownership of that yard----
Mr. Higgins. Yes, sir.
Admiral Thomas [continuing]. Understanding where they are
and then understanding how the contract must be modified so
that we get both the ship and a shipyard. Then we go and we
work with the Navy to make those necessary modifications.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Alles, do you have anything to add to that
question regarding the relationship between the Coast Guard and
the Navy and the shipbuilder?
Mr. Alles. Just as the Admiral said, sir, the contract is
Navy, but they respond to the requirements the Coast Guard
gives them. The money at this point purchasing the cutter is
DHS money through DHS appropriations.
The initial money for the contract was shipbuilding
construction Navy, which is why the contract went to them
originally. Now it is DHS money. So they are very responsive,
as the Admiral said.
Mr. Higgins. OK. Well, we are going to work closely with
the Coast Guard, the Navy, and the shipbuilder to help these
projects move forward and get back on track.
Admiral, closing question here regarding unmanned systems,
the strategic plan. Last year the Coast Guard released a report
highlighting that the use of unmanned systems is critical for
mission readiness.
Has the Coast Guard thought about incorporating autonomous
vessels into its fleet? What is the status of that?
Admiral Thomas. Thank you, Congressman. You mentioned we
have a strategy for incorporation of unmanned systems. Right
now our focus really is on aerial systems. We have experimented
with unmannered autonomous surface vessels as well, but we are
working to develop those CONOPS and definitely in the future we
will need those systems.
Mr. Higgins. We will talk more about that. My time has
expired. Thank you.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentlemen's time has expired.
Admiral, I also want to thank you for your service. Please
let your successor know, he or she, that they will be back here
in December to talk about the polar icebreaker. Thank you.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlewoman from American
Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I represent American Samoa in the South Pacific. Our
largest industry is fishing, which is at threat from Chinese
IUU fishing.
Coast Guard presence in American Samoa is the best
deterrence from Chinese incursions into our EEZ. Every single
Pacific Island leader has asked for 2 things in the Pacific
Coast Guard and the Peace Corps. Today we are discussing the
fleet of the future, one that can operate in the South Pacific.
American Samoa recently just hosted the commandant of the
Coast Guard, Admiral Fagan, in February and American Samoa
stands ready to host a larger permanent presence of the Coast
Guard.
With the success of the Harriet Lane's tour of the Indo-
Pacific, I would like to focus on OPC. My first question is for
Admiral Thomas. With regard to its aging fleet, what are the
operational consequences the Coast Guard is currently and
anticipates facing due to delays in the OPC and PSC programs?
What operational and financial tradeoffs are the Coast Guard
having to make as a result?
Admiral Thomas. Thank you for that question, Congresswoman.
I know the commandant told me she really enjoyed her visit with
you there.
Yes. The delays in our offshore patrol cutter have caused
us to undertake a service life extension program for our 270-
foot Harriet Lane-type ships, and then we are doing that in
order to maintain that capability and that capacity until we
can get the offshore patrol cutter into full production, and
that, you know, eventually that would be 2 ships per year.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. For my next question, and both
you and Mr. Alles can answer, what lessons learned from OPC
stage 1 has the Coast Guard collected and will proactively
apply to mitigate design and construction delays on stage 2?
Mr. Alles. I think I would just comment the stage 2 program
is progressing quite well at this point. A design is coming
along well. They have done their initial critical design review
so we are very encouraged by what we are seeing from the
offshore contractor there.
Lessons learned from OPC 1 have clearly been incorporated
into that effort and we are seeing good progress.
Mrs. Radewagen. Admiral Thomas.
Admiral Thomas. No, I agree with everything Mr. Alles said.
The primary contractor for stage 2 is progressing very, very
well on the design, and we expect to begin production on that
ship this year as well.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you. As a follow-up, what are the
biggest risks to OPC's stage 2? What is the Coast Guard doing
to mitigate them? What off ramps does the Coast Guard have in
place to descope requirements if needed to get ships out faster
and is this enough?
Admiral Thomas. I would say the biggest risk to stage 2 is
the availability of labor. Again, because that shipyard is on
the Gulf Coast with all the other ship routes that are doing a
lot of work for both the Navy and the Coast Guard they have on
a lot of Navy work in that very shipyard as well so their
ability to get the number of laborers they need to deliver
those ships on time is the biggest risk.
Mr. Alles. I think likewise. I agree with Admiral Thomas'
response. I think also there is the competition with the Navy
itself, so we will make sure we stay in the fight there for our
production.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Guam, Mr.
Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Vice Admiral, all 3 FRCs currently stationed in Guam are
due for repair next year. What is the Coast Guard's plan for
the region during this time when the FRCs will be completely
absent from Guam's area of responsibility and how can we ensure
that this gap in service and structure will never happen again?
Admiral Thomas. So all 3 of those vessels will go into dry
dock but not at the same time. We will sequence them so there
will always be 2 in Guam. Then very likely we will home port
another FRC there in the coming 2 or 3 years.
Mr. Moylan. Good to hear, thank you. Second question, Vice
Admiral, I recently had a chance to host Chairman Sam Graves to
see Guam's Apra Harbor breakwater. I continue working with both
the Department of the Navy and the House Armed Services
Committee to find solutions on how the marine infrastructure
can be repaired.
The breakwater is just one typhoon away from completely
washing out and rendering Apra Harbor useless. If this was to
happen, what would be the impact on the Coast Guard operations
and the capacity in Sector Guam?
Admiral Thomas. So I have been to Apra Harbor as well and I
share your concern. Obviously, if we lose that breakwater and
the ability to have sheltered moorings there we would not be
able to operate out of Guam, at least not on a full-time basis.
So it is a concern for us.
Mr. Moylan. It is considered an emergency, and I appreciate
your continued push to get this repaired as quickly as
possible.
For my final question, Vice Admiral, as the deputy
commander commandant for mission support, we have received
reports from senior Coast Guard leaders in Guam about the need
for increased capability and personnel support for operations
out of Guam. What, if anything, have your commanders said to
you about what it takes to realize their needs in supporting
Homeland's mission in Guam and what steps have been taken to
address the stated concerns?
Admiral Thomas. Coast Guard commanders around the world
tell me they don't have enough to do what they need to do and
they are right. Two-thousand-eighteen we had a PC&I budget of
$2.6 billion. You just heard in 2025 that it is $1.6. We are
going in the wrong direction. We need at least a $3 billion
PC&I budget to do all the infrastructure work that we need to
do around the Nation, and we simply are going in the wrong
direction.
So I hear that everywhere I go. It is one of the greatest
frustrations of being the guy responsible to provide things
that float and fly have runways and roofs, and I can't do it.
Mr. Moylan. I can imagine the pressure you are facing and I
really appreciate your experience and support in fighting for
the Coast Guard, for the Indo-PACOM area, for Guam, and free
associated states and America Samoa as well, we rely on you
heavily to protect our fisheries and most especially keeping
out the CCP from our area. We just can't do it without your
support, so we are going to fight for you and appreciate that.
Thank you for your service, sir.
Admiral Thomas. Thank you. Our members love serving out
there.
Mr. Moylan. Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
I am going to do a second short round of questioning for
those that want to. Admiral Thomas, do you have a, in the Coast
Guard, do you have a number of engineers, naval architects, et
cetera, that work for the Coast Guard that help you?
Admiral Thomas. Congressman, thank you for the question. I
am, in fact, an MIT-trained naval architect. We have a number
of naval architects who both work on our ships and work on
review of design for commercial vessels that we regulate. So
that is an expertise that we do have in our force, both on our
civilian side and on our military side.
Chairman Gimenez. Does the Navy have the same kind of set-
up over on their side?
Admiral Thomas. Yes, Congressman, they do and, in fact,
while I was in grad school for naval architect most of my
classmates were Navy officers.
Chairman Gimenez. Do you guys, does the Navy and the Coast
Guard, are you collocated or do you talk to each other? I mean,
do you operate separately? Do you operate quasi together or is
it just separate Coast Guard here, Navy there?
Admiral Thomas. We are integrated to the point where we
actually do exchanges of some of our employees so that we can
get our Coast Guard members some experience working on Navy
projects and vice versa. So we are talking to NAVSEA. Their
ship design headquarters is just across the river from Coast
Guard headquarters so we are there often.
Chairman Gimenez. You are there often? OK, but you are not
collocated technically. You are not together. They are across
the river, right?
Admiral Thomas. Yes. Yes, sir, but as I said, we do have
embeds and they have embeds with us.
Chairman Gimenez. OK, fair enough. You said that you needed
more money. Everybody in the Federal Government says they need
more money and I tend to agree with you. You probably do. The
submission that you gave to the administration, was that pared
down by the administration?
Admiral Thomas. Just like every component or at an agency
we are given a top line that we have to stay underneath and we
have to make hard choices in order to get underneath that top
line, which is why you see so much on the unfunded priorities
list.
In the case particularly of the polar security cutter, we
will not be able to build that ship from money within our base
and still do everything else the Nation needs us to do. We need
top line relief in order to build a polar security cutter. We
have not gotten that and that relief has to really be at the
Department level so it doesn't come from Department priorities
as well.
Chairman Gimenez. All right. So you don't have the money to
build the icebreaker that you need. Is that what you are
telling me? You don't have the money to do that? For our
Nation's security you don't have the money to do that?
Admiral Thomas. What I am telling you, sir, is that with
the current top lines that we are given to build a budget to we
cannot build a polar icebreaker and still produce 2 OPCs per
year and transition our rotary-winged fleet to H-60's and build
C-130's and build waterway commerce cars. We cannot do it.
So if we are forced to do it within our base we are going
to have to make some really tough choices, which includes
probably curtailing the OPC program or perhaps flying less
aircraft, which will really hurt our ability to provide the
same level of service to the Nation.
Chairman Gimenez. Will you provide that information to
Congress as to what you can do with the money that Congress is
allocating to you instead of saying, well, yes, we will do all
these things, knowing full well you can't do all these things?
Admiral Thomas. Absolutely happy to provide a brief. I
mean, we do come up once a quarter and brief where we are in
acquisitions, but we can definitely provide you a brief on what
we will and will not be able to do if we stay at a $1.5 billion
PC&I budget.
Chairman Gimenez. Well, I think what we need to know is
what is it you believe you need to maintain the national
security of the United States, what equipment you need, how
much it will cost, and then what you can actually do with the
budget that is allocated to you. So I would like to see that.
Admiral Thomas. Absolutely.
Mr. Thanedar. With that, I yield the balance of my time.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Thank you to our panelists here. Mr. Alles, you know, and
Admiral Thomas, I, you know, I appreciate the hard work of the
men and women of U.S. Coast Guard. I appreciate your long
service and I wish you, you know, a very happy retirement.
As I look at all these cost overruns and the delays and how
expensive these programs have become and, obviously, you have a
limited budget, what are these additional expenses, additional
costs, how is that impacting? What programs is that impacting?
As you try to cut costs, what does that do to our national
security?
Mr. Alles. I would just say that, obviously, as the Admiral
mentioned, it means tradeoffs, tradeoffs in mission
performance. It will possibly mean tradeoffs in the Department
where we put money. It is going to have to come from somewhere
to support the Coast Guard mission sets, but it is a national
priority that the Secretary takes seriously and will have to be
evaluated.
I would mention that as we think about costs overall we
have seen a very dramatic acceleration across all of our
building areas, not just shipbuilding, just building
construction, labor, materials, costs have accelerated much
more rapidly than consumer price index, in some cases up to 80
percent. So that has a big impact. The pandemic has had a
lasting effect overall and we are navigating that.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you. That is all the questions I have.
I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The Ranking Member yields.
The Chair now recognizes the gentlelady from American
Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Admiral Thomas, can you go into how the Francis Scott Key
Bridge collapse is affecting the work at the Coast Guard yard,
especially in regards to the 270 service life extensions?
Admiral Thomas. Thank you for that question. I love any
opportunity to talk about the Coast Guard yard. Fortunately, we
have not experienced any adverse impacts from the bridge
collapse, so we have a deep enough channel open now to get our
ships back and forth.
But the Coast Guard yard is another place where the Nation
needs to invest. We are not going to be able to service our own
ships. The new ships are too big for the current facilities at
the Coast Guard yard. We need to maintain that ability in-house
so that we can keep the military industrial base competitive.
When they know they are the only game in town it becomes
really difficult, so we as a Nation need to invest in the Coast
Guard yard and particularly in a dry dock that can lift the OPC
and the NSC.
Mrs. Radewagen. So this question is for Mr. Alles and
Admiral Thomas, too. Secretary Mayorkas recently testified to
the Senate Homeland Security Appropriations Committee that the
Coast Guard is underfunded. Do you agree with the Secretary?
Does the Coast Guard have the necessary assets to fulfill
all 11 of the service's statutory mission sets? What more is
needed to fill in the operational gaps?
Mr. Alles. So I would agree with the statement that the
Department has historically been underfunded overall at the
level of many billion dollars. This rolls over on the Coast
Guard programs. I won't give an amount they need. That is
something I would think we probably can provide back to the
committee, but definitely the funding levels are not sufficient
to do all the mission sets for the Coast Guard.
I will defer to Admiral Thomas.
Admiral Thomas. Well, the Chairman said it earlier. The
demand for the Coast Guard around the globe has never been
higher. We are being asked to be in more places more often and
for longer periods of time, and our budget has been flatlined,
in particular our PC&I budget, as I had mentioned, is going in
the wrong direction.
So we are underfunded and we will have to make some tough
choices if we continue to be underfunded.
Mrs. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentlewoman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from Guam, Mr.
Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. No further questions, Mr. Chairman. I just want
to thank the panel. Thank you very much.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
I thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony and the
Members for their questions. The Members of the subcommittee
may have some additional questions for the witnesses, and we
would ask the witnesses to respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days. Without objection, the subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:20 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Honorable Michael Waltz for Vice Admiral Paul Thomas

u.s. coast guard vs chinese coast guard in indo-pacific

Question 1a. Per Rep. Waltz, ``As the U.S. strives to protect a
free and open Indo-Pacific by the following of international rules,
norms, and laws, the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) continues to comply with
all international law and legal boardings. However, the Chinese Coast
Guard (CCG) continues to violate international law as exemplified in
protecting illegal Chinese fishing in the South China Sea, and in other
South Asian economic exclusion zones (EEZ) like the Philippines and
Vietnam.''
How is the USCG competing with the CCG in the South China sea with
our limited USCG assets (we only have a couple in USCG assets in
Singapore)? Why are we not building out our USCG capacity in the region
to prevent illegal CCG activity?
Answer. The Service works closely with our Department of State and
Defense colleagues to leverage their authorities and funding to develop
partnerships with like-minded nations, and execute tailored training
engagements. The opportunities for capacity building are only limited
by funding and associated authorities provided by interagency
colleagues for which the U.S. Coast Guard has the unique skill set to
execute.

The Coast Guard operates National Security Cutters, Fast
Response Cutters, Seagoing Buoy Tenders, and aircraft to patrol
and combat illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing in the
U.S. economic exclusion zone (EEZ), the high seas, and the EEZs
of Pacific Island nations through bilateral maritime law
enforcement agreements with 12 Oceania countries.

The Coast Guard provides deployable specialized forces on-
board U.S. and allied naval vessels to conduct maritime law
enforcement, interdiction, and security operations across the
North and West Pacific and in Oceania.

A trusted partner in the region, the Coast Guard is well-
positioned to continue current operations and expand activities
across the region.

The fiscal year 2024-enacted appropriation provided funding
for 2 additional 154-foot Fast Response Cutters to support the
Indo-Pacific, which will add capacity to complete further-
reaching deployments once cutters are delivered to the region.
However, the Service is still limited by its force structure in
the region and is not poised to keep pace with mounting demands
from partners for support to assist in securing their waters
from coercive behavior.

The fiscal year 2025 President's budget requests $263
million to further accelerate expansion in the Indo-Pacific.

The Coast Guard's fiscal year 2025 Unfunded Priority List
features $232 million in investments that would further the
expansion supported by the President's budget, including an
additional 270-foot Indo-Pacific Support Cutter to further the
work currently being supported by USCGC Harriet Lane, shore
infrastructure projects, and increased Marine Transportation
System Assessment Team, Maritime Engagement Team, and regional
engagement personnel.
Question 1b. Why is there a lack of USCG assets in the Pacific when
the USCG is best positioned to operate in the gray zone of the South
China Sea (i.e. if there was a search-and-rescue mission in American
Samoa we'd have to ask the NZ coast guard for help)? We have USCG
assets in Guam, but why not in Japan?
Answer. The Coast Guard's role as part of the Indo-Pacific Strategy
is largely centralized in Oceania, aside from National Security Cutters
supporting the Department of Defense in the First Island Chain. The
administration has called the Compacts of Free Association the bedrock
of the U.S. role in the Pacific--including our regional search-and-
rescue responsibilities and shared maritime boundaries. The Coast Guard
has long undertaken presence, patrolling (including pursuant to ship-
rider agreements with partner nations), training, and advisory missions
in this vital region. The investments in the fiscal year 2025
President's budget and Unfunded Priorities List represent the next step
to building Coast Guard capacity in the region.
u.s. coast guard heavy icebreaker--arctic operations
Question 2. Per Rep. Waltz, ``I am happy to see that we are looking
to replace the 1979 U.S. Coast Guard Icebreaker POLAR STAR with 3
additional Heavy Ice Breakers by 2029, albeit 5 years behind
schedule.''
With Russia's fleet of 40+ heavy icebreakers and a Russian goal of
50 nuclear ice breakers, how is the U.S. Coast Guard competing in the
2,500 nautical miles of strategic Arctic waterway that Russia and China
both want to monopolize and militarize, with only 1 active USCG heavy
ice breaker?
Answer. The Coast Guard remains committed to safeguarding U.S.
sovereignty and interests in the Arctic as outlined in the 2022
National Security Strategy, 2022 National Strategy for the Arctic
Region, and the USCG's 2023 Arctic Strategic Outlook Implementation
Plan. Expanding Arctic surface capabilities, based on the objectives
expressed in the national strategies, is one of various initiatives
that the Coast Guard is pursuing to meet national security objectives
in the Arctic.

Question From Honorable Michael Waltz for Randolph D. ``Tex'' Alles

eastern vs. austal for uscg cutters

Question. Austal Limited, the Australian-based corporation is the
parent company of Austal USA, an Alabama shipbuilder selected in 2022
over Eastern Shipbuilding for a more than $3 billion U.S. Coast Guard
contract to build ships 5 through 15 in the Coast Guard's Offshore
Patrol Cutter Program (part of a $10.5 billion project with the Coast
Guard to build up to 25 Heritage Class Offshore Patrol Cutters).
Eastern Shipbuilding was commissioned to build the first 4 cutters
in the program. The Panama City company also was given the rights for
the first 11 ships in 2016, but that contract was reduced to 4 after
Category 5 Hurricane Michael devastated Bay County and other parts on
the Panhandle in October 2018.
Eastern officials have said they think Austal USA's bid for the
latest Coast Guard contract was unrealistic. They also have noted
Austal USA does not have experience building steel hull ships. The
company instead is known for building aluminum ships for the Navy.
Prior to receiving the Coast Guard contract last year, the foreign-
owned Alabama shipbuilder was commissioned by the Navy to build
Littoral Combat Ships that were reported to be ``plagued by cracked
hulls, broken equipment, and technologies that do not work.''
Why did DHS/USCG switch from an American-based Eastern shipbuilders
to a foreign Austal Limited? Especially with a disastrous recent track
record for the LCS program.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

[all]
