- AN UNBEARABLE PRICE: THE DEVASTATING HUMAN COSTS OF THE BIDEN-MAYORKAS BORDER CRISIS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN UNBEARABLE PRICE: THE DEVASTATING HUMAN COSTS OF THE BIDEN-MAYORKAS
BORDER CRISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-28

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-715 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     7
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................    89
The Honorable Glenn Ivey, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Maryland:
Prepared Statement.............................................    89

Witnesses

Mr. Tim Ballard, Private Citizen:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    12
Ms. Mayra Hinojosa Cantu, Private Citizen:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    16
Ms. Sandy Snodgrass, Founder, Alaska Fentanyl Response:
Oral Statement.................................................    18
Prepared Statement.............................................    20
Mr. Lee Gelernt, Deputy Director, ACLU Immigrants' Rights
Project, American Civil Liberties Union:
Oral Statement.................................................    41
Prepared Statement.............................................    43

For the Record

The Honorable Daniel S. Goldman, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York:
Article, Reuters, July 24, 2023................................    61

AN UNBEARABLE PRICE: THE DEVASTATING HUMAN COSTS OF THE BIDEN-MAYORKAS
BORDER CRISIS

----------

Tuesday, September 13, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:13 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark Green
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, McCaul, Higgins, Guest,
Bishop, Gimenez, Pfluger, Garbarino, Greene, Gonzales, LaLota,
Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell, Strong, Brecheen, Crane, De
La Cruz, Thompson, Payne, Correa, Thanedar, Magaziner, Goldman,
Garcia, Ramirez, and Menendez.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order without objection. The Chair may declare the
committee in recess at any point.
Without objection, the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. De La
Cruz, is permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions to the
witnesses.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony on
Secretary Mayorkas' open border policies and how they have
taken a terrible human cost across America.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
When we talk about the crisis at our Southwest Border, it
is easy to focus on the big picture, on Secretary Mayorkas'
open border policies, the chaos unfolding directly at the
border itself, and the larger costs that this unprecedented
wave of illegal immigration has imposed on our society. We tend
to talk about record Border Patrol apprehensions, which, by the
way, have risen from a temporary low of 100,000 in June to
132,000 in July, and reported 177,000 in August, completely
undermining claims that Mayorkas' new policies would somehow
limit illegal crossings. All these things are worth focusing
on, and that is why this committee is investigating the
administration's border crisis, particularly DHS Secretary
Alejandro, Mayorkas' dereliction of duty, and his radical open
border policies. However, these larger discussions often
overlook the devastating human toll this crisis has taken on
individuals and families across our country. We have long said
that this crisis has turned every State into a border State and
every town into a border town. The consequences of the chaos at
the Southwest Border have spread throughout our country,
impacting all Americans. The men and women on our panel bear
witness to this tragic reality.
Before we hear their stories, I want to highlight a few of
the ways in which Mayorkas' open border policies have exacted a
terrible price on an untold number of innocent and vulnerable
people, Americans and migrants alike.
Let's start with fentanyl. Phase two of this committee's
investigation established that the Mexican cartels have taken
unprecedented control of our Southwest Border and have used
that control to push record amounts of fentanyl across the
border and into our communities. Tens of thousands of Americans
are dying from fentanyl poisoning, often without knowing they
are consuming the drug in the first place. DHS has said they
think they are only catching 5 to 10 percent of the fentanyl
crossing our border. The CDC predicted in May that opioid
overdose deaths, including those from fentanyl, increased in
2022 to nearly 83,000. The cartels are killing Americans,
particularly young people, one poisoning at a time. Yet where
is the outrage from Mayorkas? Where is the action?
The cartels have exacted a heavy price from the very
migrants that they smuggle and traffic across the border. At
least 1,700 migrants have been found dead on U.S. soil under
this administration's policies. CBP stopped publicly reporting
this statistic after fiscal year 2021. But I am calling on them
to report this figure once again so the American people
understand the human cost of this open border. Former Border
Patrol Chief Rodney Scott recently told this committee, and I
quote, ``Chaos kills people, and we created a chaotic border
situation''. Sadly, the numbers show that he is right. Migrants
are also being abused and exploited to an unprecedented degree.
Women and children are being sexually assaulted along the
journey, while others who eventually make it to the United
States are lured or coerced into sex slavery. According to the
New York Post reports, brothels are operating in broad daylight
in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, where immigrants are reportedly
coerced into prostitution.
CBP has recorded a historic number of encounters of
unaccompanied minors at the Southwest Border since Mayorkas
took the helm. He announced he would release these children
into the United States instead of sending them home to their
families, around 400,000 since February 21. Talk about
separating families, this Secretary has separated 400,000
children from their families. Between DHS and the Department of
Health and Human Services, hundreds of thousands of these kids
have been released into the interior, often to individuals who
have no business taking care of a minor. Tragically, many of
these children have been placed into exploitative situations,
often because the Biden administration has eliminated--
Mayorkas, eliminated--basic safety protocols from the vetting
process. As one DHS official said back in 2021, and I quote,
``This administration wants these families and kids released
quickly. That is their No. 1 goal. So they are not going to do
anything to slow that process down''. The Biden administration
cares more about politics than ensuring minors are not
exploited and abused. Make no mistake, they certainly have been
to a horrific degree.
Under Mayorkas' leadership they are reporting that they
have lost track of 85,000 UACs after release. A Florida grand
jury investigation into the handling of these minors found that
in one case, 100 children were sent to the same address in
Austin, Texas--100 kids. Other addresses 44, 25. These minors
themselves are being pushed into servitude of all kinds, from
select the sex trade to forced labor, as the New York Times,
not known as a conservative bastion, by the way, reported
extensively earlier this year.
Our committee has been digging into this issue for months
now, and let me tell you, when we publish our findings, the
American people will be shocked and disgusted at how Secretary
Mayorkas' policies have explicitly led to the mass trafficking,
exploitation, and abuse of vulnerable minors. It is truly
horrifying. I cannot understand why this President remains
confident in a Secretary who has put so many American lives
into the crosshairs of the cartels.
Then there is the toll on law enforcement across this
country. No professional group has been hit harder by Mayorkas'
border crisis than Federal, State, and local law enforcement.
Consider that Border Patrol suicides have reached a record
high. Suicide is a complex and heavy topic. One that I take
very seriously as a veteran who has been working hard against
veteran suicide for decades. This committee will always address
it with the utmost respect and never through the lens of
politics. But as a former Border Patrol official and spouses
have told us, the strain and demands placed on these agents by
the on-going crisis have created an environment in which agents
face untold trauma, anxiety, and depression. Those three words,
trauma, anxiety, and depression were words used by the wife of
a Border Patrol agent earlier this year when telling us, this
committee, what agents experience today at the border, they
deserve so much better.
CBP officials have also increasingly been forced to conduct
rescue operations to save those crossing illegally. This fiscal
year alone, CBP has conducted more than 28,000 rescue
operations, just to date. That is up from 5,297 in fiscal year
2019, in fiscal year 2021 it was only 13,256, and in 2022,
22,522. See a trend here? CBP is on track for more rescue
operations this fiscal year than fiscal year 2011 to fiscal
year 2020 combined. The more people flood across our border,
the more Border Patrol agents and Air and Marine officers must
put themselves at significant risk to save them, risking trauma
and anxiety and depression.
Let the record reflect the bravery and selflessness of
Texas National Guard Specialist Bishop Evans, who died in April
2022 after trying to save two individuals struggling in the Rio
Grande River. Evans' valiant action saved their lives, but cost
him his own in the process. It was later determined that the
pair were involved in smuggling narcotics into the United
States. Let us also not forget Marine Interdiction Agent
Michael Maceda, who died in the line of duty last November
while attempting to intercept a drug smuggling vessel off the
coast of Puerto Rico. We do not deserve public servants like
Bishop Evans and Agent Maceda, and they should both be alive
today.
Of course, let's talk about the crimes committed by illegal
aliens in this country. The sanctuary cities that have welcomed
vast numbers of illegal aliens into their communities have seen
a crime spike like none other. In Chicago, one recent headline
read ``No rule of law. City Council members decry criminal
activity outside migrant shelters''. From New York comes
another disturbing headline, ``Two men beaten by a group of
disorderly migrants outside New York City shelter. One victim
pushed through a glass window''. One illegal alien from
Venezuela has been arrested 6 times for 14 crimes within just 2
months of arriving to the Big Apple. In May, a 15-year-old girl
in Alabama was raped in a restaurant bathroom by an illegal
alien released into this country in November 2021 after giving
Border Patrol agents a fake name. That same month, another
illegal alien sexually assaulted a young woman at the point of
a machete in Prince George's County, Maryland, not more than an
hour up the road from here. Last year, 21-year-old Kayla
Hamilton of Maryland was raped and murdered by an illegal alien
who was also a member of MS-13, and just a couple of weeks ago,
an illegal alien, released into the country in 2022 after
crossing the Southwest Border, killed an 11-year-old boy in
Ohio. A family in my own State who lost their own son to an
illegal alien's reckless driving, has been working tirelessly
ever since to shine a light on the crimes committed by those
unlawfully present in this country.
I specifically want to thank Wendy Cocoran and her family
for their efforts to honor their son, Pierce, whose life was
taken by an illegal alien. We need more patriots like Wendy who
will do the work many local officials often can't or won't.
These crimes are real. The tragedy and the trauma caused by
these illegal aliens will last lifetimes.
During our last hearing, some of our colleagues across the
aisle said they were embarrassed that we were holding more
hearings about the impact of this crisis on the American
people. They claimed such oversight was a waste of time. I and
the majority of the American people strongly disagree. In fact,
numerous Democrats, State and local leaders, have had enough,
like New York City Mayor Eric Adams, and I quote, ``We are
facing an unprecedented state of emergency. We are past our
breaking point. New Yorkers' compassion may be limitless, but
our resources are not''. Massachusetts Governor Maura Healey,
``There now exists in the Commonwealth a state of emergency due
to rapid and unabating increases in the number of families with
children and pregnant women, many of them new arriving migrants
and refugees living with the State, but without the means to
secure safe shelters in our communities''. Chicago Alderman
Raymond Lopez, ``We know the buses keep coming in every day and
we know that we have a thousand people in police stations right
now with no clear plan for what to do and no way of paying for
whatever's coming down the pipe''.
Hearing the stories of Americans victimized by Mayorkas'
open border is not a waste of time. Their lives are worth
whatever energy we can exert to inform the American people of
the travesty of this Secretary's failures to follow the laws
passed by this Congress and uphold his oath to protect the
American people.
I hope we inform the President, and perhaps he fires
Mayorkas or replaces him with someone who at least cares enough
to understand the cartel strategy. Secretary Mayorkas actually
admitted here he didn't know or recall. Holding him accountable
for causing this humanitarian disaster is not a waste of time.
Today, everyone on this committee has a choice, continue to
ignore the horrific consequences of the border crisis or
address the human tragedies caused by our wide open border that
impact everyone in our districts. This shouldn't be a partisan
issue. We must deal with the human costs of this terrible
crisis and we must do so now.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark Green
September 13, 2023
When we talk about the crisis at our Southwest Border, it's easy to
focus on the big picture: the Biden administration's open-borders
policies, the chaos unfolding directly at the border itself, and the
larger costs that this unprecedented wave of illegal immigration has
imposed on our society.
We tend to talk about record Border Patrol apprehensions--which, by
the way, have risen from a temporary ``low'' of 100,000 in June to
132,000 in July and a reported 177,000 in August, completely
undermining claims that Mayorkas' new policies would somehow limit
illegal crossings.
All these things are worth focusing on, and that's why this
committee is investigating the Biden administration's border crisis,
particularly DHS Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas' dereliction of duty and
his radical open-border policies.
However, these larger discussions often overlook the devastating
human toll this crisis has taken on individuals and families across the
country.
We've long said that this crisis has turned every State into a
border State and every town into a border town. The consequences of the
chaos at the Southwest Border have spread throughout our country,
impacting all Americans.
The men and women of our panel bear witness to this tragic reality.
Before we hear their stories, I want to highlight a few of the ways
in which Mayorkas' open-borders policies have exacted a terrible price
on an untold number of innocent and vulnerable people--Americans AND
migrants alike.
Let's start with fentanyl. Phase 2 of this committee's
investigation established that the Mexican cartels have taken
unprecedented control of the Southwest Border and have used that
control to push record amounts of fentanyl across the border and into
our communities. Tens of thousands of Americans are dying from fentanyl
poisoning, often without knowing they're consuming the drug in the
first place--and DHS has said they think they're only catching 5-10
percent of the fentanyl crossing our border.
The CDC predicted in May that opioid overdose deaths, including
those from fentanyl, increased in 2022 to nearly 83,000. The cartels
are killing Americans, particularly young people, one poisoning at a
time. Yet where is the outrage from the Biden administration? Where is
the action?
The cartels have exacted a heavy price from the very migrants they
smuggle and traffic across the border, as well. At least 1,700 migrants
have been found dead on U.S. soil under this administration's policies.
CBP stopped publicly reporting the statistic after fiscal year 2021,
but I am calling on them to report this figure once again, so the
American people understand the human cost of this open border.
Former Border Patrol Chief Rodney Scott recently told this
committee, ``Chaos kills people, and we created a chaotic border
situation.'' Sadly, the numbers show that he's right.
Migrants are also being abused and exploited to an unprecedented
degree. Women and children are being sexually assaulted along the
journey, while others who eventually make it to the United States are
lured or coerced into sex slavery.
According to a New York Post report, brothels are operating in
broad daylight in Sunset Park [Brooklyn], where immigrants are
reportedly coerced into prostitution.
CBP has recorded a historic number of encounters of unaccompanied
minors at the Southwest Border since Mayorkas took the helm. He
announced he would release these children into the United States
instead of sending them home to their families--around 400,000 since
February 2021! Talk about separating families?
This Secretary has separated 400,000 children from their families.
Between DHS and the Department of Health and Human Services, hundreds
of thousands of these kids have been released into the interior, often
to individuals who have no business taking care of a minor.
Tragically, many of these children have been placed into
exploitative situations, often because the Biden administration has
eliminated basic safety protocols from the vetting process. As one DHS
official said back in 2021, ``This administration wants these families
and kids released quickly. That is their No. 1 goal, so they are not
going to do anything to slow that process down.''
The Biden administration cares more about politics than ensuring
minors are not exploited and abused. And make no mistake, they
certainly have been--to a horrific degree.
The Biden administration has reportedly lost track of more than
85,000 UACs after release. A Florida grand jury investigation into the
handling of these minors found that in one case, 100 children were sent
to the same address in Austin, Texas. Other addresses in Texas received
44 and 25 of these children!
These minors themselves are being pushed into servitude of all
kinds, from the sex trade to forced labor, as the New York Times
reported extensively earlier this year.
Our committee has been digging into this issue for months now, and
let me tell you, when we publish our findings, the American people will
be shocked and disgusted at how Secretary Mayorkas' policies have
explicitly led to the mass trafficking, exploitation, and abuse of
vulnerable minors. It is truly horrifying. I cannot understand why this
President remains confident in a Secretary who has put so many American
lives into the crosshairs of the cartels.
Then there's the toll on law enforcement across this country. No
professional group has been hit harder by Mayorkas' border crisis than
Federal, State, and local law enforcement. Consider that Border Patrol
suicides have reached record highs in the last several years.
Suicide is a complex and heavy topic, and this committee will
always address it with the utmost respect, never through the lens of
politics.
But as former Border Patrol officials and spouses have told us, the
strain and demands placed on these agents by the on-going crisis have
created an environment in which agents face untold trauma, anxiety, and
depression. Those three words--trauma, anxiety, and depression--were
words used by the wife of a Border Patrol agent earlier this year when
telling us what agents experience today. They deserve so much better.
CBP officials have also increasingly been forced to conduct rescue
operations to save those crossing illegally. This fiscal year alone,
CBP has conducted more than 28,000 rescue operations, up from just
5,297 in fiscal year 2019. In fiscal year 2021, it was 13,256. In
fiscal year 2022, it was 22,522. See a trend here?
CBP is on track for more rescue operations this fiscal year than
from fiscal year 2011 to fiscal year 2020 COMBINED. The more people
flood across our border, the more Border Patrol agents and Air & Marine
officers must put themselves at significant risk to save them, risking
trauma, anxiety, and depression.
And let the record reflect the bravery and selflessness of Texas
National Guard Specialist Bishop Evans, who died in April 2022 after
trying to save two individuals struggling in the Rio Grande. Evans'
valiant action saved their lives, but cost him his own in the process.
It was later determined that the pair were involved in smuggling
narcotics into the United States. Let us also not forget Marine
Interdiction Agent, Michael Maceda who died in the line of duty last
November while attempting to intercept a drug smuggling vessel off the
coast of Puerto Rico. We do not deserve public servants like Bishop
Evans and Agent Maceda and they should both be alive today.
And, of course, let's talk about the crimes committed by illegal
aliens in this country.
The sanctuary cities that have welcomed vast numbers of illegal
aliens into their communities have seen crime spike. In Chicago, one
recent headline read, ``No rule of law: city council members decry
criminal activity outside of migrant shelters.'' From New York comes
another disturbing headline: ``Two men beaten by group of `disorderly'
migrants outside NYC shelter--one victim pushed through glass door.''
One illegal alien from Venezuela has been arrested 6 times for 14
crimes within just 2 months of arriving in the Big Apple.
In May, a 15-year-old girl in Alabama was raped in a restaurant
bathroom by an illegal alien released into this country in November
2021 after giving Border Patrol agents a fake name.
That same month, another illegal alien sexually assaulted a young
woman at the point of a machete in Prince George's County, Maryland--
not an hour up the road from where we sit. Last year, twenty-year-old
Kayla Hamilton of Maryland was raped and murdered by an illegal alien
who was also a member of MS-13.
And just a couple of weeks ago, an illegal alien released into the
country in 2022 after crossing the Southwest Border killed an 11-year-
old boy in Ohio after crashing into the school bus carrying this young
boy and other children on their first day of school.
A family in my own State who lost their own son to an illegal
alien's reckless driving has been working tirelessly ever since to
shine a light on the crimes committed by those unlawfully present in
this country. I specifically want to thank Wendy Corcoran and her
family for their efforts in honor of their son, Pierce, whose life was
taken by an illegal alien.
We need more patriots like Wendy who will do the work many local
officials often can't--or won't.
These crimes are real. The tragedy and trauma caused by these
illegal aliens will last lifetimes.
During our last hearing, some of our colleagues across the aisle
said they were ``embarrassed'' that we were holding more hearings about
the impact of this crisis on the American people. They claimed such
oversight was a ``waste of time.''
I, and the majority of the American people, strongly disagree. In
fact, numerous Democrat State and local leaders have had enough.

New York City Mayor Eric Adams: ``[W]e are facing an
unprecedented state of emergency . . . [W]e are past our
breaking point. New Yorkers' compassion may be limitless, but
our resources are not.''

Massachusetts Governor Maura Healey: ``[T]here now exists in
the Commonwealth a state of emergency due to rapid and
unabating increases in the number of families with children and
pregnant [women]--many of them new arriving migrants and
refugees--living with the State but without the means to secure
safe shelters in our communities.''

Chicago Alderman Raymond Lopez: ``We know the buses keep
coming in every day, and we know that we have a thousand people
in police stations right now with no clear plan for what to do
and no way of paying for whatever's coming down the pipe.''
Hearing the stories of the Americans victimized by Biden and
Mayorkas' open border is not a waste of time. Their lives are worth
whatever energy we can exert to inform the American people of the
travesty of this Secretary's failures to follow the laws and uphold his
oath to protect the American people.
I hope we inform the President and perhaps he will fire Mayorkas
and replace him with someone who at least cares enough to understand
the cartel's strategies. Secretary Mayorkas admitted he did not as you
will recall. Holding this administration accountable for causing this
humanitarian disaster is not a waste of time.
Today, everyone on this committee has a choice: continue to ignore
the horrific consequences of the border crisis, or address the human
tragedies caused by our wide-open border that impact every one of our
districts.
This shouldn't be a partisan issue. We must deal with the human
costs of this terrible crisis. And we must do so now.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning to everyone present.
Mr. Chairman, if the title is any indication of this
hearing, the Republican Majority is unfortunately engaging in
partisan politics, again, with today's hearing. It didn't have
to be this way.
Throughout this committee's history, we have tried to work
in a bipartisan manner to help combat human trafficking and
ensure the Department of Homeland Security protects children
and other vulnerable populations. Last Congress, when I served
as Chairman, the committee worked to enact the Ranking Member
John Katko's Countering Human Trafficking Act, which made DHS's
Center for Countering Human Trafficking permanent. The Act also
increased coordination between DHS's components and the Blue
Campaign, a national public awareness effort designed to
educate law enforcement and the public on recognizing the signs
of human trafficking. I was proud to work with Ranking Member
Katko on the bill and pleased that every subcommittee Chair and
Ranking Member joined us as original co-sponsors. Committee
Democrats and Republicans also worked together last Congress to
pass Representative Donald Payne Jr.'s legislation, the
Homeland Security for Children's Act. His legislation required
DHS to include feedback from organizations that represent the
needs of children in the Department's strategies, policies, and
plans. I was pleased that President Biden signed into law that
bill last year.
These are just a couple of recent examples of the Committee
on Homeland Security's long record of bipartisan cooperation on
issues like these. Unfortunately, the current Republican
Majority appears to be turning its back on bipartisan
cooperation again. Republicans are trying to advance their
illegitimate impeachment agenda, even as the Biden
administration and Secretary Mayorkas work to implement orderly
and humane border policies. Given the hearing's title, it is
apparently lost on Republicans that it was actually the Trump
administration's border policies that imposed devastating human
costs, particularly on families and children. Under the Trump
administration's unconscionable family separation policy, for
example, over 5,500 children were taken from their parents at
the border. These children suffered irreparable harm. Some have
been reunited with their parents. This family was separated for
years before being reunited by a Biden administration task
force.
Tragically, though, hundreds of separated children continue
to pay the price for this Trump policy. They remain separated
from their parents despite on-going reunification efforts still
today. Not only did the Trump administration take children from
their parents, it expelled unaccompanied children from other
countries and forced people seeking refuge under our asylum
laws to languish in dangerous conditions in Mexico, where many
were victimized by cartels, smugglers, and criminals. Talk
about the human cost of border policy, these were very real
human costs, borne mostly by children, families, and the most
vulnerable.
How do Republicans respond when the Biden administration
tries to right the wrongs of the past administration to protect
kids or put policies in place to offer lawful pathways for
families fleeing violence and persecution at home? Well, let's
take a look at the Committee Republicans' social media for an
indication. Just recently, we see them mocking the Biden's
administration for hiring someone to work at DHS who actually
has experience protecting the rights of children. Republicans
also included in their border bill provisions to eliminate
protections for children in DHS custody under the Trafficking
Victims Protection Act and the Flores Agreement. Unbelievable.
We must never, ever return to the failed border and
immigration policies of the last administration. As Americans,
we are better than that, or at least we should be. While we
won't agree on everything, there are places we can and should
work together. Democrats want an orderly, humane border, we
just want to do it in a way that upholds our values as
Americans. We want to stop human trafficking, combat smugglers,
and help those suffering from the scourge of opioid addiction.
If Republican leadership would stop letting the most extreme
MAGA wing of its party call the shots, maybe we could work
toward getting that together. For the sake of our committee,
this country, and American people, I hope so.
Mr. Chairman, with that, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
September 13, 2023
If the title is any indication, the Republican Majority is
unfortunately engaging in partisan politics again with today's hearing.
It didn't have to be this way.
Throughout this committee's history, we have tried to work in a
bipartisan manner to help combat human trafficking and ensure the
Department of Homeland Security protects children and other vulnerable
populations.
Last Congress, when I served as Chairman, the committee worked to
enact then-Ranking Member John Katko's Countering Human Trafficking
Act, which made DHS's Center for Countering Human Trafficking
permanent. The Act also increased coordination between DHS components
and the Blue Campaign, a national public awareness effort designed to
educate law enforcement and the public on recognizing the signs of
human trafficking. I was proud to work with Ranking Member Katko on the
bill and pleased that every subcommittee Chair and Ranking Member
joined us as original cosponsors.
Committee Democrats and Republicans also worked together last
Congress to pass Rep. Donald M. Payne, Jr.'s legislation, the Homeland
Security for Children Act. His legislation requires DHS to include
feedback from organizations that represent the needs of children in the
Department's strategies, policies, and plans. I was pleased that
President Biden signed it into law last year. These are just a couple
recent examples of the Committee on Homeland Security's long record of
bipartisan cooperation on issues like these.
Unfortunately, the current Republican Majority appears to be
turning its back on bipartisan cooperation again. Republicans are
trying advance their illegitimate impeachment agenda, even as the Biden
administration and Secretary Mayorkas work to implement orderly and
humane border policies.
Given the hearing title, it's apparently lost on Republicans that
it was actually the Trump administration's border policies that imposed
devastating human costs, particularly on families and children. Under
the Trump administration's unconscionable family separation policy, for
example, over 5,500 children were taken from their parents at the
border. These children suffered irreparable harm. Some have been
reunited with their parents. This family was separated for years before
being reunited by a Biden administration task force.
Tragically though, hundreds of separated children continue to pay
the price for this Trump policy--they remain separated from their
parents despite on-going reunification efforts still today. Not only
did the Trump administration take children from their parents, it
expelled unaccompanied children from our country and forced people
seeking refuge under our asylum laws to languish in dangerous
conditions in Mexico, where many were victimized by cartels, smugglers,
and criminals.
Talk about the human costs of border policy--these were very real
human costs borne mostly by children, families, and the most
vulnerable.
And how do Republicans respond when the Biden administration tries
to right the wrongs of the past administration? To protect kids or put
policies in place to offer lawful pathways for families fleeing
violence and persecution at home? Well, let's take a look at committee
Republicans' social media for an indication.
Just recently, we see them mocking the Biden administration for
hiring someone to work at DHS who actually has experience protecting
the rights of children. Republicans also included in their border bill
provisions to eliminate protections for children in DHS custody under
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act and the Flores agreement.
Unbelievable.
We must never, ever return to the failed border and immigration
policies of the last administration. As Americans, we're better than
that. Or at least we should be. While we won't agree on everything,
there are places we can and should work together.
Democrats want an orderly, humane border. We just want to do it in
a way that upholds our values. We want to stop human trafficking,
combat smugglers, and help those suffering from the scourge of opioid
addiction.
If Republican leadership would stop letting the most extreme MAGA
wing of its party call the shots, maybe we could work toward that,
together. For the sake of our committee, this Congress, and the
American people, I hope so.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
I am pleased to have a distinguished panel of witnesses
before us today. I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise
their right hand.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative. Thank you, and please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Mr. Ballard, Mr. Tim Ballard. Mr. Ballard spent over a
decade working as a special agent for the Department of
Homeland Security, where he was assigned to the Internet Crimes
Against Children Task Force as an undercover operative helping
dismantle child trafficking rings in the United States and
multiple foreign countries. In 2013, Tim and his team of
special operatives left their careers and founded Operation
Underground Railroad, the premier private organization in the
world to take on child trafficking cartels, resulting in the
rescue and rehabilitation of over 7,000 children and women.
Their early efforts are seen, of course, in the movie Sound of
Freedom. Tim is now senior advisor to the Spear Fund, a totally
new approach that invites all anti-trafficking organizations
and concerned people of the world to come together in unity to
end human trafficking once and for all.
Thank you, sir, for being here.
Ms. Mayra Cantu. Ms. Cantu is the wife of a Border Patrol
agent who has served his country for more than 15 years. They
have spent around 10 years stationed in the Del Rio sector and
are now in the Rio Grande Valley sector in Texas with their
three beautiful children. She is active in her community and
deeply involved with the Border Patrol spouses in supporting
the efforts of our brave agents.
Again, thank you for being here.
Ms. Sandy Snodgrass. Ms. Snodgrass is a clinical
psychologist who has been living in Alaska for over 50 years.
Ms. Snodgrass has one child, Robert Bruce Snodgrass. Bruce was
tragically poisoned by fentanyl and taken from us in Anchorage
on October 26, 2021. After receiving the toxicology report
confirming the poisoning, Ms. Snodgrass left her practice and
began her advocacy work full-time. She has become a leading
expert and advocate on behalf of victims, working with
stakeholders in Alaska and around the country to stem the
scourge of fentanyl that is wreaking havoc on the United
States.
Thank you for being here.
Mr. Lee Gelernt. Did I pronounce that correctly, sir?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes, thank you.
Chairman Green. OK. Good. He is an attorney at the ACLU's
national office in New York. He is widely recognized as one of
the country's leading public interest lawyers and has argued
dozens of important civil rights cases during his career,
including in the U.S. Supreme Court and many Federal Courts of
Appeal throughout the country. He has also testified as a legal
expert before both houses of Congress. In addition to his work
at the ACLU, he is an adjunct professor at Columbia Law School.
Thank you, sir, for being here.
I thank all the witnesses, and I now recognize Mr. Ballard
for 5 minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF TIM BALLARD, PRIVATE CITIZEN

Mr. Ballard. Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and
Members of the Homeland Security Committee, it's an honor to
testify here today.
I'd like to begin by showing you a powerful clip from the
popular film Sound of Freedom.
[Video playing]
This scene depicts a moment from my real life I'll never
forget. I was working for the Department of Homeland Security
out of Calexico, California, and I can tell you first-hand that
the only reason we were able to save this precious little boy
was due to the fact that they had to take him across the border
at a port of entry checkpoint because the border walls
compelled them to do so.
The horrors a child faces as a victim of human trafficking
demand that we take action. A child can be sold up to 20 times
a day, 6 days a week, for 10 years, or even longer, depending
when the abuse began. Just in 2022 alone, immigration
authorities encountered more than 152,000 unaccompanied minors
at or near the U.S.-Mexico border, representing an all-time
high.
I believe every Member of this committee and people
everywhere can agree that human trafficking is a plague and an
evil that must be eradicated. Evidence of this can be seen in
the response to the movie Sound of Freedom, based on my life
story, which has been a surprise box office success and is
sparking a national conversation on child sex slavery and
trafficking, the fastest-growing criminal enterprise on the
planet.
The conclusions I offer in this testimony are based on my
professional experience as an anti-trafficking operator. After
starting my professional career with the CIA, I transferred to
the Department of Homeland Security. At DHS I spent 12 years as
a special agent and undercover operator for Homeland Security
Investigations. After leaving the Federal Government, I have
continued the fight against human trafficking, first as the
founder and CEO of the organization Operation Underground
Railroad, and now as a senior advisor to the SPEAR Fund, which
is an organization that funds and collaborates with experts,
organizations, and concerned citizens around the globe to fight
and end human trafficking.
Traffickers use our Southern Border to bring slaves into
our country for the sex industry, because the United States is
one of the highest consumers in child sex abuse material in the
world. Our Federal agents who work at the Southern Border are
women and men of the highest integrity and dedication. Yet
despite the hard work and success agents on the ground, one
thing has become vividly clear, poor U.S. border security and
broken U.S. policy are feeding the growth of human trafficking
in the United States.
One way this is seen is the absence of physical barriers on
our border. I have personally seen how ports of entry were
responsible for helping rescue a child, catch a sexual
predator, and start a chain of events that rescued multiple
children from his abuse. On the other hand, I've spoken with
survivors who were trafficked by cartels, taking advantage of
the miles of unprotected U.S. border. In one case in
particular, a young woman was brought across the border at an
area where no barriers or protections existed. Once in the
United States she was sold and raped for money up to 30 to 40
times a day for 5 years before eventually escaping herself. She
shared with me the tragic conclusion that had her captors been
forced to attempt a crossing into our country at the port of
entry, just like the little boy you saw in the film, that she
would have had a better chance of being rescued. But the
success we've seen in interdicting human trafficking at points
of entry means nothing if our immigration policies allow
traffickers to flaunt legal loopholes.
Recently, Members of Congress sounded the alarm on
information that the Government has lost track of 85,000 minors
that crossed the border unaccompanied. The New York Times
reported that the Department of Health and Human Services has
lost contact with thousands of children who were released to
sponsors and these children are now feared of being at risk of
exploitation.
Just in May alone U.S. Customs and Border Protection
encountered an average of 435 unaccompanied minors per day.
These children are prime targets for traffickers, for sex or
labor. Tragically, as a result of this administration's current
policies, DHS and HHS have unwittingly become a child
trafficking delivery service. This must stop. We must begin
with finding the 85,000 missing unaccompanied children, which
this administration claims is not their problem anymore.
Congressman Smith's Secure Act will help find them by holding
HHS, DHS, and the FBI responsible for reporting on the status
of the unaccounted-for children. The Secure Act will require
these agencies to work together to locate them, assess their
exposure to being trafficked, exploited, or abused, and to vet
adults in their new homes for criminal activity. We pray all
these kids will be found safe, but in my expert judgment, a
significant number of them do not need to be merely found, but
rescued from actual and active sexual abuse. Once we find these
children and rescue those in need, we will be in a better
position to reform the failed policies and processes that put
them in the hands of abusers to begin with.
Real freedom is not a phone number in the pocket of a child
for an unknown sponsor or a dangerous trek across South and
Central America. Real freedom is safety and protection from
abuse and abusers for our most vulnerable population, our
children, our future.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ballard follows:]
Prepared Statement of Tim Ballard
September 13, 2023
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and Members of the
Homeland Security Committee, it's an honor to testify here today.
I would like to begin today by showing you a powerful clip from the
popular movie ``SOUND OF FREEDOM''.
This scene depicts a moment from my real life I'll never forget. I
was working for the Department of Homeland Security out of Calexico,
CA, and I can tell you first-hand that the only reason we were able to
save this precious little boy was due to the fact that they had to take
him across the border at a port of entry checkpoint.
Despite what you may hear from some media sources, human
trafficking is absolutely real, and--for the sake of innocent
children--it must be dealt with urgently and immediately.
The horrors a child faces as a victim of human trafficking demand
that we take action. A child can be sold up to 20 times per day, 6 days
a week for 10 years or even longer if they are trafficked as a toddler
or infant.
The topic of border security and the policies surrounding it have
unfortunately become a type of political football that is used in the
larger discussion of our Government's immigration policies. But the
reality of what is happening at our Southern Border is not merely a
policy debate, it is a humanitarian crisis with real victims.
Just in 2022 alone immigration authorities encountered more than
152,000 unaccompanied minors at or near the U.S.-Mexico border,
representing an all-time high. As I will share with you today, many of
those children will enter the United States and be put at risk of
sexual exploitation by human traffickers.
Regardless of ideology or party label, I believe every Member of
this committee, and good people everywhere, can agree that human
trafficking is a plague and an evil that must be eradicated.
Evidence of this can be seen in the response to the movie ``SOUND
OF FREEDOM''--based on my life story--which has been a surprise box
office success and is sparking a national conversation on child sex
slavery and trafficking, the fastest-growing criminal enterprise on
earth.
But the growing resolve amongst Americans is also seen in national
polling, showing a majority of Americans support President Biden
closing the Southern Border until the humanitarian crisis involving
drug smuggling and human trafficking can be properly addressed.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Trafalgar Group Polling, Conducted April 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The American people, on all sides of the political aisle, are
realizing that ending human trafficking in the United States is not
part of a political debate, it is an unprecedented humanitarian crisis
happening in our country, and on our watch.
The conclusions I offer in this testimony are based on my
professional experience as an anti-trafficking operator. After starting
my professional career with the CIA, I transferred to the Department of
Homeland Security. At the DHS, I spent 12 years as a special agent and
undercover operator for Homeland Security Investigations. For 10 of
those years, I was combating sex trafficking on the Southern Border and
became one of the country's foremost experts on the issue of
trafficking through years of undercover work, research, and
investigation.
After leaving the Federal Government, I have continued the fight
against human trafficking. First, as the founder and CEO of the anti-
trafficking organization Operation Underground Railroad (O.U.R.), and
now as a senior advisor for the SPEAR Fund, an organization that funds
and collaborates with a coalition of experts, organizations, and
concerned citizens from around the globe to end human trafficking in
our time.
Through my experience as a Federal agent, CEO of O.U.R., and senior
advisor for SPEAR Fund I have worked closely with the heads of every
U.S. agency whose job it is to find and rescue children being
trafficked across the Southern Border. These agencies under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Homeland Security include Customs and
Border Protection, Border Patrol, Immigration and Customs, and Homeland
Security Investigations.
Our Federal agents who work at the Southern Border are women and
men of the highest integrity and dedication. Their efforts protect us
daily from the myriad of different dangers found coming into our
country. Our agents exist to protect, not to judge, not to
discriminate, and not to carry out a political motive. They follow the
laws they have sworn to uphold and they deserve a debt of gratitude
from each of us as they help keep us safe.
When I last had the honor to testify before Congress I shared how
traffickers use our Southern Border to bring slaves into our country
for the sex industry because the United States is one of the highest
consumers of child sex abuse content in the world.\2\ The United States
is also one of the wealthiest nations in the world, creating fertile
ground for child traffickers who are trying to get their product to
this lucrative illicit market.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ THORN.org.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Through my decade on the border as a human trafficking expert for
the Federal Government, I participated in dozens of cases and
operations that uncovered human trafficking rings and discovered human
smuggling processes across the border. We were fortunate to rescue many
victims and I'm proud that we put so many criminals behind bars.
But despite the success of agents on the ground, one thing has
become vividly clear: poor U.S. border security and broken U.S. policy
are feeding the growth of human trafficking in the United States, and
empowering international criminal cartels both inside and outside of
our borders.
One way this is seen is the absence of physical barriers on our
border. While the topic of a border wall has become hotly contested
here in Washington, DC and in the media, the reality is that requiring
people to enter our country at actual ports of entry is very effective
in combating human trafficking. It can mean the difference between
freedom or sexual captivity for a child.
As you saw in the clip from the movie, I have personally seen how
ports of entry were responsible for helping rescue a child, catch a
sexual predator, and start a chain of events that rescued multiple
children from his abuse.
On the other hand, I've had heartbreaking conversations with
survivors who were trafficked by cartels taking advantage of the miles
of unprotected U.S. border. In one case in particular a young woman was
brought across the border at an area where no barriers or protections
existed. Her captors brought her to New York City where she was sold
and raped for money up to 30-40 times a day for 5 years before
eventually escaping.
She shared with me the tragic conclusion that had her captors been
forced to attempt crossing into our country at a port of entry she
would have had a better chance of being rescued, as opposed to the hell
on earth she endured before her escape.
At our points of entry, trained law enforcement officials have the
ability to look into the eyes of traffickers and victims. They have
technology, training, and instinct on their side to identify victims
and hopefully rescue them.
But the success we've seen in interdicting human traffickers at
points of entry means nothing if our immigration policies allow
traffickers to flaunt legal loopholes.
Recently, Members of Congress sounded the alarm on information that
the Government has lost track of 85,000 minors that crossed the border
unaccompanied,\3\ and The New York Times reported that the Department
of Health and Human Services has lost contact with thousands of
children who were released to ``sponsors'', and are now feared to be at
risk for exploitation.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Newsweek, Jul. 14, 2023.
\4\ New York Times, Apr. 17, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In May, U.S. Customs and Border Protection encountered an average
of 435 unaccompanied minors per day,\5\ while in June of this year
alone, the Biden administration released 344 kids to non-related adults
in the United States \6\--most of whom already had multiple children in
their care. These children are prime targets for traffickers--for sex
or labor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ U.S. CBP May Operational Update, Jun. 20, 2023.
\6\ NBC News, Jun. 6, 2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To fight the human trafficking battle most effectively, we must put
aside politics. Oftentimes politicians and the media try to make border
enforcement and pro-migration positions mutually exclusive. That does
not need to be the case. Our country can have a robust and welcoming
policy about immigration, but it must be in a way that's legal and
doesn't leave loopholes for criminals to hurt children and sentence
them to a life of horror.
Ending human trafficking in the United States would create huge
progress in ending human trafficking across the globe. One of the first
steps in accomplishing that is securing our border and fixing our
immigration policies. As we have seen from the reaction to the movie
``SOUND OF FREEDOM'' and polling, the American people from all
political ideologies are ready to tackle this scourge.
I ask that this administration and its agencies show the same
resolve, put politics aside, and immediately take the action needed to
begin securing our border and ending the horrible policies that are
only serving to put innocent children at risk.
We have seen the success that is possible when our Nation acts with
a unified spirit against evil people and evil ideologies, and by God's
grace that same spirit can bring an end to human trafficking.

Chairman Green. Thank you.
Ms. Cantu, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF MAYRA HINOJOSA CANTU, PRIVATE CITIZEN

Ms. Cantu. Good morning, Chairman Green and distinguished
Members of the committee. I am honored to be here, and I thank
you for inviting me.
I am Mayra Cantu, a Border Patrol wife for over 15 years.
My husband and I have been married for over 21 years, and we
have three amazing kids, Dylan, Lex, and Devyn. My husband was
first stationed on Eagle Pass, Texas for 10 years. He is
currently stationed in the Rio Grande Valley. Today, I speak
with the experience and knowledge of a Border Patrol wife.
Given this opportunity, I'd like to speak on a topic that is
rarely asked about.
Rarely does the current administration ask about the 19,000
American souls and their families whom have also been affected
by the shift in policies and procedures that have drastically
and tragically changed our country. These American-serving
patriots I speak of is our very own United States Border Patrol
agents. This includes the spouses and children of these agents,
all whom are voting Americans from both sides of the aisle. We
are your constituents. Please take this moment to understand
that we are understand what we are facing every day with this
huge influx of illegal immigration.
Day 1 of this administration, our agents went to work
knowing they were outnumbered. Huge caravans of illegal
immigrants were aggressively pushing their way into our agents'
paths. Our agents knew our stations would hit max capacity
instantly. Knowing they didn't have enough vehicles or
facilities to stop these caravans, our agents, including my
husband, felt defeated. As the days went by with these extreme
changes, I noticed my husband's mood began to change. He became
more distant, kept to himself, and would spend his day
sleeping. As things got worse on the border, so did my husband.
My husband began to talk about work in his sleep, but the
sounds he would make hardly sounded like words. They were
screams of terror. One night, as he tossed and began to mumble
some words, he all of a sudden screamed out, la nina, la nina.
Screaming as if this little girl's life was in danger. I was so
terrified at the volume and tone, I froze. I then realized my
husband was reliving the trauma of work in his sleep. I know
the job is stressful, but I had no idea how bad things would
get.
Imagine this, a child who has just been through a horrible
traumatizing journey, may have possibly been raped or tortured
by bad people, has now gained the trust of a Border Patrol
agent. The child decides to vent to this agent and pours out
every emotion he or she has been holding back. Now this child
looks up at this agent for comfort, for answers. What could
this agent possibly tell this child? Our agents are fathers,
mothers, brothers, sisters. They are real humans with human
emotions, emotions like anger, frustration, sadness, sympathy,
and every emotion you or I would feel if we heard those
stories. To that, I asked Mr. Mayorkas, what has been done to
assist our agents to handle these situations? What is the
protocol? This Border Patrol wife is asking, what was the plan
for our agents who would be hearing these stories from the
millions of illegal immigrants you knew were crossing?
We all knew for months in advance that the caravans of
family units were coming, we all knew that the journey was
going to be like for those women and children. You knew our
agents were going to be the first in line to handle these
traumatized individuals. What was the plan for them? Did you
consider the long-term effects of an agent's mental and
spiritual health from listening to the horrific tragedies from
the millions of illegal immigrants that would be crossing? What
are you doing now, 2\1/2\ years later?
As a wife allow me to describe what happens. Our agents
with boots on the ground carry those stories with them, they
carry the names and faces of those children, women, and even
those good men that may have had a family member get swept into
the river. These stories come up throughout their day, as they
themselves try to live their normal life. It fills our thoughts
daily to the point where normal life situations are no longer
as relevant as those tragic stories. This creates a challenge
for a family as a whole. Us wives end up having to take over
every situation at home. Distance grows between a husband and a
wife. This creates many more arguments, frustrations,
resentments. Our children, unfortunately, get sidelined. How
could a failing grade ever come close to what our agents go
through at work? This creates distance between our agents and
our children. The burden of not being able to help or fix the
problems at work becomes so overwhelming, it consumes an
agent's mind to the point where he lashes out in anger.
This creates even more problems in a happy home. Without an
agent even realizing it, problems at home end up being greater
than he or she imagined. In many cases, an agent turns to
alcohol, solitude, and all of a sudden, we end up with a
potential divorce topped with depression. Just like that, our
Border Patrol agents end up with a high suicide rate.
Let's not forget to mention the stress of forced
vaccinations by this administration, vax or get fired.
This man-made perfect storm is what has our agency with
higher numbers in substance abuse, divorce rate, and suicide
rate. Us Border Patrol wives don't need to look up statistics
to check or check the news to know. We know, because we live
the Border Patrol life.
My greatest fear is allowing Government to disregard our
Border Patrol agents as they once disregarded our military.
Let's not repeat history.
God bless all of you, our country, and may God bless our
Border Patrol.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Cantu to follows:]
Prepared Statement of Mayra Hinojosa Cantu
Sept. 13, 2023
Good morning, Chairman Mark Green and distinguished Members of the
committee.
I am honored and humbled to be here with all of you. I thank you
for inviting me and for taking an interest in my testimony.
I am Mayra Cantu and I am a Border Patrol wife. My husband has been
serving our country for over 15 years. We have been married for 21
years and have 3 amazing kids. Dylan, Lex, and Devyn. Once my husband
joined the Border Patrol, he got stationed in Eagle Pass, Texas. We
were then living in the Rio Grande Valley also known as the Tip of
Texas. So we moved our little family from Edinburg, Texas to Eagle
Pass, Texas, leaving both of our families behind. Being moved from the
area you live in is very common in the Border Patrol. We spent 10 years
in Eagle Pass, Texas where my husband served on the ground unit, ATV
Unit, and the Boat Unit. After 10 years we were able to transfer back
home to the Rio Grande Valley where my husband is currently stationed.
Today I speak with the experiences and knowledge of a Border Patrol
wife. A wife, that through God's grace has been given the opportunity
to speak on a topic that never gets asked about. No one ever asks about
the over 19,000 American souls and their families that have also been
affected by the shift in policies and procedures that have drastically
and tragically changed our country, as of January 2021.
The over 19,000 American, voting, serving souls I speak of are our
very own United States Border Patrol Agents and us, the spouses and
children of these agents. Our men and women in green are those who are
not only our first line of defense but also, our actual boots on the
ground, on the riverbanks of the Rio Grande River, our checkpoints, and
all American borders in our country.
Us Border Patrol families are not just patriotic Americans, we are
voting Americans, of both sides of the aisle. We are your constituents.
With that being said, I ask that everyone please take a moment to truly
understand what these 19,000 souls and us, the families, are facing
every day with this huge influx of immigration, along with the shift in
policies and procedures.
January 2021 was the day everything changed for us Border Patrol
families. On that day our men and women in green went into work knowing
that they were outnumbered. They knew our Border Patrol stations would
be at max capacity, they knew we did not have enough facilities, enough
vehicles, they knew they were defeated.
Respectfully I say, imagine that on your first day of work with the
new boss. In my opinion, Day 1 was a significant hit to our agents. Day
1 was realizing the fact that they were not going to catch, stop, or
prevent these huge caravans of people aggressively pushing their way
into the paths of our agents. You see in an outsider's perspective, you
see a caravan as a large group of people entering our country. For us
Border Patrol families, we see caravans as the people my husband will
come across face-to-face. I remember having plenty of conversations
with my husband, as a concerned wife, was always filled with questions
like, ``What are you going to do? What is the plan? What does work say?
What can be done?''
In 2008, my kids and I drove to Artesia, New Mexico, to attend the
Border Patrol graduation ceremony for my husband. It is an experience I
will always remember. As an attendee, I was filled with such
patriotism. I was so proud of my country at how honorable the Border
Patrol was presenting each graduating class. They all marched and
presented their class flag with such pride. They all stood together
looking so sharp, as they recited their oath to protect you, me, and
our entire country with vigilance, service, and integrity.
That badge, that oath means something to our agents . . . but these
past 2\1/2\ years our agents feel as if their hands have been tied
behind their backs, unable to do their job as they were taught. Leaving
them with the human emotion of frustration and let-down creating an
overall sense of low morale throughout the patrol.
As the days went by with these extreme changes, I noticed my
husband's mood began to change. He became more distant, kept to
himself, and would spend his days sleeping during the day. I figured it
was work and he was potentially taking longer to decompress. As things
got worse on the border, so did my husband. My husband began to talk
about work in his sleep. But the sounds he would make hardly sounded
like words, they were screams of terror, so loud I had to close our
bedroom door so that he wouldn't wake up our kids. One night as he
tossed and began to mumble some words, he all of a sudden screamed out
``LA NINA! LA NINA!?!'' Was so terrified, I froze. I then realized my
husband was reliving the trauma of work in his sleep.
I know the job is stressful, but I had no idea how bad things had
gotten. I would sit with my husband and ask him every day how he was
doing at work. I knew this would help him snap out of work mode to be
able to continue his regular family life routine. I learned that my
husband was manning Tent City on a daily basis. At this point we could
hear in the news how so many stations were at max capacity due to the
caravans of family units. This meant that our agents, including my
husband, had to interview unaccompanied juveniles.
As an agent these stories come with the job. The difference now is
the amount of stories our agents hear on a daily basis was and is off
the charts. If you can imagine, a child who has just been through such
a horrible, traumatizing journey, may have possibly seen a family
member drown, or them being abused or tortured by bad people, has now
gained the trust of a Border Patrol agent handing the child a snack . .
. The child decides to vent and release every emotion he or she has
been holding back because of fear . . . to this agent and is now
looking up at this agent for comfort. For answers.
With 800 other illegal immigrants in that tent city, this agent
knows hundreds are already being bussed over . . . What could this
agent possibly tell this child in that short time? Our agents are
fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, they are real humans with human
emotions . . . emotions like anger, frustration, sadness, sympathy, and
every emotion you or I would feel if we heard those stories.
To that I ask Mr. Mayorkas, what has been done to assist our agents
to handle these situations? What is the protocol? What are the proper
procedures for our agents when confronted with these situations?
We all knew for months in advance that the caravans of family units
were coming. We all knew what the journey was going to be for those
women and children. You knew our agents were going to be the first in
line to handle these traumatized individuals. What was the plan for
them? This Border Patrol wife is asking what was the plan for our
agents who would be hearing these stories from the millions of illegal
immigrants you knew were crossing?
Did you consider the long-term effects on an agent's mental and
spiritual health from listening to the horrific tragedies from the
millions of illegal immigrants that would be crossing? What are you
doing now, 2\1/2\ years later?
As a wife allow me to describe what happens. Our agents with boots
on the ground carry those stories with them. They carry the names and
faces of those children, women, and even those good men that may have
had a family member get swept under the river. Their stories come up
through out their day as they themselves try to live their normal life.
It fills their thoughts daily to the point where normal life situations
are no longer as relevant as those tragic stories they hear at work.
This creates a challenge for a family as a whole. Us wives end up
having to take over every situation at home. Distance grows between a
husband and a wife. This creates many more arguments, frustrations,
resentments. Our children unfortunately get sidelined. How could a
failing grade ever come close to what our agents go through at work?
This creates distance between our agents and our children. The burden
of not being able to help or fix the problems at work become so
overwhelming it consumes an agent's mind to the point where he lashes
out in anger, short-tempered. This creates even more problems in a
happy home. Without an agent even realizing it, problems at home end up
being greater than he or she imagined. In many cases an agent turns to
alcohol. Solitude. Nightmares. And all of a sudden we end up with
undiagnosed PTSD. Our worst-case scenario is a potential divorce,
topped with depression . . . and just like that our Border Patrol
agents end up with a high suicide rate.
How can this happen you ask? Well, lets not forget to mention the
stress of forced vaccination. Our agents were being told that they had
to get vaccinated or get fired.
This man-made perfect storm is what has our agency with higher
numbers in substance abuse, divorce rate, and suicide rate.
As for me, I don't need to look up statistics or check the news to
know. I know because I live the Border Patrol life. Our Green line
represents family, united in faith.
Distinguished Members of Congress, we must make a change. Our
country deserves better. Your constituents deserve better.
My greatest fear is allowing Government to disregard our Border
Patrol agents as they did once to our military.
Thank you and may God bless all of you, our country and may God
bless our Border Patrol.

Chairman Green. Thank you.
Ms. Snodgrass, you are recognized.

STATEMENT OF SANDY SNODGRASS, FOUNDER, ALASKA FENTANYL RESPONSE

Ms. Snodgrass. Good morning I'd like to thank Chairman
Green and Ranking Member Thompson for the opportunity to
address this committee today.
I'd like to begin my testimony with a moment of silence to
honor the memory of American citizens who have lost their lives
to illicit drug poisonings, particularly recognizing citizens
that will die today during the course of this hearing.
[Moment of silence.]
Ms. Snodgrass. My only child, Robert Bruce Snodgrass,
became forever 22 on October 26, 2021, in Anchorage, Alaska. He
was poisoned by fentanyl on that cold October day in a wooded
area within shouting distance of a McDonald's drive-through.
The fentanyl that he got that day prevented him from being able
to call out for help. He dropped and died where he stood.
Bruce loved Alaska. He was an outdoorsman, he was a free
solo climber, he was a wilderness survival expert. He was safe
in the back country of Alaska. He was not safe in his own
hometown. The year that Bruce died, Alaska was No. 1 in the
Nation for increased illicit drug death. The 73 percent
increase was fueled by fentanyl.
In the first 6 months of 2023, enough fentanyl was seized
in Alaska to kill every Alaskan three times. Alaska is being
targeted by drug cartels due to the money that they can make in
my State, particularly in rural, predominantly Alaska Native
communities. One pill in an Alaskan village can cost $80. That
same pill sold in a large American city, costs $10.
So what to do?
I'm hopeful that this committee will focus on solutions
today. I'll offer five solutions to consider today and moving
forward.
First, designate Mexican drug cartels and their
transnational criminal partners as terrorist organizations.
This will bring the full weight of the U.S. Government to bear
down on the perpetrators that have killed and continue to kill
Americans on our sovereign soil. Immediately, as Members of the
U.S. House of Representatives, you can co-sponsor and support
the passage of House Bill H.R. 1564.
Second, this committee can fully support the Department of
Homeland Security's non-invasive technology to significantly
increase the number of passenger and commercial vehicles
scanned at the Southern Border.
Third, the Postal Inspection Service has created a
standardized Nation-wide task force officer, TFO program. TFOs
are armed with non-invasive scanners and are embedded with
postal inspectors, often as part of the High Intensity Drug
Trafficking Area, HIDTA, initiatives and task forces. They act
as critical force multipliers, and this committee can update
the funding sources and advance the investigations and
interdictions of the TFO programs around the country.
Fourth, HIDTA programs in all 50 States are a model of how
to dramatically impact the contaminated drug supply in this
country. HIDTA initiatives create task forces, including
Tribal, local, State, and Federal law enforcements, including
Homeland Security forces, to very effectively investigate,
interdict, and prosecute drug-trafficking organizations, DTOs,
in all 50 States. I've witnessed HIDTA's effectiveness in
Alaska, and I'm asking this committee to support HIDTA.
Fifth, Congressman Trone has introduced a bipartisan House
Bill 2867, known as Bruce's Law, named for my son. Bruce's Law
will establish an awareness campaign related to the lethality
of fentanyl and fentanyl-contaminated drugs; it will provide
community-based enhancement grants to mitigate the effects of
drug use, particularly focused on school-aged children. I
cannot urge committee Members strongly enough to co-sponsor
Bruce's Law and support its rapid passage. Time is not on our
side.
Finally, I'd like to again thank Chairman Green and Ranking
Member Thompson for the opportunity to address this committee.
Chairman, I wish you Godspeed in your work here today and
the days moving forward.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Snodgrass follows:]
Prepared Statement of Sandy Snodgrass
Sept. 13, 2023
Good morning, I would like to thank you Chairman Green and Ranking
Member Thompson for the opportunity to address the committee today.
I would like to begin my testimony with a moment of silence to
honour the memory of American citizens who have lost their lives to
illicit drug poisonings. Particularly recognising American citizens
that will die today during the course of this hearing.
My only child, Robert Bruce Snodgrass, became forever 22 on October
26, 2021, in Anchorage, Alaska. He was poisoned by fentanyl on the cold
October day in a wooded area within shouting distance of a McDonalds
drive-through. The fentanyl he got that day prevented him from being
able to call out for help. He dropped and died where he stood.
Bruce loved Alaska, he was an outdoorsman, a free solo climber and
wilderness survival expert. He was safe in the backcountry of Alaska.
He was not safe in his own home town.
The year Bruce died Alaska was No. 1 in the Nation for increased
illicit drug deaths. The 73 percent increase was fueled by fentanyl.
In the first 6 months of 2023 enough fentanyl was seized in Alaska
to kill every Alaskan 3 times. Alaska is being targeted by drug cartels
due to the money they can make in my State, particularly in rural,
predominantly Alaska Native Communities. One pill in an Alaskan Village
can cost $80. That same pill is sold in large American cities for $10.
So, what to do?
I am hopeful that this committee will focus on solutions today. I
will offer 5 solutions for your consideration today and moving forward.
First, designate Mexican drug cartels and their transnational
criminal partners as terrorist organisations. This will bring the full
weight of the U.S. Government to bear down on the perpetrators that
have killed and are continuing to kill Americans on our sovereign soil.
Immediately, as Members of the U.S. House of Representatives you can
co-sponsor and support the swift passage of House Bill HR. 1564.
Second, this committee can fully support The Department of Homeland
Security's non-intrusive technology to significantly increase the
number of passenger and commercial vehicles scanned at the Southern
Border.
Third, The Postal Inspection Service has created a standardized
nationwide Task Force Officer (TFO) Program. TFO's are armed with non-
invasive scanners and are imbedded with Postal Inspectors. Often part
of High-Intensity Drug Trafficking Area (HIDTA) Task Forces. They act
as critical force multipliers and this committee can update the funding
resources to advance the investigations and interdictions of TFO
Programs around the country.
Fourth, The HIDTA Programs in all 50 States are a model of how to
dramatically impact the contaminated drug supply in this country. HIDTA
initiatives create task forces including Tribal, local, State, and
Federal law enforcement, including Homeland Security Forces, to very
effectively investigate, interdict, and prosecute Drug Trafficking
Organisations (DTO's) in all 50 States. I have witnessed HIDTA's
effectiveness in Alaska and I am asking that this committee fully
support HIDTA.
Fifth, Congressman Trone has introduced the bi-partisan House Bill
H.R. 2867, known as Bruce's Law, named for my son. Bruce's Law will
establish an Awareness Campaign related to the lethality of fentanyl
and fentanyl-contaminated drugs. It will provide community-based
enhancement grants to mitigate the effects of drug use, particularly
focused on school-aged children. I cannot urge the Members of this
committee strongly enough to co-sponsor Bruce's Law and support its
rapid passage. TIME IS NOT ON OUR SIDE.
Finally, I would again like to thank Chairman Green and Ranking
Member Thompson for the opportunity to address this committee.
Chairman, I wish you and this committee God Speed in you work here
today and in the days ahead.

Thank you.
[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Green. Thank you, Ms. Snodgrass.
I now recognize Mr. Gelernt for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF LEE GELERNT, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, ACLU IMMIGRANTS'
RIGHTS PROJECT, AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

Mr. Gelernt. Thank you for the opportunity to testify, Mr.
Chairman, Ranking Member Thompson, and the Members of the full
committee.
Our written submission discusses recent immigration
policies that have caused incredible harm to migrants,
including the Trump administration's family separation policy
and asylum bans enacted by both the Trump administration and
the Biden administration. This morning, I want to focus in
particular on the family separation policy that ripped apart
asylum-seeking parents and children and only ended because of
the ACLU's Ms. L lawsuit.
The family separation policy is the worst thing I have seen
in my more than 30 years at the ACLU, and unfortunately, the
harm from this policy remains on-going 5 years later. Yet there
are still some who believe the policy should be reenacted. The
ACLU is committed to ensuring that the full extent of this on-
going harm is understood and not forgotten, so that such an
abhorrent policy is never again adopted.
As we came to learn, the goal of the family separation
policy was to subject families to such cruelty that they would
give up their asylum claims and to deter other asylum-seeking
families from seeking refuge here. It stands out today as one
of the worst episodes in our Nation's recent history. We now
know that there were at least 5,500 children who were separated
from their parents and there are likely more cases that we
still don't know about. Of those 5,500 children, more than 500
were under the age of 5 when taken from their families, some
were just babies still breastfeeding, one was only 6 months
old. Five years later, there remain hundreds of children who
still have not been reunited with their parents because of the
failure to document and keep track of the parents and children.
Many of these still-separated children have now spent nearly
their entire life without their parents.
Physicians for Human Rights has stated that the forcible
separation of families constituted torture. The president of
the Academy of Pediatrics referred to the family separation
policy as, ``government-sanctioned child abuse''.
But it is ultimately the individual stories that most
starkly reveal the cruelty. One mother we represented was
forced to strap her 18-month-old son into the backseat of a
Border Patrol vehicle and not allowed to comfort the hysterical
child before Federal officers took her child away. The mother
recounted that as the car drove away with her baby, she could
see him craning his neck to get one last look at her out the
window. Another separated child was a 4-year-old little boy who
wore glasses. When agents came to take him away, he fortunately
had his glasses with him, but was not able to retrieve the case
for his glasses. His mother worried constantly, every day,
whether the Government would show him where he could keep his
glasses safe at night or whether they would get him a new pair
if they broke. Another father reported that he was denied even
a few minutes to brace his son for what was about to happen.
Instead, his child was pulled away while holding his father's
leg and begging to know what was happening and where he was
being taken. Mothers and fathers were often not even told where
their children had been taken or given the chance to say
goodbye, left only to wave to them through a glass window as
they were led away. Ms. L, the lead plaintiff in the ACLU's
lawsuit, only learned that her 6-year-old daughter was being
taken away because she heard her scream from the next room,
mommy, don't let them take me.
The trauma hasn't ended even for those families who have
been reunited. One mother told us that her 4-year-old son
continued to ask if he would be taken away again in the middle
of the night when he went to sleep. Another 3-year-old boy we
represented would stand by the window after he was reunited,
looking to see if people were coming to take him away again.
It is not just the children who suffered. The parents have
also understandably been traumatized as it destroyed their
relationship with their children. Many children were too young
to understand that their parents could not stop what was
happening. They would stare into their parents eyes as they
were screaming not to be taken away, watching as their parents
just stared back helplessly. When the children were finally
reunited, they would ask their parents why they didn't fight
for them or why they didn't love them enough to keep them. When
I was in El Salvador to meet with our clients, I met a father
who broke down crying when he recounted that the very first
thing his 8-year-old child said to him when he was finally
returned was, Pappy, why did you let them take me? We all have
an obligation to make sure that this shameful chapter in our
history is never repeated.
Thank you for allowing the ACLU to testify today.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gelernt follows:]
Prepared Statement of Lee Gelernt
September 13, 2023
The American Civil Liberties Union (``ACLU'') thanks the U.S. House
Committee on Homeland Security for the opportunity to submit this
statement for the committee's hearing on the human cost of Federal
border policies.
The ACLU is a nonpartisan public interest organization with 4
million members and supporters, and 53 affiliates nationwide--all
dedicated to protecting the principles of freedom and equality set
forth in the Constitution. The ACLU has a long history of defending
civil liberties, including immigrants' rights. The ACLU vigorously
defends the Constitutional right of due process for both citizens and
immigrants, advocates for policies that protect these rights.
The ACLU represents families that were forcibly separated at the
Southern U.S. border through the Ms. L case and continues to work to
ensure that the Federal Government identifies and reunifies thousands
of migrant families. We are also one of the organizations challenging
the current asylum ban. We have participated in other litigation over
the years concerning the civil liberties of immigrants, and we
routinely advocate in Congress and State legislatures for policies that
promote due process and protections for immigrants.
Our testimony today focuses on recent policies, adopted by the
Trump and Biden administrations, that have caused incredible suffering
and harm to migrants.
the family separation policy
The family separation policy enacted by the Trump administration
ripped apart asylum-seeking parents and children and only ended because
of the ACLU's Ms. L lawsuit. The family separation policy is the most
draconian, cruel immigration policy I have seen in my more than 30
years litigating at the ACLU. Unfortunately, the harm from this policy
remains on-going 5 years later. Yet there are still some who believe
the policy should be reenacted. The ACLU is committed to ensuring that
the full extent of this on-going harm is understood and not forgotten,
so that such an abhorrent policy is never again adopted.
In 2017, the ACLU learned of reports that young children arriving
at the Southern Border with their families in search of protection,
were being ripped away from their parents. In the coming months, the
public learned that this was not just an accident or an exceptional
mistake; rather, the Federal Government had adopted a deliberate policy
of taking children from the parents, a policy that came to be known as
the ``Zero Tolerance'' policy. The goal of this policy was to subject
families to such cruelty that they would give up their asylum claims
and to deter other asylum-seeking families from seeking refuge here. It
stands out today as one of the worst episodes in our Nation's recent
history.
In March 2018, the ACLU filed a national class action in Federal
court in San Diego (the Ms. L case) to stop this despicable practice.
At the time, still months before the Federal Government officially
announced it had an official ``zero tolerance'' family separation
policy,\1\ we were already aware of several hundred separated families.
Three months later, when the court struck down the policy as
unconstitutional, calling it brutal, the Government reported to the
court and the ACLU that there were about 2,700 families who had been
separated.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See. e.g., Jonathan Blitzer, ``A Mother, Separated From Her
Children at the Border, Comes Home,'' The New Yorker, May 5, 2021,
https://www.newyorker.com/news/annals-of-immigration/a-mother-
separated-from-her-children-at-the-border-comes-home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Yet astoundingly, there were thousands more families who had been
separated, which only came to light months after the initial court
ruling. We know that there were at least 5,500 children who were
separated from their parents, and there are likely more cases that we
still don't know about. Of those 5,500 children, more than 500 were
under age 5 when taken away from their families. Some were just babies,
still breast feeding; the youngest was only 6 months old.
Five years later, there remain hundreds of children who still have
not been reunited with their parents because of the Government's
failure to document and keep track of the parents and children.\2\ Many
of these still-separated children were only babies or toddlers when
taken from their parents and have spent nearly their entire life
without their parents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ See PBS News Hour, ``Hundreds of migrant children remain
separated from families despite push to reunite them,'' Feb. 6, 2023,
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/hundreds-of-migrant-children-remain-
separated-from-families-despite-push-to-reunite-them; Philip Bump, The
Washington Post, ``Hundreds of immigrant families split apart under
Trump remain separated,'' Washington Post, Feb. 13, 2023, https://
www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2023/02/13/trump-immigrants-children-
border/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Physicians for Human Rights has stated the forcible separation of
families by the U.S. Government constituted torture.\3\ There is an
``overwhelming body of scientific literature'' that is ``replete with
evidence of the irreparable harm and trauma to children caused by
separation from their parents.''\4\ The president of the American
Academy of Pediatrics referred to the U.S. Government's family
separation policy as ``government-sanctioned child abuse.''\5\ The
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry has warned that
family separation ``places already vulnerable children at increased
risk for traumatic stress reactions, psychiatric disorders, and other
adverse medical outcomes'' and can have lifelong effects on children,
particularly those who have already fled violence or conflict.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Physicians for Human Rights, ``You Will Never See Your Child
Again'': The Persistent Psychological Effects of Family Separation
(2020), available at https://phr.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/PHR-
Report-2020-Family Separation-Full-Report.pdf.
\4\ Declaration of Lauren Shapiro, Exhibit 6, Ms. L.
\5\ CNN, ``Doctor: Family separation is child abuse,'' June 18,
2018, https://www.cnn.com/videos/us/2018/06/18/colleen-kraft-american-
academy-of-pediatrics-family-separation-child-abuse-ath.cnn; Justin
Wise, The Hill, ``American Academy of Pediatrics president: Trump
family separation policy is `child abuse','' June 18, 2018, https://
thehill.com/latino/392790-american-academy-of-pediatrics-president-
trumps-family-separation-policy-is-child/.
\6\ American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Statement,
Separating Immigrant Children From Their Families, June 2018, https://
www.aacap.org/AACAP/Policy_Statements/2018/
Separating_Immigrant_Children_From_Their_Families.aspx.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These aggregate statistics and medical evidence tell the story in
one respect but cannot begin to account for the lasting damage, trauma,
and hardship that this policy has caused to these children and their
parents. The individual stories most starkly reveal the cruelty.
One of the separated mothers we represented was forced to strap her
18-month-old son into the back seat of a Border Patrol vehicle and not
allowed to comfort the hysterical child before Federal officers took
her child away. The mother recounted that as the car drove away with
her baby, she could see him craning his neck to get one last look at
her glimpse of her out the window.
Another separated child was a 4-year-old little boy who wore
glasses. When immigration agents came to take him away, he fortunately
had his glasses with him, but was not able to retrieve the case for his
glasses. His mother worried every day whether the Government would show
him where he could keep his glasses safe at night or whether they would
get him a new pair if they broke.
Another father reported that he was denied even a few minutes to
brace his son for what was about to happen. Instead, his child was
pulled away while holding his father's leg and begging to know what was
happening and where he was being taken. Mothers and fathers were often
not even told where their children had been taken or given the chance
even to say goodbye, left only to wave to them through a glass window
as they were led away. Ms. L, the lead plaintiff in the ACLU's lawsuit,
only learned that her 6-year-old daughter was being taken away because
she heard her scream from the next room, ``Mommy, don't let them take
me.''
The fear, trauma, and suffering hasn't ended even for those
families who have been reunited. Another mother told us that even after
being reunited with her 4-year-old son, he continued to ask if he would
be taken away again in the middle night when he went to sleep. Another
3-year-old boy would stand by the window after he was finally reunited,
looking to see if people were coming to take him away again. These
children may remain traumatized the rest of their lives.
But it is not just the children who suffered. The parents have also
understandably been traumatized by this policy, as it destroyed their
relationship with their children. Many of the children were too young
to understand that their parents could not stop what was happening.
They would stare into their parents' eyes as they were screaming not to
be taken away, watching as their parents just stared back helplessly.
When the children were finally reunited, they would ask their parents
why they didn't fight for them and why didn't they love them enough to
keep them. When I was in El Salvador to meet with our clients, I met a
father who broke down crying when he recounted that the very first
thing his 8-year-old child said to him when he was finally reunited was
``Papi, why do you let them take me?''
The trauma these families and young children experienced will have
a lasting impact on their lives and is a stain on our Nation. Going
forward, we must commit to ensuring that our Government never returns
to such a heinous policy of harming children and their families. We all
have an obligation to make sure that this shameful chapter in our
history is never repeated.
asylum bans
Although the family separation policy has ended for now, Federal
and State agencies continue to use abusive and unnecessary tactics to
stop asylum-seeking children and others from getting protection in the
United States. Right now, children and their families arriving at our
Southern Border continue to face myriad challenges and abuses when they
try to seek protection.
The current Biden administration asylum ban, which the ACLU and
partners are challenging in Federal court, has left many families
stranded in life-threatening conditions along the border while they
wait for a rare CBP appointment and opportunity to request help at a
port of entry. Since this new asylum ban went into effect in May, it
has already threatened the lives of many children and their parents
trying to apply for asylum in the United States. Asylum-seeking
parents, forced to wait in Mexico for a rare CBPOne appointment, have
had to sleep in encampments with cable wires tied around their children
to ensure their children are not abducted, abused, and potentially
trafficked in the middle of the night.\7\ While waiting in these life-
threatening conditions where migrant families are an easy and
predictable target, women have been raped and whole families have been
kidnapped, even tortured.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Human Rights First, Refugee Protection Travesty: Biden Asylum
Ban Endangers and Punishes At-Risk Asylum Seekers (2023), https://
humanrightsfirst.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/Refugee-Protection-
Travesty_Asylum-Ban-Report_July-2023-1.pdf.
\8\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also know from past asylum bans that restricting access to
asylum leads to horrific harms. In Huisha-Huisha v. Mayorkas, the ACLU
and partners' case challenging the exclusion of asylum seekers under
the infamous Title 42 policy enacted by the Trump administration and
retained by the Biden administration, the Court of Appeals for the D.C.
Circuit observed that asylum seekers faced horrible abuses when turned
back to places where they faced torture or persecution. Judge Walker,
writing for the Court, observed that for families who were turned back
to Mexico without an opportunity to apply for asylum, ``the record is
replete with stomach-churning evidence of death, torture, and rape.''
Indeed, the Court noted that for those forced to walk back across the
bridge back to Mexico, it was as if they were ``forced to walk the
plank into those places.''\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Huisha-Huisha v. Mayorkas, 27 F.4th at 733 D.C. Cir. 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
It is not only criminal gangs that are threatening the safety and
well-being of these families. This summer when the State of Texas put
razor-wire-wrapped buoys in the Rio Grande, over 130 migrants were
reportedly injured and needed medical treatment because of this callous
attempt to stop asylum seekers from out of the United States.\10\ Among
those injured were children stuck on the wire-wrapped buoys and a young
pregnant woman who miscarried while caught in the wire.\11\ According
to news reports and information from a whistleblower, Texas troopers
were ordered to refuse water to migrants and push even young children
back into the river,\12\ and in recent weeks, it has also emerged that
fathers were separated from the rest of the families without being
given information on where their children and partners were.\13\ These
intentional and dangerous acts are a continuation of our Government's
harsh and harmful treatment of children and their parents who seek
safety at our borders.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Benjamin Wermund, ``Texas Troopers Treated 133 Migrants for
Injustices From Razor Wire Over Two Months This Summer,'' The Houston
Chronicle, Aug. 30, 2023, https://www.houstonchronicle.com/politics/
texas/article/border-wire-injuries-18336354.php.
\11\ Benjamin Wermund, ``Texas troopers told to push children into
Rio Grande, deny water to migrants,'' The Houston Chronicle, July 17,
2023, https://www.houstonchronicle.com/politics/texas/article/border-
trooper-migrants-wire-18205076.php; see generally, Benjamin Wermund &
Jeremy Wallace, ``Razor wire along the Rio Grande is blocking border
agents from reaching at risk migrants,'' The Houston Chronicle, July
11, 2023, https://www.houstonchronicle.com/politics/texas/article/
texas-border-razor-wire-memo-18193102.php; John C. Moritz, Michael
Collins, & Francesca Chambers, ``Two found dead in Rio Grande where
Texas' floating barrier and razor wire sparked Federal lawsuit'' USA
Today, https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2023/08/03/two-
dead-in-rio-grande-where-texas-installed-razor-wire-and-buoys/
70522492007/; Peter Breen, ``3 takeaways from DPS trooper's email about
the state of the Texas border,'' The Houston Chronicle, July 18, 2023,
https://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houston-texas/trending/article/
border-injury-death-razor-wire-trooper-email-18206609.php.
\12\ Benjamin Wermund, ``Texas troopers told to push children into
Rio Grande, deny water to migrants,'' The Houston Chronicle, July 17,
2023, https://www.houstonchronicle.com/politics/texas/article/border-
trooper-migrants-wire-18205076.php.
\13\ Acacia Coronado, ``Texas separates migrant families, detaining
fathers on trespassing charges in latest border move'' Associated
Press, Aug. 4, 2023, https://apnews.com/article/texas-immigration-
family-separation-a652cafdfd5270b097d0ebcc034796b8; Brittany Gaddy,
``Texas Department of Public Safety separating several fathers from
families seeking asylum, immigration attorney says,'' ABCNews, Aug. 4,
2023, https://abcnews.go.com/US/texas-department-public-safety-
separating-fathers-families-seeking/story?id=101969972; Rosa Flores &
Sara Weisfeldt, ``Texas is separating families at the border in
apparent `harsh and cruel' shift in policy, immigration attorney
says,'' CNN, Aug. 2, 2023, https://www.cnn.com/2023/08/02/us/texas-
border-policy-separating-families/index.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Our border policy has for too long put children, their parents, and
other asylum seekers and migrants in danger when they come to the
United States seeking protection. We must ensure that our country does
not shrink from its long and rightly celebrated commitment to providing
an opportunity for those in danger to seek protection.

Chairman Green. Thank you, sir, for your testimony.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after the Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ballard, you are a former HSI investigator who has
investigated human trafficking, correct?
Mr. Ballard. Yes.
Chairman Green. Are the catch-and-release policies of
Secretary Mayorkas facilitating the trafficking of people and
children?
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely. What's happening is these children
are being brought in----
Chairman Green. Let me--if I could.
Mr. Ballard. Sure.
Chairman Green. So the answer to that question is yes?
Mr. Ballard. Yes.
Chairman Green. OK. So worded another way, there are cases
of human trafficking and sex trafficking of minors that are
occurring that would not be occurring if these policies were
not in place?
Mr. Ballard. That's correct.
Chairman Green. We have made it clear--in fact, the
Attorney General, Attorney Merrick Garland, appointed by
President Biden, admitted in the U.S. Senate that the cartels
are using the catch-and-release policy strategically to
overwhelm the Border Patrol agents and bypass them with drugs
and trafficked humans. Do you believe Secretary Mayorkas knows
there are human trafficking cases happening because of his
policies?
Mr. Ballard. I do believe he knows that.
Chairman Green. So you believe he knows that what Attorney
General Garland admitted to the Senate? He knows that is
happening?
Mr. Ballard. I don't know how he couldn't know.
Chairman Green. So is it fair to say that the policies of
the United States Government--and I am reiterating here--the
policies of President Biden and Secretary Mayorkas' leadership
encourage and facilitate mass human and child trafficking?
Mr. Ballard. I would say yes.
Chairman Green. Mr. Gelernt, again, I have a question for
you, sir.
You mentioned earlier in your testimony that it was both
Trump and Biden policies.
Mr. Gelernt. Yes.
Chairman Green. I think I heard you say that. Is the ACLU--
and the policies I am thinking of, are they removed the
background checks on the people who would be the sponsors, and
this is how we are getting 100 kids in one home and all this
because nobody's doing any vetting on this. Is the ACLU suing
the Biden administration like it sued the Trump administration?
Mr. Gelernt. We are suing the Biden administration over
various policies. We are not suing over that. We obviously are
concerned if steps were not taken to vet. But I think----
Chairman Green. Do you think you might sue the Biden
administration? I mean, it is 85,000 kids and you sued over
5,500 under the Trump administration and were brought here to
talk about policies that are going on right now, but you are
talking about policies that happened long ago or in the
previous administration. We are here investigating what is
going on right now. You were brought here as the other side's
witness, right, and you talked about that, but are you all
going to sue the Biden administration over the 85,000 missing
children because of these policies?
Mr. Gelernt. Well, sir, I think we always will sue
whichever administration is in place. But I think on those
children, we don't know that they were missing. I suspect that
their sponsors often don't answer calls from the Government. I
think the way to deal with it----
Chairman Green. Let me ask it this way.
Mr. Gelernt. So I don't know that they're missing.
Chairman Green. I appreciate that. So we find that 100 went
to one home--100. Do you think that is reasonable?
Mr. Gelernt. We certainly don't want to see child
exploitation. I don't know enough about the specific facts.
But----
Chairman Green. That is fair.
Mr. Gelernt [continuing]. To the extent that steps can be
taken to stop child exploitation, we certainly want those steps
to be taken.
Chairman Green. That is fair. Well, we will be watching to
see, because I think if you really do take on both parties'
administrations, this one would be a good one for you guys to
look into because they removed the background checks from the
sponsors of these children. We find in Austin, Texas, where 20
and 30 and the New York Times found where kids were being
forced labor--in our country.
Mr. Ballard, I interrupted you earlier. I think you were
going to talk a little bit about how the policies are
facilitating human trafficking and I would like to give you the
rest of my time to do so.
Mr. Ballard. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
It's very disturbing to me because I know how the United
States does deal with children. For example--how they should
and how they have. I adopted two children from Haiti that we
had rescued in an operation in February 2014. I went through a
major vetting process. I rescued the kids and I had to be
vetted. I was happy to be vetted. Home studies, background
checks, fingerprints over and over and over again. I was
grateful that the U.S. Government did this. The same would
happen to a missing child or an unaccompanied child that showed
up by himself or herself in New York City or Washington, DC.
They would be treated like the precious children of God that
they are.
My question for the administration would be, why don't you
treat these foreign children the same way? Why would you let
them come in with no vetting, very little to no vetting. It's
not that the number----
Chairman Green. To be clear, we are talking about the
vetting of the sponsor who takes those children, right?
Mr. Ballard. Correct. It's more difficult to adopt a cat
from a shelter in the United States than it is to go down and
take one of these children out of the custody of HHS and claim
that I'm the sponsor. There's no background checks. There's no
fingerprinting. Why would you afford a foreign child much less
protection than you would an American child? I think it's
despicable, frankly.
Chairman Green. Thank you. My time has expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Let me thank the witnesses for their testimony.
Ms. Cantu, I would like to acknowledge that I share your
concern about the mental health challenges of officers and
agents on the front lines at DHS. In fact, I introduced H.R.
2577 with Mr. Garbarino to enhance the wellness for this
critical segment of the DHS work force. It passed out of this
committee on a bipartisan basis in July. I look forward to the
full House's consideration in coming days and I would look
forward to the Chairman giving me some help on the Republican
side so that the issue you outlined before our committee that
we can add to the challenges that our employees face and their
families from a health and wellness standpoint.
So that was just--I heard you--and one of the reasons Mr.
Garbarino and I did the bill together, it made sense and has
nothing to do with party. It is about our brave men and women
who serve this country, and that is why we did it.
Apart from that, Mr. Gelernt, family separation is bad, and
I think it talks about our values as American citizens. Can you
give me some of the examples that you came across in
challenging this policy?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes. I think in addition to some of the
examples I gave this morning, what we came across are just
children who were so young and so traumatized and had no idea
what was happening to them. They would literally be pulled away
from their parents, begging and screaming not to be taken and
the parents were helpless, standing there watching. What the
physicians told us was that the only reason a 3-, 4-, 5-year-
old child is not scared of the world as a general matter is
because they think their parents can protect them from
everything. But what happened to these children is they would
be staring in their parents eyes as they were taken away. At
that moment, they would realize their parents actually can't
protect them from the world. It's forever changed their lives
in many, many cases, where the children now have a deep-seated
trauma and feeling of vulnerability, like the children I
mentioned that are worried about being taken away again in the
middle of the night. Many of the parents were too scared even
to ask where their child was being taken. Parents told me,
well, if I ask where my child's going to be taken, maybe
they're going to treat my child even worse. Sometimes the
parent wouldn't be told for months where their child was,
sometimes they wouldn't be able to talk to the child for
months. If the child was pre-verbal, they would just be staring
into a camera, not knowing and seeing their child crying. I
think what many physicians have said now is that we may never
undo the trauma we caused these children.
Mr. Thompson. Well, I might--can get back to you.
Ms. Snodgrass, obviously, I am a father, a grandfather, and
I just can't imagine losing either one of my children or
grandchildren. So I know I speak for the rest of the committee
in the loss of your son. It is absolutely traumatic. But I can
tell you that a lot of us have supported the non-intrusive
technology. Every time it has come up, we have passed
legislation to do it. I promise you that if it comes again, and
it will, in this session and I want some of my other colleagues
to support it too. It passed, but it was not on a bipartisan
basis. I want us to do what is right for the country.
For our men and women on the Border Patrol, we need to
enhance the numbers. We are trying to get more people, and we
are doing that, but it needs to be a bipartisan effort. So I
look forward to working with my colleagues on the Republican
side to provide the help necessary to address many of the
problems that we have outlined here today.
With that, Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Higgins for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would like unanimous consent to offering it to the record
a report produced on September the 6 of this year by DHS
Inspector General Joseph Cuffari.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The information has been retained in committee files.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I will be citing from that report during my questioning.
Mr. Ballard, do you know Inspector General Cuffari?
Mr. Ballard. I do not.
Mr. Higgins. You can have the honor of meeting him soon if
I can arrange that. He is a wonderful man. He is dedicated to
his job. His job as the Inspector General of DHS is to
investigate potential criminal behaviors and unconstitutional
behaviors from within DHS. Our Southern Border, 1,954 miles of
our Southern Border--I have walked every foot of it--is 100
percent controlled by cartels on the Mexican side of that
border. Under this administration--you all can believe whatever
numbers you want--the number I am about to tell you is real, we
have had 9 million illegal crossings, 6 million are documented,
million-and-a-half known getaways, million-and-a-half unknown
gotaways. It is 9 million from when I went to grade school,
that is what it adds up to. So the DHS that is executing the
policies of this Biden administration is directly responsible
for this rodeo we see at our Southern Border, from sea to
shining sea. Our Southern Borders--what we used to call a large
gathering of unidentified subjects in various stages of
disagreement and argument and fight when I was a cop for a long
time, when we would roll up on a situation that looked like
that would just tell dispatch I got a rodeo over here. All the
other cops on the radio would know we were talking about. We
have a rodeo from the Pacific to the Gulf at our Southern
Border. DHS, under Secretary Mayorkas is responsible for that.
The human misery and suffering and death, and 85,000 lost
children, and our own Southern Border, now rated as the most
dangerous land crossing border in the world by a highly-
recognized immigrant international organization. It is insane.
So the guy that is responsible for investigating that is
Joseph Cuffari. He has produced this report a few days ago, and
it is quite condemning of the Biden administration. So what do
you think the Biden administration would do with an IG like
that, Mr. Ballard, in your experience?
Mr. Ballard. What do I think they'll do with his report?
Mr. Higgins. No, what do you think they would do with the
man that produced this report?
Mr. Ballard. Well, I hope they would treat him fairly and
listen to his findings, because I can--I haven't read the
report, but I can imagine----
Mr. Higgins. Hope springs eternal, does it not? This is the
Biden administration we are dealing with. They are going after
that man in his whole office. So I am telling the Executive
right now, you are watching this, we are not going to allow you
to crucify the inspector general that is revealing the horrors
of your policy--85,000 lost children.
Mr. Gelernt, are you an attorney, sir?
Mr. Gelernt. I am.
Mr. Higgins. You know, when I was a cop, we had a common
saying, a bit of a chuckle, we would say that I have known many
convicts I can trust in my life and very few attorneys.
You are here representing the ACLU, sir? Do you speak on
behalf of the ACLU this day?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. Are you here voluntarily?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes.
Mr. Higgins. Are you here with counsel or are you by
yourself?
Mr. Gelernt. I'm by myself.
Mr. Higgins. Congratulations. These 85,000 missing
children, what is your opinion about that? How does the ACLU
and you feel about 85,000 missing children? Think their civil
rights might be being violated?
Mr. Gelernt. Our view is that those children are not likely
missing, that the sponsors don't simply answer the phone.
Mr. Higgins. Yes, the sponsors are not real. You know that,
right? It is a racket. It is a sponsor racket. That is why they
are not answering the phone. That is why you can't find who
they are. The vast large percentage of these sponsors--these
kids are getting sucked into sex trafficking, primarily, human
slavery. The policies of this administration are supporting
that. We are partnering with the cartels with human
trafficking. By God, I would hope--there are many attorneys in
my family. I was the one that ended up to be the Army grunt and
the street cop. But I would hope that the ACLU would take a
serious look at exactly what kind of cases the ACLU is taking
up. I have a couple of questions for you I am going to submit
for the record afterwards.
But, Mr. Ballard, in my remaining few seconds, can you
assess from your perspective exactly what Congress should do to
help our agents at the Southern Border?
Mr. Ballard. First, we need to go find those 85,000
children, and we need to start enforcing the laws that Congress
put upon the Executive branch, which is to enforce the border.
That's the most compassionate and it's the only compassionate
policy for children is to suck the wind out of the cells of the
criminal networks making $14 million a day trafficking women
and children into our country. You end it by enforcing the
border policies.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I appreciate the
indulgence. I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Correa for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank the
committee for holding this most important hearing today. Very
important.
Mr. Ballard. Ms. Cantu, Ms. Snodgrass. Mr. Gelernt, thank
you for your testimony.
Mr. Ballard, I have had the opportunity to visit a safe
house in Tijuana, Mexico, where minors were rescued from sex
slavery south of the border. Met an 18-year-old baby girl
rescued from a prostitution house just south of the border.
Horrific stuff. Recently, I visited the Orange County Juvenile
Hall. The No. 1 reason young ladies were in jail, child
prostitution. So your testimony regarding our Nation's appetite
for child sex is disgusting. True, but disgusting.
Thank you for your testimony, sir.
Ms. Cantu, does your husband wear a blue or a green
uniform?
Ms. Cantu. Thank you for that question.
I hear often the colors get confused. Our Border Patrol
agents wear green. We wave our green line flags.
Mr. Higgins. So he wears a green uniform?
Ms. Cantu. Correct. Customs is blue.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you for your service. I have been out
there spending time with folks in green and blue to better
understand their challenges. So thank him on my behalf for his
work.
Ms. Snodgrass, I am also a father. I pray every day that my
children stay away from this poison because it is ravaging the
streets back home as well.
Mr. Gelernt, if I am--did I say that----
Mr. Gelernt. That's fine. Gelernt.
Mr. Higgins. Gelernt. Refugees. We talk about south of the
border, but I think this is a world-wide issue. Mean, I turn on
the TV, I see boats flipping over in the Mediterranean,
refugees trying to move from subcontinent to the European area.
I think this is a world-wide challenge here in the Americas. I
know Colombia is housing--now it is up to 3 million Venezuelan
refugees. I just returned from Guatemala, where that Guatemalan
president had a few words for us, saying we need help
addressing the refugee crisis. This is a world-wide phenomena
that was made even worse by COVID-19, that has devastated the
economies around the world. I hope all of us as Americans, can
begin to address that issue, because nobody, especially the
refugees, are not doing well from this challenge.
Recently, one of my trips to the Texas border, I ran across
two little girls from Ecuador, Yareli and Yasmina, ages 3 and
5. Here, as you can see, is where they were rescued. This is
the two girls that were thrown over the border wall, 14-foot
wall. They were launched over by the smugglers. The only reason
they are still alive, Ms. Cantu, is because green uniformed
border officers were able to spot them out in the middle of
nowhere and bring them to safety in the middle of the night. So
thank your husband again for the good work they are doing.
People forget about their humanitarian heart, but the good work
they are doing. But this is a border wall that they were able
to essentially be thrown over.
I guess, Mr. Gelernt, what is driving these folks north?
What would make you essentially turn over your most precious
things you have in your life, which is your children, to
unknown smugglers to smuggle them into United States?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes, thank you for that question.
I think what's driving them is not U.S. policy, but the
real danger and horrendous conditions.
Mr. Higgins. This is a world-wide issue.
Mr. Gelernt. Right. The only way--I think--you know, when I
was in Guatemala, I met a father and I asked him why he sent
his teenage son to the United States and he said, well, the
beginning of the school year, the gang slipped something under
his door saying, we know all your children, we know where they
go to school, we know the routes they take, and if they don't
join the gang, they're going to be killed. So he said to me it
was the hardest decision he had ever had to make, but there's
just too much danger. I think that's what's pushing people.
Nobody really wants to make the trek to the United States if
they don't have to, thousands of miles with a little child. So
that's what's pushing them to come here. I hope that we can
continue to have a humane, appropriate, lawful asylum system.
Mr. Higgins. If I can, I am going to interrupt you because
I am running out of time, before the Chairman cuts me off. I
don't want to minimize the fact that we have a challenge in
immigration, a refugee challenge on our Southern Border in this
country, and we need to focus on that. But I think we also have
to understand the context, which is a world-wide phenomena. I
am working--look forward to working with the folks across the
aisle to figure this one out. Real lives are at stake here, and
so is our Nation.
Thank you very much.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Guest for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ballard, my wife and I several weeks ago had the
opportunity to see the movie based upon your life, your
experience, the Sound of Freedom. I want you to know it was a
powerful movie, a movie that left us with a powerful line, a
rallying cry, if you will, that God's children are not for
sale. But we know, as we say those words we know that human
trafficking is real. Your movie or the movie about your life
depicted the realness of that. We know that there are
statistics that show us that the average age of exploitation is
12 to 15 years of age, that each year the number of cases in
the United States involving sex trafficking increases. We know
that sex trafficking is the second largest criminal enterprise
in the entire world. We know that every 30 seconds a child is
sold into slavery. Those are staggering statistics concerning
the problem that we are trying to deal with.
I want to talk a little bit about some of the things that
you have in your report briefly.
You talk about the fact that a child can be sold up to 20
times per day, 6 days a week, for a decade or longer, depending
upon the age of the child. We know that individuals who are
selling narcotics, that those narcotics can be sold a single
time, but a child can be sold time and time and time again. You
also talk about in your report polling, which I think is
important to Members of Congress that talk about the opinion of
the American public. What does the American public think on a
specific issue? You say that the American public realizes that
ending human trafficking is important, that it is an
unprecedented human crisis, and that Americans support closing
the Southern Border. You also talk a little bit about the fact
that in the United States, that we are the highest consumer of
sex abuse content in the world, that we are the demand for this
growing criminal enterprise. Then you tell a story about a
young lady that you were involved with and helped rescue in New
York City, that she had been sold and raped 30 to 40 times a
day for 5 years, and eventually she escaped from her captors.
You talk about the fact that when she came into the country
that she came not through a port of entry, but she came through
an unsecured part of our Southern Border. Then you go to make
what I think is a conclusion here that we have poor U.S. Border
security, that we have a broken U.S. policy, and that we are
feeding the growth of human trafficking. You go on to talk
about the absence of a physical border and that is contributing
to this problem.
The clip that you showed in your opening statement showed a
very powerful part of that movie where you were able to rescue
this young child as his captor was bringing him into the United
States for the purpose of entering him into the sex trafficking
industry. Then you go on and you finally conclude requiring
people to enter our border at actual ports of entry is very
effective in combating human trafficking.
So briefly, Mr. Ballard, can you talk a little bit about
the importance of requiring individuals to enter ports of
entry, about the screening that can be done, about the number
of cases of human trafficking that could be stopped if we would
just physically secure our border and require individuals, all
individuals, who are entering the country, to come through
ports of entry?
Mr. Ballard. Yes. Thank you, Congressman. Speaking of the
men and women wearing the blue uniforms, that's where they are.
They are at those ports of entry. They are experts, they have
technology, they know what to look for. If a child has their
last hope to be rescued before entering into the belly of what
is the highest-consuming nation on the planet of child rape
videos, their last hope will be to reach out to one of those
heroes in a blue uniform, help me. They will. I've watched them
do it. I've been part of it. So we need border enforcement
because it compels the movement to that final point of possible
rescue. Why would we not want that? Why would we not want every
child to have the last hope of rescue before entering into the
great United States and disappear maybe forever? So that's why.
What's interesting is it's never been partisan. I was under
two different administrations, Bush and Obama, and we kept
building the wall and building enforcement. Everyone liked it
because it saved children. It wasn't partisan. How it became
partisan is something that you can--because I need--I don't
understand. It should never have been. It rescues children,
period.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Payne for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Payne. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gelernt, we know there are still families that are
separated because of President Trump's zero tolerance policy.
Why has it been so difficult to reunite families after being
separated by the Trump administration? Is it in part because of
the last administration's failure to keep appropriate records
of these children and families that this has been made so
difficult? You know, they collected them all up and rounded
them all up and put them in the cages and then why has it been
so difficult?
Mr. Gelernt. That's exactly right, Congressman. What the
Federal judge who ruled on the family separation policy and
called it brutal and unconstitutional said was that it appears
that the Federal Government kept track of property better than
it kept track of children. So what we learned was that many,
many parents, hundreds, more than a thousand, had been deported
without their children. When we said the Trump administration
needs to look for these families and reunite them, they
refused. So we, along with partner organizations, said that we
will try and find these families. But because there were no
records, it has been painstaking. We are still looking for many
families. It has required phone calls, mailings, posters, but
also just actual detective work on the ground by a group called
Justice in Motion, as well as other groups, and we are still
looking for families. Because the records were not there, it
has been just an unbelievable task that we hope that all these
families are ultimately reunited. We won't stop till they are.
But some of these children were taken away when they were
babies or toddlers and----
Mr. Payne. Right.
Mr. Gelernt [continuing]. So now they've lived almost their
entire lives without their parents.
Mr. Payne. Right. To gentleman on the other side that spoke
just before me, he opined on the 85,000 children that are still
missing. Well, I know one of the reasons they are still
missing, because nobody took the time to make sure they took an
accounting of where these children were. So that might be a
part of that 85,000 that he is so worried about.
The Biden administration has established a task force to
reunify children and their parents. What more can be done to
help find the still missing families?
Mr. Gelernt. I think the task force has done a very good
job. I think it got off to a slow start, but now it is working
diligently with partners. Ultimately I'm not sure that there
are a lot of specifics. I think we probably are doing
everything we can, but these last remaining families could be
in hiding, and it's difficult. But I am happy to work with the
committee on additional steps as we discover them.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
Last week, the Department of Homeland Security published a
report describing the efforts the Department has undertaken to
review the--incorporate feedback from organizations
representing the needs of children, including children within
underserved communities, into the Department policy. This
report was established as a result of my bill, the Homeland
Security for Children Act, which was signed into law last year.
The report states separating children from their families to
deter other individuals from coming to the United States and
asserting an asylum claim is in clear opposition of our
Nation's values. So I just wanted to put that on the record.
Mr. Gelernt, if a future administration was to bring back a
policy that separated children from their families in some way,
what potential impact would there be on these children?
Mr. Gelernt. If the policy came back I think what we would
see is exactly what we saw before, deeply traumatized children,
possibly for the rest of their lives, as well as the parents. I
mean I can't imagine what it would be like to have my child
taken away, not know where they've been taken, not know whether
I'm going to ever get them back. I mean, one of the first
children we reunited, the emotion was so raw when they were
finally reunited. One of the reasons I think it was so raw is
not just because they had been separated for 5 months, but
because I think that they never actually thought they would see
each other again. So I think what we're talking about is
traumatizing thousands and thousands of more children again. I
hope that we'd never again in this country engage in that type
of policy.
Mr. Payne. Thank you.
To your point about you could not imagine, I would hope my
colleagues in the Congress would have had that same feeling as
I did, I could not imagine my children being separated from me
and I hope the former President and my colleagues realize that
fact.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Bishop for his 5 minutes of testimony
or questions.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ballard, I also saw the movie Sound of Freedom. I don't
know if others do this, sometimes when I see a movie based on
supposedly real life I go out and do a little research and see
how close to real life it is. The most significant finding that
I had from going to look at that, sir, is you are, from
everything I have seen, a genuine and remarkable hero. There is
one hero that surpasses you, and that is your wife, sir.
How many children do you have, including the two Haitian
children you have just mentioned?
Mr. Ballard. There's nine in total.
Mr. Bishop. When you did some fairly extraordinary things,
as that movie depicts, and Jim Caviezel, I think, acts it
marvelously--they could have put you in it because they usually
get the leading man because he is good-looking, you are not too
shabby yourself--and I say as an old bald guy--but what was
depicted in that story really happens. You really did that and
your family, your wife was committed to it to a level that is
remarkable.
Would you repeat the statistic about what the experience is
of a child who is trafficked, how long that can happen and how
many--just real quickly, because I want to use it as the basis
to ask a question to Mr. Gelernt.
Mr. Ballard. Well, a child--the ones that we have seen,
many that we have seen, they're sold over and over again, 10
times up to 20 times within a 24 hours period when they're with
a criminal network that's organized that way. There's plenty of
those in the United States.
Mr. Bishop. For how long?
Mr. Ballard. Oh, 10-plus years.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Gelernt, there are all sorts of human
miseries in life. You have described, I think, in your lawsuit
and the advocacy about it depicts one that is certainly true,
the separation of children from their parents. In most cases,
it has turned out to be on a temporary basis, but nonetheless,
one that you said is very traumatizing, no doubt. Which is
worse, that sort-of temporary separation or being exploited in
sex trafficking up to 20 times a day for as long as the child +
a decade? Which is worse, in your view?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes. I mean, Congressman, I am not here
remotely to dismiss the horror----
Mr. Bishop. Can you just say what you--I mean you wouldn't
disagree with me that the one Mr. Ballard describes is a much
more devastating misery?
Mr. Gelernt. A child sex-trafficked, a young child sex-
trafficked is as bad as it can be.
Mr. Bishop. So here is the thing, and I am sure you would
be thinking, because you are very skillful, that as you sit
there that I am depicting a false choice. That is to say, the
fact that you would see that experience would not excuse the
United States from abusing rights and separating children. I
actually totally agree with you. But you do have to think about
the design of your policies, of all of our policies and what
you do and what results that entails.
You have said that the 85,000 children that HHS has lost
track of, you don't really think they are missing. I understand
your point there, too. They would just not assume--in a lot of
cases, they'd like not to have official contacts. Let's say 6
percent of them, though, are in a different circumstance, sir.
That would be 5,500 people, 5,500 children who have gone off
the grid for some other reason. I suspect in many of those
cases, it is the reason that Mr. Ballard's presence here
testifies to.
I think Mr. Ballard, I would like to give the last little
while. I don't know that anyone in this room could contest or
doubt your commitment to children, and yet you don't seem to be
allied with Mr. Gelernt about which is the biggest problem. Can
you speak to that in the last minute and 16 seconds I have
available?
Mr. Ballard. Yes. I find it curious the amount of attention
on a policy that I actually agree with the witness that
shouldn't be repeated again. But we have something before us
right now--85,000 children are missing. Because if you
understand the vetting process that goes into, for example, an
adoption or that goes into if you find a missing child in New
York city or whatever city, the vetting process that would go
into anyone coming to claim that child. If that kid was
released to anyone without that vetting process, you would call
that child missing. Especially when you called the number and
they're not picking it up. We can suspect why they're not
picking it up.
So I think that we have before us a problem right now.
Right now this should be the focus of the Congress' actions.
Mr. Bishop. Well said.
I am going to take back my last 20 seconds because I want
to make one other point that I think sometimes eludes us. The
question is not that inside HHS suddenly bureaucrats have been
uncommitted to vetting children's sponsors. The problem is we
have gone from about 1,400 children to--I can't do the number--
to 83,000 a year that have gone missing. These are people that
have been--because the system is overwhelmed with the numbers
of unaccompanied children that have been incentivized to come.
Whether you believe that it is honorable and humane or not,
whether it is triggered by problems in other parts of the world
or not, we have designed policy--we--others have designed
policy for the United States that they believe is best and so
children are being sent here unaccompanied in massive numbers,
and you make them massive enough, you cannot build a system
sufficient to vet them. That is the end result, Mr. Gelernt, to
the policy you guys have pursued.
I have great respect for the ACLU, actually, and I would
get into that if I weren't out of time. But I suspect that we
have got to look at our overall picture and where the results
have come.
Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Thanedar for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman. I want to thank all of
witnesses. You know, your stories touch my heart. Personal
losses, heroism, everything that you talked about.
But, Mr. Gelernt, thank you again for joining us today. I
want to applaud your work fighting the previous
administration's inhumane policies. The welfare of children has
always been a priority for me and for my constituency. Now,
welfare does not just mean keeping children safe from harm, it
means ensuring that their mental well-being is protected. The
separation policy started under the previous administration
caused immense damage to the lives of many vulnerable and
helpless children. Research has shown that it led to tortious
outcomes, and these concerns are just the tip of the iceberg.
Regardless of their right to enter the country, the
separation caused undue trauma that will linger painfully. This
policy was not and is not necessary, nor does it do anything
for border control. Yet there are those who still support it.
Mr. Gelernt, considering this situation, and given your
know-how, how many policy changes are needed to undo the
problems generated by institutions such as the family
separation policy?
Mr. Gelernt. Well, we hope that no administration ever does
it again, but obviously, Congress can enact a law to prohibit
it, and that would be certainly a worthwhile thing to do so
that we didn't have to rely on the Federal courts. I hope that
the Federal courts will never allow such a policy to be
enacted. But we stand ready to work with Congress if Congress
were to take that up.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Now, the hardship of being an immigrant is something that
is often forgotten when speaking about border policy. We
quickly forget that the pluses and minuses in the data are
human beings with feelings, thoughts, fears, and joys. NGO's,
in partnership with ICE, often take care of the human character
of migrants. As an immigrant myself, I was lucky enough to be
extended a hand by an NGO when I needed it most, fighting
homelessness. Therefore, can creating partnership between
government organization and NGO's offer a workable solution to
ease the human cost of border control?
Mr. Gelernt. I think that the NGO's have an enormous role
to play, and a partnership with NGO's is the right way to go,
because I think the NGO's are trusted by immigrant communities
and can do things that sometimes the government can't do. So we
have strongly advocated for partnerships with NGO's.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, sir.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. LaLota for 5 minutes of questioning.
Oh, Mr. Gimenez. Mr. Gimenez came in on me. My apologies, Mr.
LaLota.
I recognize Mr. Gimenez.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just snuck in,
sorry.
Mr. Ballard, I watched the movie that portrays part of your
life, and it was very powerful, very powerful movie. I would
like to get your opinion. What policies that are in place now
are, if they are, helping the cartels, helping the human
traffickers to traffic minors and other people in the United
States?
Mr. Ballard. Well, we know that what drives criminal
networks who are making approximately $14 million a day, what
drives them are the very lack of enforcing our policies, the
lack of policies, the lack of enforcement of the policies that
are in place. Because if you can get a person in and a child in
that easily, that's what drives a criminal network. So we have
good laws on the books, we're just not enforcing them.
There's another issue that we should be very concerned
about. There's something called the Flores Settlement, which is
well-intended. It's a court ruling that compels a child to be
released within 72 hours into the United States, even if that
child's with their parent. Well, the traffickers are always
smarter than we give them credit for, and they've been taking
advantage of that. What they do is they'll take these children
who are unaccompanied, and they will pair them and they will
instruct them to call this woman and this man, the clients of
the smuggler, mom and dad. Border Patrol was noticing the same
kids keep coming through as the kid of the family. So that's a
part of this conversation, too, of this family separation. If
there are real families being separated, that's devastating,
that shouldn't happen. But let's vet it again. It's a lack of
vetting, it's a lack of investigating. Is that kid really with
that parent, or is that kid being abused? Is that kid being
used as a pawn in the game, in the trafficking criminal
networks efforts?
So all those things has to do with taking children, in my
opinion, making them the priority, investigating everything
about them and who's coming to get them. That's what's lacking.
Mr. Gimenez. It is interesting because my last term I went
down to the border and to check out what was going on and
actually ran into about six migrants crossing the border, a
father--two fathers, a couple teenagers. It turns out that one
of the fathers wasn't really the father. Later on, they found
out, they did some DNA testing and all that. So I am wondering
if that DNA testing is still going on to find out if these
supposedly parents are real parents. Then we really have a big
issue here.
What would you do differently in order to stem the flow of
human trafficking that we have right now? Because you are quite
right. I mean, the cartels are actually making more money on
human trafficking than they are with drugs, which is really
when you think about it, that is a heck of a thing to say. They
are making billions of dollars on human trafficking. What would
you do differently?
Mr. Ballard. Well, for one, I would return the rapid DNA
technology that was once in place and this current
administration took it away several months ago. I don't know
why they did that. I've used this technology. It's like within
20 minutes you can get a positive or negative ID and confirm.
Mr. Gimenez. So the administration actually took that away?
Mr. Ballard. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. They did? So we have an administration that is
saying that it is inhumane to separate families from each
other, and yet they don't even know the people being brought
over are being brought by their family?
Mr. Ballard. Right. Worse than that, anyone can show up and
claim----
Mr. Gimenez. I wonder what the ACLU has to say about that.
That is a rhetorical question. Thank you. Go ahead.
Mr. Ballard. I would investigate that.
Mr. Gimenez. Yes. OK. Now, see I get upset when I see
injustice, when I see the human toll that is happening at our
border in the name of politics, in the name of open border, the
human suffering that continues to happen in the United States,
85,000 children at least, that are unaccounted for. Is that a
tragedy, sir?
Mr. Gelernt. If the 85,000 are really missing and being
exploited, absolutely. But we don't believe that the mere fact
that the calls were not answered--and I just want to--if I
could just make one point. We are all for when people show up
and there's some reason to believe that it's not the parent or
legal guardian for some kind of vetting. There's lots of ways
to do it, and it's easy. DNA was mentioned, calling the
consulate, checking documents. But what we don't want to see
and what we have happened, what we have seen repeatedly is just
someone says, well, we don't want trafficking, so we're going
to take this family away. Then they actually are the parent.
The judge says, well, why don't you do a DNA test? It becomes
clear it is the parent. So I think there needs to be balance on
both sides.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. My time is up. I wish I had a heck
of a lot more time because I could have a lot more questions.
Thank you and I yield back.
Mr. Guest [presiding]. At this point the Chair recognizes
Mr. Goldman for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Gelernt, a couple quick questions for you. Can the
Biden administration unilaterally hire more immigration judges
to address the long backlog of asylum claims?
Mr. Gelernt. I apologize. I do not know all the technical
aspects of what they can do now and whether they have----
Mr. Goldman. Well, they would need authorization and
appropriation from Congress, right?
Mr. Gelernt. Well, right, so--right.
Mr. Goldman. So can the administration just print money so
that they can hire more border security agents, or is that
something that Congress has to do?
Mr. Gelernt. No. No.
Mr. Goldman. OK. It is interesting to hear my colleagues
say that the administration's policies are political when there
are so many obvious legislative issues that need to be fixed by
Congress that the administration cannot do. Unfortunately, what
is political about our immigration discussion right now is what
my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are doing, and
they are using immigration as a political partisan cudgel, and
they have no interest in actually solving the problems. The
backlog of asylum claims is a significant problem that we need
to address, our border security is a significant problem that
we need to address. We may disagree on how to do it, but
Congress has to do it.
So I find it remarkable when I hear the Chairman say that
this administration, ``Encourages child and sex trafficking''.
Or my colleague from Louisiana says that the Government is
partnering with cartels in human trafficking.
Mr. Ballard, do you agree that this Government is
encouraging human trafficking and partnering with the criminal
organizations to engage in human trafficking?
Mr. Ballard. I wouldn't say it's wittingly, but I would
definitely say that the trafficking networks are using a failed
policy to get people and children into our country in a way
that's unethical and flat-out wrong.
Mr. Goldman. Unethical and wrong----
Mr. Ballard. And wrong.
Mr. Goldman [continuing]. To enforce our--OK.
Let's talk about that for a second. You have talked about
the control of the human trafficking network by the cartels,
right?
Mr. Ballard. Correct.
Mr. Goldman. The cartels are the ones who are or
orchestrating this and benefiting from it and pushing it,
correct?
Mr. Ballard. Correct.
Mr. Goldman. The cartels, you would agree, rule to the
extent they do by force and threat of violence, correct?
Mr. Ballard. Yes.
Mr. Goldman. They do that because they possess weapons of
war, such as AR-15s, correct.
Mr. Ballard. The cartels, yes, they possess those things.
Mr. Goldman. Do you know where the majority of those
weapons of war come from that the cartels use?
Mr. Ballard. I don't.
Mr. Goldman. The United States. The United States.
Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask unanimous consent to
introduce a July 24, 2023 article by Reuters that is entitled
``Mexico Urges U.S. Court to revive a $10 billion lawsuit
against gun makers''.
Mr. Guest. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

Mexico Urges US Court to Revive $10 Billion Lawsuit Against Gun Makers
By Nate Raymond
July 24, 2023 3:26 PM EDT, Updated 6 months ago
BOSTON, July 24 (Reuters).--The Mexican government on Monday urged
a U.S. appeals court to revive a $10 billion lawsuit seeking to hold
U.S. gun manufacturers responsible for facilitating the trafficking of
weapons to drug cartels across the U.S.-Mexico border.
A three-judge panel of the 1st U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in
Boston questioned whether a lower-court judge wrongly concluded that a
U.S. law barred Mexico from suing Smith & Wesson Brands.
That law, the Federal Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act
(PLCAA), provides the firearms industry broad protection from lawsuits
over their products' misuse.
But Mexico's lawyers argued the law only bars lawsuits over
injuries that occur in the United States and does not shield the seven
manufacturers and one distributor it sued from liability over the
trafficking of guns to Mexican criminals.
Steve Shadowen, a lawyer for Mexico, said allowing its case to
proceed in U.S. courts would enable Mexico to not only seek damages but
also a court order aimed at combating the 20,000 deaths a year he
blamed on the companies' actions.
``What we want is an injunction to make these defendants start
paying attention to their distribution systems,'' he said. ``And it's
only U.S. courts that can provide that injunctive relief.''
Mexico says over 500,000 guns are trafficked annually from the
United States into Mexico, of which more than 68 percent are made by
the companies it sued, which also include Beretta USA, Barrett Firearms
Manufacturing, Colt's Manufacturing Co and Glock Inc.
Noel Francisco, a lawyer for Smith & Wesson, argued Mexico's
lawsuit was devoid of allegations the gun manufacturers' gun sales
themselves did anything that would create an exception to PLCAA's broad
protections.
``You have licensed manufacturers that sell to licensed
distributors that sell to licensed retailers that sell to individuals
who satisfy the requirements of Federal law, but some of them happen to
be straw purchasers,'' he said.
U.S. Circuit Judge William Kayatta said that while Mexico had not
alleged the gun makers directly violated any gun laws, one of its core
legal theories was that they aided and abetted others who trafficked
guns abroad, creating potential liability.
``What's wrong with it?'' Kayatta asked.
A ruling is expected in the coming months.
Reporting by Nate Raymond in Boston; Editing by Bill Berkrot.

Mr. Goldman. I flag this because in 2005 the Republicans
passed, over Democrats objections, a bill that provides
immunity to gun manufacturers. What we have here is that the
cartels are ruling by force, they are ruling, as you just
testified, Mr. Ballard, through the use of weapons, of guns, of
weapons of war that are trafficked across the border, but not
from south to north, from north to south. I am sure you would
agree with me that if they did not possess those weapons of
war, they would be much less powerful because that is how they
rule. No one here is defending child sex trafficking. I
supervise prosecutions of sex trafficking. There is nothing
worse. But there is a big difference between criminal
organizations engaging in crimes, child sex trafficking, and
the Government sanctioning policies that separate children from
their parents.
So let's remember, we are not talking apples to apples
here. Let's hope that we never go back to that policy, as
Donald Trump recently said he would like to do.
I yield back.
Mr. Guest. The Chair at this time recognizes Representative
McCaul for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Ballard, thank you for being here and all the
witnesses. Ms. Snodgrass, I am so sorry to hear about your
son's passing. We are hearing these stories way too much, way
too frequently.
I was a Federal prosecutor many years, I was Chair of this
committee. HSI does some great work. The movie Sound of
Freedom, very moving. Especially God's children are not for
sale. They are not. What we see with the trafficking, it is one
of the worst sins that I have seen in my lifetime, where
children are property and they are trafficked. I want to thank
you for your heroism and the job you did to save those
children. Problem is, we have more children now, trafficked,
than ever before.
Would you agree that this is probably one of the worst
human trafficking events of your lifetime right now?
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely.
Mr. McCaul. On Day 1, this administration rescinded a
policy that was working. It was called Remain in Mexico. You
know how political asylum works. They couldn't touch base in
the United States, there was no catch-and-release, 85 percent
don't qualify, 15 percent do. It worked. On Day 1, it is
rescinded. Guess what happens? The floodgates. Every Border
Patrol agent I talk to--I am from the great State of Texas--
will tell you that there was a direct cause and effect.
But it is not just human trafficking. Now we have almost
100,000 deaths due to fentanyl, which, unfortunately, Ms.
Snodgrass knows only too well. Have you ever seen anything
worse from an opioid epidemic in your lifetime?
Mr. Ballard. No, no.
Mr. McCaul. What is worse is when the kids get here, guess
what, they have no legal status. So where do they go, Mr.
Ballard? The women, the girls, where do they go?
Mr. Ballard. They have to be released to HHS, where they
wait for any sponsor to come and pick them up and take them
home.
Mr. McCaul. A lot of times, these sponsors have maybe 15
different children. Guess what they are doing? Sex trafficking.
They are bringing it now inside the United States of America.
Guess what? Where do the young boys typically go? They don't
have a home. Maybe they have a sponsor. Guess what happens to
them?
Mr. Ballard. Well, they're exploited, labor, sex. Any kind
of exploitation is available. They have no name, no number, no
identity. They are the perfect victim of any kind of
exploitation within this country because no one even knows they
exist.
Mr. McCaul. The perfect victim. Both the girls and the
boys. The boys, I would argue, go to MS-13, where they got to
pay back their debt to the cartels. This is a racket, and it is
sanctioned by this administration. In fact, it was created by
this administration. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Ballard. The policies absolutely made this possible.
Absolutely.
Mr. McCaul. The policies.
You know, when I was a Federal prosecutor there is aiding
and abetting complicit with an offense. Would you consider
these policies to be aiding and abetting the criminal conduct
that we are seeing?
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely. Especially since the
administration has been told and warned and told again that
that's what they're doing. If they continue doing it,
absolutely I'd say they're absolutely aiding and abetting and
they're complicit in this.
Mr. McCaul. Secretary Mayorkas knows better. I have known
him for a long time. I worked with Jeh Johnson. He was a U.S.
Attorney like I was, in the border State of California. He
knows exactly what he is doing, but he is disregarding the
truth, and he won't change the policy that is causing so much
harm and destruction to this country.
Would you say that Secretary Mayorkas is complicit with the
human trafficking, with the fentanyl, with the sex trafficking,
with the deaths?
Mr. Ballard. Because I've seen him be questioned in
hearings both Senate and House, and I know that he now knows
because I've seen it, I have to say, unfortunately, yes, that
he would have to be complicit in it.
Mr. McCaul. Have you ever seen the death rate higher than
it is today of people just trying to get to the border?
Mr. Ballard. Never. It's never been this high.
Mr. McCaul. Because there are so many of them.
Mr. Ballard. There's so many.
Mr. McCaul. Because we are open for business. That is a
sign the administration put on the border, we are open for
business, come on in, come on in. Once you touch base in the
United States, guess what? Catch-and-release. My first bill in
Congress 20 years ago began catch-and-release. Guess what? We
are back to it again. It is a failed policy. It doesn't work.
We finally had it fixed, and then this administration comes in
and they screwed it all up. It comes at a high price. Too many
people are dying from overdose. Ms. Snodgrass, my heart goes
out to you. My children have been to five funerals already of
their friends. Too many human trafficking cases. We just opened
up the United States to be a big criminal conspiracy network.
Is that correct, Mr. Ballard?
Mr. Ballard. Yes.
Mr. McCaul. I see my time has expired.
Thank you so much, and I appreciate all of you.
Mr. Ballard, thanks for the job you have done.
Mr. Ballard. Thank you, sir.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Magaziner for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman.
We do have a humanitarian crisis at the border and the way
you deal with a humanitarian crisis is with humanity. not with
cruelty, not with political posturing, with humanity.
Unfortunately, too many of my colleagues are more focused on
impeachment theater than they are on working together in a
bipartisan way to solve the problems at the border.
There are Republicans on this committee who filed articles
of impeachment against the Homeland Security Secretary 2 years
ago when he had only been on the job for a couple of months,
and others who bragged to their supporters that impeachment was
in the works even before the committee began holding hearings
on this topic. I really wish that my colleagues would stop
playing political games and work together in a bipartisan way
to advance real solutions at the border because there are
things that will help that we can come together on, if you
would just work with us.
So look, the vast majority of the migrants coming to our
Southern Border are escaping poverty, they are escaping
political persecution, they are seeking a better life for
themselves and their children because they see the United
States as a beacon of hope. In many cases, the migrants coming
to the border are seeking to come legally. I cannot stress this
enough, in many cases they want to do the right thing, apply
for legal asylum under our laws and immigrate legally.
Unfortunately, many migrants on their journey to the United
States face danger from drug cartels, from human smugglers,
from gun smugglers. Even when they are able to avoid the
cartels and the smugglers, many die on their arduous journey.
When they arrive at the border, oftentimes they face weeks and
months of delays and delays and delays and red tape before they
can have their legal claims processed. Dying of thirst, dying
of starvation, running out of time, they seek to enter the
country between ports of entry out of sheer desperation, not
because they want to, but because they have no other choice.
Of course, it is not just the migrants who are falling
victim to the cartels and the traffickers and the gun
smugglers, it is American citizens too.
So let's talk about solutions. In my conversations with
Border Patrol leadership, they were clear that their No. 1 ask
of us is a more streamlined system at legal ports of entry so
that the migrants who are trying to do the right thing and come
here legally aren't driven between ports of entry, but have
their claims processed in an orderly way at ports of entry. I
heard Mr. Ballard talk about the bravery of the blue shirts,
the customs and immigration officials, and I agree completely.
We need more blue shirts. We need more blue shirts who are
qualified at the ports of entry, who know how to separate the
good guys from the bad guys. When it comes to Border Patrol,
what they are asking us is make it easier for the people trying
to do the right thing to go to ports of entry so that we can
focus our efforts between ports of entry, going after the bad
guys, going after the smugglers, going after the cartels. We
are not going to fix illegal immigration in this country
without fixing legal immigration. That is part of the solution.
I wish my colleagues would work across the aisle on this
because there are real bipartisan solutions that will help.
We cannot go back, we must not go back to the cruel tactics
of the past. Fifty-five hundred children, at least that we know
of, separated from their families under the Trump
administration, including 500 under age 5. Thousands of parents
who risked their lives so that their children could have a
better future and will now probably never see their children
again because of the despicable, grandstanding politicians who
wanted to look tough. Now another grandstanding politician, the
Governor of Texas, has illegally strung miles of razor sharp
coils across the banks of the Rio Grande. Children, some as
young as 5, receiving staples for lacerations. Let's not forget
the Governor of Florida, who sent agents to Texas, not even his
own State, to fool people into getting on planes, telling them
that they would get help, but never notifying the States that
they were being sent to. It was all a charade, political
grandstanding. Let's work together on real solutions, better
border security, a more streamlined legal immigration process,
humanity, not cruelty. There are real solutions here that we
can come together as a country around, but the grandstanding
has to stop.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Garbarino for his questioning.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, the
witnesses, for being here today.
I want to start with Ms. Cantu. The DHS Inspector General
released a report in May of this year that found that ECE and
CBP personnel felt that Secretary of Mayorkas' policies have
forced them to perform their job with one hand tied behind
their back. Multiple chief patrol agents, including the now
chief of the Border Patrol, told this committee in official
interviews this summer that they had heard similar frustrations
from their agents. Do you agree with this assessment?
Ms. Cantu. Yes, I agree.
Mr. Garbarino. To the extent you feel comfortable sharing,
what additional frustrations has your husband expressed with
the current policies of the Secretary?
Ms. Cantu. I could say that our agents share the
frustration with them not being allowed to be those asylum-
seeking judges, because before they were. They were the first
contact of anybody seeking asylum. They could get to decide,
because they got the first-hand approach to these people,
whether they should stay or they should go, whether they were
lying or they were not lying. A lot of duties have been taken
away from our Border Patrol agents, the duties that they
learned at their academy to do, and now they've been just
diluted because of the simple concept of the border is open.
Now it's too hard for our agents.
Another frustration is not being able to have a one-on-one
interview with juveniles, with kids. Before our agents would do
that, our Border Patrol agents would. How do I know that?
Because my husband would come home with all those stories. Now
it's not like that anymore. It's too many because of the same
concept, our border is open. Now that's how we start losing
kids, because our agents have lost the one-on-one with those
kids.
So the fact that the rules, the laws that are in place are
not being followed, and that's frustrating for them. I can say
that the majority of agents that I've spoken to between
conversations, everybody says the same thing. I haven't heard
anybody say differently. The frustration of not having our laws
in place, not having Remain in Mexico in place, not being able
to be those judges because they're the first people that can
tell whether it's a real story or not. Not able to do the one
on one interview with the juveniles, knowing whether that
parent is a parent or not. Those Border Patrol agents can make
that distinction. They're the best eyes out there to do that
job. But all of these tasks that they have learned to do at
their academy has been stripped away from them because of the
concept that the border is open.
Now here we are, everybody asking these questions. With all
due respect, those questions that everybody's been asking,
you're talking about are Border Patrol agents. I haven't come
across a question that you guys have asked that doesn't pertain
to an agent. Whether these families, these kids were separated,
we already know what happened to those kids.
The frustration with our agents is that all these steps are
being skipped. They've been skipped out of this equation. Every
agent can tell you exactly how to fix this problem, but nobody
is listening. One more time, our Border Patrol agents have been
completely skipped out of this entire system. That's why we sit
here today. That's the frustration.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, and I understand and I appreciate
that. I know that frustration often leads to trauma, PTSD for
these agents. The Ranking Member and I do have that DHS suicide
prevention bill that we are working on. So hopefully we can get
that moving.
But I only have a little bit of time left and I want to get
to Ms. Snodgrass. I am very sorry for your loss. But I want to
ask you this question. The DA's latest national threat
assessment found major cartels are operating in at least 60
American cities peddling dangerous drugs. According to
preliminary data, Alaska had a larger percentage increase in
overdose deaths than any other State from 2020 to 2021, with
fatalities rising from 146 to 253. Your organization, Alaska
Fentanyl Response Project, works to raise awareness about
dangers of fentanyl and combats drugs in Alaska. Can you please
explain how fentanyl impacts Alaskan communities?
Ms. Snodgrass. Thank you for the question.
So Alaska is being targeted by Mexican drug cartels because
of the prices that they can charge there. They can charge $80
for one pill that's normally sold for $10 in other American
cities. The rural Alaskan communities are only accessible by
air. Those air carriers, private air carriers, do not screen.
So you get off a major airlines and then you get on a small air
carrier, you can get on with whatever you can carry and you're
not screened. We recently had interdictions in Kodiak, Alaska,
a very small community of maybe 1,000 people with 3,000 pills--
3,000 pills headed to a community of 1,000 individuals. Happens
all the time in Alaska. Alaska is working very, very hard in
interdicting these drugs. They are boots-on-the-ground guys,
very similar to who you're talking about, that we will not wait
for the Federal Government. We're doing it ourselves in Alaska.
So we're very unique in that, that we can do that. But Alaska
has a big target on its back. The DEA knows it, and they're
helping us.
Other cities, other States, other countries, there's no
difference between Alaska and anywhere else in the United
States. It's being brought into every community around the
country every day. Three hundred Americans die on American
sovereign soil every day.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that answer, and again, I thank
you for your hard work.
I am over my time. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Garcia for his 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
all of our witnesses.
Certainly it definitely feels like deja vu again here in
this hearing. We have the same hearing it seems over and over
again without actually really bringing up issues that would
make this country safer.
We have had 6 full committee hearings, 5 of them just on
the border, one of which, of course, was just the Republican
caucus just yelling at Secretary Mayorkas here in this chamber.
Now, everyone takes border security seriously, but I do want to
remind us this is the Homeland Security Committee, not just the
border committee. But we also know why House Republicans
continue to focus on this issue. It is over and over again a
political stunt focused on impeaching Secretary Mayorkas. We
also keep hearing lies repeated over and over by some of our
colleagues on the other side.
I have a couple questions for Mr. Gelernt. Again, to
reiterate, is the border open, and is it legal to claim asylum
in this country?
Mr. Gelernt. It is not illegal to seek asylum.
Mr. Garcia. Would it be legal for the Biden administration
to refuse to accept asylum claims?
Mr. Gelernt. It would be. We believe that the current
policy is effectively denying people the right to apply for
asylum, and that's why we've brought a lawsuit.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you.
Has the Biden administration ordered border agencies to
stop enforcing the law?
Mr. Gelernt. Not that I'm aware.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, and I hope that settles some things
for our colleagues.
I also want to remind our colleagues that FBI crime data
shows that in border communities crime is actually 15 percent
lower than the national average. This is a narrative that is
against what is normally brought up as some sort of chaos
happening in border communities across the border.
But I also want to address how broken our conversation on
immigration is. We should be clear that there is no way to an
orderly border without a conversation about legal pathways.
Many of my colleagues on the Democratic side have brought this
up, but we also have to be very clear about why these
conversations are happening. Our conversation is broken
because, unfortunately, House Republicans are competing by
threatening people and national Republicans are making lies
about what is actually happening along the border.
Now, Mr. Gelernt, would it be a good idea you think to
shoot migrants in the legs, as Donald Trump has advocated?
Mr. Gelernt. I'm sorry, Congressman?
Mr. Garcia. Do you think it would be a good idea to shoot
migrants in the legs, as Donald Trump has advocated?
Mr. Gelernt. No, I don't.
Mr. Garcia. Do you think it would be a good idea to build a
water-filled moat with alligators along the border, as Donald
Trump has advocated?
Mr. Gelernt. No, I don't.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. I agree with you.
But we are seeing real actions taking place that are quite
shameful and disturbing. Governor Greg Abbot, as you know,
recently took horrific actions by illegally deploying actual
floating buoys, which we saw with blades on them, to maim
innocent people at the border. The sheriff of the county where
these blades were deployed, who is a Border Patrol veteran,
blasted the barrier as a waste of money and far from effective.
We know Republican leaders continue to tell their base that we
can solve this problem also with military strikes in Mexico.
Former President Trump--back to Donald Trump--said he wants
battle plans drawn for attacking Mexico. Ken Cuccinelli, who
Trump picked to run the Department of Homeland Security, wrote
a policy memo calling for the full-scale multi-invasion of
Mexico territory over a few years. Florida Governor Ron
DeSantis has declared that he is prepared to authorize drone
strikes in Mexico. Almost every Republican Presidential
candidate has claimed to agree with this policy. I hope the
American people understand how much damage and chaos, of
course, this would unleash.
Now, Mexico's former Ambassador has warned, ``That Mexico
probably will refuse to continue to cooperate with a President
that threatens to use force against Mexico without Mexico's
consent''. So this idea that we are somehow going to invade
northern Mexico, which is being parroted by Donald Trump and
the other Republican candidates, is completely crazy.
Now, Mr. Gelernt, I know you have a great deal of
experience with the refugee population in northern Mexico who
are waiting, in many cases, to claim asylum. What would the
impact of a military strike have on conditions there? How would
that be received?
Mr. Gelernt. I don't believe it would be received well.
Mr. Garcia. What do you think would create a more orderly
Southern Border? Legal pathways for asylum seekers who are
often fleeing cartels or American planes bombing northern
Mexican cities?
Mr. Gelernt. I think you're hitting on it correctly. I
think the way to deal with asylum is to create more legal
pathways. I think one of the things the cartels prey on is the
lack of legal pathways so people have no choice but to turn to
cartels. People don't want to turn to cartels, they don't want
to have to trek miles and miles to find a place to cross, they
want to have a legal pathway through a port of entry. I think
that's the way to undermine cartels and to provide a humane
asylum system.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Gelernt.
I am sorry that the question line is even necessary. I
think it is important to highlight some of the completely
ridiculous and insane ideas that have been brought up by the
leader of the Republican Party.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ms. Greene for her 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you for bringing
this excellent panel of witnesses before us.
While Democrats on our committee want to widen the road and
create a bigger invasion into the United States of America,
enabling human trafficking, cartels making over $150 billion a
year on selling little girls, little boys, and selling people
into the United States and selling drugs, Republicans are
committed to securing our border, Mr. Chairman, and firing the
people whose failed policies are killing Americans every single
day. I want to remind everyone, we serve the United States of
American citizens, not the rest of the world. That needs to be
made clear. You need to remember your oath of office, people.
Ms. Snodgrass, I am very sorry for your loss.
Ms. Snodgrass. Thank you.
Ms. Greene. My children are 25, 23, and 19. I can't imagine
what you go through losing a child.
Ms. Snodgrass. I can tell you that those cartels are
targeting your children. They're targeting military-aged youth
in this country from China and Mexico. They're targeting your
children.
Ms. Greene. That is right. They are targeting everyone's
children.
Ms. Snodgrass, we had another witness come before our
committee. Mrs. Rebecca Kiessling testified before this
committee in March of this year. She lost her two sons to
fentanyl poisoning, like you lost your son. She lost them in
2020. She passionately called out the current administration
for its pathetic border security policies that aren't securing
our border, opening our border, that made the fentanyl crisis
even worse. However, she was laughingly mocked by the President
of the United States, Joe Biden, for her criticism of the on-
going border crisis because that fentanyl they took came during
the last administration. How did Joe Biden's comments when he
laughed at her sit with parents like you who lost a child to
fentanyl poisoning? How did that make you feel, Ms. Snodgrass?
Ms. Snodgrass. Thank you for the question.
I was here with Rebecca that day and the next day when that
comment was made. She was devastated. All of us in the fentanyl
family groups were devastated by that comment. It's
unconscionable that this is not recognized as a red, white, and
blue issue. This is American children dying on American soil.
No one knows what their voting history is when they're sold a
drug. She went underground for a month after that. We all will
never forget, we will never forget the disrespect paid to us,
and particularly Rebecca lost two sons. We'll never forget it.
To think that this could be talked about in terms of who died
on whose watch, there's no explanation for that. This country
is being targeted. It's a war being won, in my opinion, on
American soil. They're killing 112,000 Americans. That's war.
We need drug terrorists to be declared as terrorists. Fentanyl
is a weapon of mass destruction. This is a war being waged. We
are not standing up to it. We need to turn the tables and take
this war to them. Take this war to them instead of us
responding poorly, in my opinion. Take this to them. Turn the
tables.
Ms. Greene. That is right. Thank you. Thank you so much for
that. Again, I am very sorry for your loss.
Mr. Gelernt, I am sorry, I can't see your----
Mr. Gelernt. That's all right. Gelernt.
Ms. Greene. Gelernt. You know, I find it so hypocritical of
you to listen to you basically mock former President Trump's
administration, attacking the policies of testing for DNA,
keeping children safe while they are ensuring that they are
with a parent, while this administration, under Secretary
Mayorkas, under Joe Biden, this administration Democrats have
lost over 85,000 children in our country. We cannot find them.
We cannot find them. You know what? Here, listen to this. This
is so disturbing to me. The very fact--the very fact that this
administration sent more than 100 children to the same address
in Austin, Texas, while other Texas addresses received 44 and
25 minors, respectively, that is outrageous. That is
outrageous. I don't have a question for you. I just want you to
understand that there is no criticism of the former
administration and the ridiculous numbers and the so called
separating children from their parents. No, that is called
keeping them safe.
Ms. Cantu, wouldn't you say that that is what your husband
was able to do under the former President Trump's
administration, was keep children safe?
Ms. Cantu. Yes, ma'am.
Ms. Greene. How does your husband feel now and all of the
brave men and women in the Border Patrol, how does it affect
their mentality? How does it affect their marriages? How does
it affect their families when they have their hands tied behind
their backs? They are not allowed to protect these children.
They watch regular Americans get fired every single day, but
yet we can't impeach Secretary Mayorkas because that is
impeachment theater? How has that affected Border Patrol
agents?
Ms. Cantu. It's overall beyond frustrating. These Border
Patrol agents carry that weight with them every day. The fact
that they cannot comply with the oath that they swore on the
day that they graduated from their academy, this is a flag that
classes wave in the academy, in Artesia. This is a promise that
they made. This represents a promise. The oath, the ability to
protect this country. That's their frustration. They no longer
have that. They're no longer allowed to practice the laws that
they were taught. Nothing even special, it's just the basic
books.
Ms. Greene. Yes.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I wish we had another round with
these witnesses.
Chairman Green. We do. If you want to stick around. We can.
We did say at the beginning that we would allow a second round
of questioning.
Actually, we are going to take a recess for 5 minutes to
allow the witnesses to take a break and we will reconvene at
12:35. So a little more than--well, about 10 minutes. So 10-
minute recess and back at 12:35.
[Recess.]
Chairman Green. Committee is in order and I think we are
on.
Mrs. Ramirez, you are recognized for 5 minutes for your
questioning.
Mrs. Ramirez. Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member
Thompson. I am glad we had a little bit of a break. I know it
has been a long, long few hours here.
Today is our first hearing back since August recess and I
do feel like it is kind of deja vu. We have heard over and over
again that we are in a migrant crisis, and I think we all agree
there is one. No child should die in the water or be separated
from their family, citizen or non-citizen. At least that is
what my Christian values tell me. Instead of addressing this
crisis, however, this committee is looking for scapegoats to
blame--President Biden, Secretary Mayorkas, immigrants,
children, women, families. Now, if we are looking for someone
to blame for this crisis, we can look around this room and
point fingers, and certainly we do, but the truth is that this
crisis was made by years of inaction from politicians on both
sides of the aisle.
If the border is open, which we continue to hear over and
over and over again, then why is it that people are drowning in
the Rio Grande? Then why is it that 1,700 people, as the
Chairman mentioned, have been found dead through dehydration or
drowning? If the border is in fact open, then why is it that
women and children are being targeted in the way they are and
risking their entire life just to be here, a country that then
we want to deport them from as they are escaping all sorts of
horrible situations in their country? What I would say is that
if we are truly serious about addressing this crisis, folks, we
have got to start talking about immigration reform. That feels
like a deja vu of deja vu's.
We have to deliver work permits for immigrants. We have a
labor shortage right now, manufacturing jobs, hospitality, all
industries. They want to work. They don't want to have to be
forced to live in shelters or have to be forced in conditions
that are not legal. But we also have to ask ourselves, what
would make anyone, that mother with that son cross through
jungles to come to this country? What is the root cause of
migration? That is our job as legislators to ask ourselves
those questions and then find solutions.
Mr. Gelernt, give me a yes or no, given your work with
migrants, do you believe that it is important for cities to
welcome migrants and provide them with basic support as they
integrate into our communities?
Mr. Gelernt. I do.
Mrs. Ramirez. Another follow-up, yes or no, do you think
that the Federal Government can do more to help with this?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes.
Mrs. Ramirez. I agree with you, too. I agree with you, too.
You see, we talk about 85,000 children, 85,000 children
that were separated by the Trump administration. We have to
make sure that these children that are no longer children are
cared for. I would like to say to you that it is so
disappointing to me to see some of my Republican colleagues
talk about protecting women and children and then support cruel
policies such as H.R. 2, the Child Deportation Act. There is
this thing called dissonance that we can look up, you say one
thing, but do the other. That is putting at risk and opposing
funds for cities that are providing shelter. It is dissonance
to what we say we care about. You say you care about children,
you care about women. I don't want to see anyone trafficked. If
you don't, we are going to find solutions.
We should not stand for this blatant power play, nor allow
it to be used as leverage to threaten our country with a
Republican government shutdown. Our job right here is to find
solutions. People want legal pathways. They don't want to be
trafficked. It is our responsibility to create those legal
pathways. I have told my colleagues before, I am ready to work
with you on that. For those that are here, those that have been
here, you can help pass the Promise and Dream Act and give
dreamers that are no longer children a pathway to citizenship.
Our job here is to continue to fight for justice and the
rights of all that is the job that we got elected to do. That
does include immigrants, that does include refugees. Because as
I look here, unless you are Native American, every one of you
and me, our ancestors came from another country, and we were
welcomed here.
Thank you for your time. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Ezell for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for our
witnesses that have come here today to tell us what you think
is going on at the border.
We have been up here for the last several months and we
have exposed time and time again the failed border policies of
this administration. It is no secret that the border is a mess,
and it is no secret that our law enforcement officers are under
attack. I spent my entire life as a law enforcement officer,
and every time I have seen over the last several years the
attacks that come under law enforcement, it just makes me sick
to see that. To listen to Ms. Cantu today, Ms. Snodgrass, I am
so sorry for your loss, and Mr. Ballard, thank you for what you
have done. Mr. Gelernt, thank you all for being here and for
your information.
But we have seen the failed policies of this administration
time and time again, these children that are missing, these
people that have been exploited. It is terrible that it is
going on right here in our country. It could be stopped in a
very short period of time.
We have seen the suicide of our Border Patrol agents, we
have seen suicides of our law enforcement officers across this
country and it is absolutely unnecessary. It is because of
failed policies that have been put in place by this
administration. It is absolutely appalling.
I want Ms. Cantu to talk to us just for a few minutes about
some solutions, about some of the attacks that have been on our
law enforcement officers, our CBP officers down here at the
border. I want you to tell me some of the things that we could
do immediately, and I want this committee to hear it. As a wife
of a law enforcement officer, I want you to talk to us today
about some of the issues that your husband has faced and some
of his colleagues has faced so that we can understand the
amount of pressure that you are under as a wife supporting your
husband.
Ms. Cantu. Thank you.
I think first and foremost, the committee must understand I
sit here as a Border Patrol wife. With all due respect, ma'am,
the border is open. Thousands of illegals come here with no
questions asked. They are released into our country. Our border
is open, ma'am. We hear every day countless stories of all the
people that are bussed everywhere, flown everywhere, or just
walked out the front door. That happens every day.
I believe that the talks within our Border Patrol agents is
that we need to bring back those basic rules that we had. Once
again, when we do things like Remain in Mexico policy, the
traffic slows down automatically. How do I know? Because I've
heard stories of people from different countries other than
Mexico coming to our country and claiming to seek asylum. Once
they hear, well, if you are going to seek asylum, you have to
wait in Mexico, they say, no, never mind, I want to go back to
my country. That fixes and tidies up the traffic so that it
gives time for our agents to take the time to process, to
properly process, interview primarily the kids that cross. If
the traffic slows down with even just one policy of Remain in
Mexico, our agents are able to handle those cases with kids one
by one, like it was before. That's going to save a lot of kids.
Seeking asylum, the rules are the rules. There is no other
way to explain it. Seeking asylum, you have to go through the
POE. We didn't write those laws, Border Patrol agents didn't
write these laws, they were already there.
It's just a lot of basic things. Just three things could
make such a big difference, and it could help all of our
points, everything that all of us are trying to do, saving
kids, the trafficking, the drugs, just some basic rules. But I
just don't understand why Mr. Mayorkas wouldn't take the
initiative to do that. Because it's very black and white. It's
not complex. Giving the opportunity for our Border Patrol
agents to be asylum judges. Nobody's going to know those
illegal immigrants crossing better than our Border Patrol
agents that caught them. Having them do the interview with the
kids one-on-one, you'd be surprised how much those agents learn
from those kids in just 5 minutes. Remain in Mexico. It's so
basic. But even to begin with that we have to realize that
right now our border, no matter how you write it down on paper,
it is open. We see it every day. I live in the Rio Grande
Valley.
[Speaking foreign language], I see it every day. It fills
up my downtown where I like to shop. It fills up our downtown
area with immigrants trying to get to that bus station to head
wherever they're going to go to. They just walk out. My
brother's an ICE agent. I hear talks all the time, these people
are walking out and there's nothing our agents can do. There's
nothing our ICE agents can do. It's being allowed. I know Mr.
Mayorkas can make a difference, and he refuses to. I firmly
believe we should get a different approach. I believe with the
conversations that I've had with other Border Patrol wives,
with other agents, we feel the same.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Ms. Cantu.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Menendez for his 5 minutes of
questioning, the Ranking Member.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all the
witnesses for appearing here today.
I know it has been a long hearing. But specifically, I want
to thank Ms. Snodgrass for your advocacy, for your testimony
here today, and for what you are doing to try to raise
awareness around fentanyl. Coming from all the way from Alaska
means a lot to us.
My son's name is Robert too. He turned one yesterday. A lot
of the work that I do here is thinking about my children and
the children of our neighbors, grandchildren of our neighbors,
and ensuring that future grandparents and parents don't have to
do the advocacy that you are doing today. The issue of fentanyl
and its impact on our country is something that I believe we
all take seriously. You mentioned legislation that has been
introduced in your son's name. It is introduced by a Democrat
and has both bipartisan support. I believe that we should be
focused on solutions. You present five items in your testimony,
some of it is funding non-invasive screening both for DHS and
our postal service. Those are concrete solutions that we can
work on here in Congress.
I think where folks on this side get a little bit
frustrated is that we are not talking more about those tangible
solutions to ending the scourge of fentanyl in this country. We
have a tendency in this environment here in Washington to
politicize a lot of what we do. Some of what we do is
constructive, some of what we do is working with people like
you to figure out solutions so we can prevent the loss of life
in this country as opposed to purely trying to assign blame. So
I thank you for coming here and trying to recenter what we are
doing because it is important work and it is within our
jurisdiction. I do look forward to continuing do the work, to
continue to look forward toward those solutions that you
presented so we can expand upon them.
But there are also things that this administration has
done, like Operation Blue Lotus, which seized thousands of
pounds of fentanyl, thousands of pounds of precursors, arrested
over 200 individuals engaged in the transportation of fentanyl
and other illicit drugs. We should be thinking about how we can
grow that program as opposed to just trying to ignore it,
because it is something that the administration has done in a
productive way to address the challenge of fentanyl that we
have. I hope to do that work and to do that work with all of my
colleagues in this room on both sides of the aisle, because it
has been said before, it is not a Democratic issue, it is not a
Republican issue, it is an American issue. We start addressing
the issue as Americans as opposed to Republicans and Democrats,
we will get to much better solutions. So I thank you again for
your advocacy and for your time here.
I just want to quickly turn to some of the things that we
have dealt with in this committee, and that includes H.R. 2,
the border bill that we had through our committee earlier this
year. We offered a series of amendments that we thought could
improve the bill, even though we thought in its whole it was
flawed. But specifically, the amendments that we introduced,
myself included, had to deal with the treatment of NGO's. H.R.
2 would prevent DHS from providing any funding to non-
governmental entities, including faith-based nonprofit
organizations, who provide shelter, transportation, and legal
assistance to families fleeing horrific conditions. It would
also require FEMA's disaster management partners, such as
Catholic Charities, to verify every person's immigration status
before providing life-saving services.
Mr. Gelernt, as someone who has spent a considerable amount
of time with asylum seekers and others in the immigration court
system, how do these types of services and the nonprofits you
provide them impact those who seek assistance?
Mr. Gelernt. I think having the NGO's and nonprofits
involved is absolutely critical. That partnership, that public-
private partnership, is essential to doing the work on the
ground. I think that the nonprofits can do things that the
Government can't do. There's a certain trust factor. They are
on the ground working every day with these communities. So the
more we can foster that, the better.
Mr. Ezell. They can be more nimble, right? Because they can
move in terms of how the circumstances change to better adapt
to what is happening on the ground. Would you agree with that?
Mr. Gelernt. I would.
Mr. Ezell. Let me ask you, in your opinion, should Congress
be restricting the amount of funding that goes toward these
nonprofits?
Mr. Gelernt. No.
Mr. Ezell. What do you think the impact on migrants--and
you alluded to this, the communities that they serve look like
should this funding be restricted?
Mr. Gelernt. I'm sorry?
Mr. Ezell. I am sorry. What would the impact on migrants
and communities look like should this funding be restricted?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes, I think it would help significantly. I
think that's exactly what we need is nonprofits helping with
housing, transportation, all those logistics. As you point out,
they are nimble, they are working with the communities. I think
the impact would be significant.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Luttrell for his 5 minutes questioning.
Mr. Luttrell. Good afternoon, everybody. Thank you for
joining us here today.
I have 5 counties, 3 of which are--Liberty County is a
county right outside my district and to date, there are 200
families per month moving in, there are cartel gangs, MS-13,
Mexican Mafia, and from what I understand, murders in that
area. I live about 5 hours from the border coming from the
west, southwest, and then depending on where else in the State
you are traveling. But I live off the border, but I am the
landing zone, and the murders are very cartel-esque, when I
talk to the sheriff's office, constables, and State troopers.
Ms. Cantu, you mentioned earlier, and maybe it is my fault,
but I haven't had the opportunity to chat with anybody that is
walking that line. You said earlier that they have the way to
close the border. Now, depending on who you are talking to, is
the border open, is the border closed. The border is what it is
today. What we have, it is open, it is closed, we have this
problem. Can you rattle off a couple of bullet points that your
husband and your brother and everybody are talking about that
we can get our heads around? Because maybe it is just we are
not hearing it correctly?
Ms. Cantu. Yes, thank you for your question.
First and foremost----
Mr. Luttrell. It is fine if you don't, I can appreciate
that. I am sure it is pretty complex, but----
Ms. Cantu. No, it's not. It's just like coming up with the
order. Remain in Mexico, that deters all the traffic from a lot
of other countries, obviously not from Mexico, that slows down
this traffic, Russians, Chinese, all these people from these
countries that are not really fond of our country. Another
option would be to asylum seekers, we can do customs, asylum
judges, and have asylum seekers go through the POE, through the
point of entry. Once you do Remain in Mexico, the traffic slows
down. This gives Border Patrol agents the ability to either
help with asylum seekers by being asylum judges, or they can
also perform the interviews for these kids that are being
crossed. Again, as soon as you put in that Remain in Mexico
policy, the traffic slows down immensely. That gives Border
Patrol agents more time to fully focus. Because right now, the
only thing that happens is these stations are just bus stops.
Our stations are just bus stops because they don't get fully
processed correctly like they were before because of the high
amount of traffic that comes in. Before I could have
conversations with my husband telling me how he had this little
boy and his name was so-and-so, and he was this age, and he
knew--he had some kind of knowledge about these people. Why?
Because he had the time to actually talk to these people, to
these kids. Now it's just bus in and out, in and out, in and
out. The traffic is too much. Even if you do try to get to hire
more agents, with all due respect, a lot of guys don't want to
be agents right now. It's not the greatest job in the world
right now, unfortunately. We stand for the patrol. We want more
agents. We want more help. But unfortunately, it's not very
popular right now.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you.
Mr. Gelernt--did I say that right?
Mr. Gelernt. Yes. Thank you.
Mr. Luttrell. Hearing what you are hearing from the other
side, can you give me some idea of why you said 5,500 children
are missing, but we have the number 85,000 that is floating
over the top of our head, if the policies are in place and the
procedures are being followed, why do we still have these
problems? Can you answer that question for me?
Mr. Gelernt. So our view is that those 85,000 are probably
not missing. That what is happened is----
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, sir, yes, you have said that a couple of
times.
Mr. Gelernt. So I think our view is that if steps were not
taken to diligently look at backgrounds of sponsors, they
should be. That's something that needs to be fixed. I think HHS
is looking into it and has taken steps. But my assumption is
that those children are not missing. Sponsors just don't want
to answer the phone from a Government agency.
Mr. Luttrell. Given the time frame that this current
administration has been in place from the previous
administration, have rules been changed in a way to make this
more streamlined and beneficial for those coming across?
Mr. Gelernt. I think that there have been changes. Some are
restrictive. I don't know that any have been particularly
streamlined, as far as I know.
Mr. Luttrell. I guess my concern is, if that is the case,
then what seems to be the problem? Because if the numbers that
are coming across--the numbers that are coming across have just
grown exponentially, and we want to solve that problem. Working
on both sides, they all think--Mr. Menendez said it greatly, we
do want to solve this problem. We are just trying to figure out
the best way to do that.
Mr. Gelernt. Right. So I think a couple of things. One is I
do think that there need to be more asylum officers there so
that it can go faster. We are not opposed to a more efficient
system as long as it retains some basic fairness and due
process. The other thing is, I do think that more legal
pathways opening up would help asylum seekers. It would also
diminish the cartels. What we hear on the ground is the cartels
prey on people who have no way to come in legally. So the only
offer they can receive is, well we'll take you illegally by the
cartels. Once there are legal pathways, it cuts the cartels
out. So I do think we need more legal pathways for asylum
seekers, we need more asylum officers to do the work more
efficiently. Again, we are not opposed to a system that's more
efficient as long as it retains basic fairness and due process.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you.
I yield back, sir.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Brecheen for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So since this administration took office we are looking at
numbers that tell us that about every year the population of
Oklahoma, the State that I represent, is what is coming across
our border illegally. We are almost at the point of three times
the population of Oklahoma in our country illegally. You know
it is bad when the mayor of New York City is saying, talking
about ``illegal immigration is going to destroy'' he used that
word, destroy the city. He is talking about people coming from
West Africa, Russia. This is the site of Ground Zero. We have
100 people every year the last couple of years, we are now at
140, those are on the terrorist watch list just for this year,
140 that have been encountered. Who knows the number of
potential heinous actors have come across that we have not
apprehended.
Mr. Ballard, I think all of us applaud you, Jim Caviezel,
Matthew Faraci--throw out Matthew's name, he is from Oklahoma--
you guys are agents of light in the Sound of Freedom. What you
have done to advocate and what you have done to shed light on
the humanitarian crisis of the sex slave trade. Thanks for
being agents of light in a dark situation.
Things have been talked about today. The second-largest
criminal enterprise in the world is the sex slave trade. Every
30 seconds a child is subjected to this heinous act, the United
States being the largest consumer of child pornography--third-
largest consumer of child pornography and largest consumer of
child rape videos. God help our country in this cultural rot.
Line upon line and precept upon precept, we have stepped away
generation after generation from Biblical virtue. This is where
we are at. That is an aside. But for every parent who is not
wanting to wage in this battle of good and evil, of returning
this Nation back to our roots of Biblical virtue, if we stay
silent, it is probably going to be easier for us, but it is not
going to be easier for our kids and our grandkids.
But now let's talk about those children that are coming
across our border illegally. You had shared with me earlier the
President of Guatemala told you something pretty profound.
Would you expound about what the President of Guatemala told
you as it relates to this trafficking issue?
Mr. Ballard. Yes. I was with President Giammattei last week
and he was just talking about the horrifying things that are
happening to his people. He started a campaign with his
Government called [speaking foreign language], which is to say,
making visible what is invisible. It's basically a warning to
the people, don't go with these smugglers because most of them
are also traffickers, most of them are abusers. They might play
a nice game and pitch a nice pitch in the beginning. Hey, don't
worry, I'll pay you later. Well, you can pay me later. Yes,
they'll pay with their bodies. They'll pay with other things.
Mr. Brecheen. Did you tell me that 75--he told you that 75
percent----
Mr. Ballard. Correct.
Mr. Brecheen [continuing]. Of all minors and women that are
migrating are subjected to sexual abuse?
Mr. Ballard. That's exactly what he told me. That's his
understanding.
Mr. Brecheen. I am going to continue with that. So we had a
border sheriff that told us that cartels are utilizing the sex
trafficking slave trade that are saying to parents if you can't
afford what we are going to charge you to come into the United
States, because we have become the Uber service to get into the
United States for free, and we are going to charge you if you
can't afford it. Do you have a 13-, 14-, 15-year-old daughter
that we can help pay off your debt? That is an interesting note
that was told to this committee. I think you had said in your
commentary, or something you said in the past, that there is
$14 million a day, the dollars that the cartel is making that
corroborates another report by the New York Times that says it
is $13 billion in 2021 the cartel made off human trafficking.
We know there are 400,000 unaccompanied minors that have come
across this border since this administration took office. We
have got this massive flow that the administration is not able
to vet, whether their families are legitimate families or
``fake families''.
Would you quickly tell me what the definition of a ``fake
family is''? Quickly,just in deference to my time.
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely. Due to the Flores Settlement, it's
a loophole that the traffickers and smugglers know that if they
can get a kid and convince that kid to call her mom and him
dad, the clients, you create a fake family and that forces the
Border Patrol to let them in within 72 hours and they're all
released. The kid gets used and recycled over and over again.
Mr. Brecheen. So I am going to showcase this. I don't know
if the camera will pick this up. This is from U.S. Customs and
Border Patrol. This is dated May 19 of 2023, reversing under
the Trump administration, we took DNA testing to verify whether
or not those young adults were actually with a legitimate
family member. This letter says ``The U.S. Customs and Border
Protection familial DNA contract with certain technologies will
end on May 31 of 2023. The testing will conclude on that date.
Samples submitted afterwards will not be utilized.'' So we know
that there is a grand jury in Florida that said that there were
100 kids sent to San Antonio or sent to San Antonio, Texas to
one sponsor. What do you think really is happening in those
situations?
Mr. Ballard. I think when you see that happening, you can
expect exploitation. When you've left yourself no option to
investigate because you haven't done any follow-up you haven't
done any background work, those kids are now gone, and they are
missing.
Mr. Brecheen. Is this administration complicit whether
knowingly or unknowingly when advocating the sex slave trade,
because of these type of policies they are allowing these fake
families to move people into the interior of the United States?
Mr. Ballard. I hate to say this, but, yes, they are
complicit because they know. They do know. I've watched them
learn. Thanks to C-Span, I've watched them learn what's
happening and they continue to do the same thing.
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman. Thank you for your
important leadership on this American matter and appreciate all
the witnesses being here today.
Mr. Ballard, I am the father of three young girls. My
daughters are 14, 12, and 9. I watched with great concern the
movie that depicted your service to our country, The Sound of
Freedom, and appreciate that you put your life and your family,
set you free to be able to put others before you and your own
family. I appreciate you making that sacrifice for young
children that you didn't even know. In a system with so many
failures, you, sir, are a bright spot, a beacon of hope, a
light that has helped shine on this crisis that America has
that has impacted innocent humans for too long.
Sir, you mentioned in your testimony that there are
loopholes in our immigration laws relative to this border
crisis. I represent a suburban district east of New York City
which is suffering from a migrant crisis right now. The City's
mayor, a Democrat, says that this migrant crisis will destroy
New York City.
Mr. Ballard, sir, how familiar are you with the history
behind America's asylum process? Specifically, that the
historic intent behind the asylum process was to provide a safe
haven for folks from other countries to have a safe haven here
in this country if they are under imminent danger of
persecution in their own country rather than a traditional
immigration or visa process? How familiar are you with modern-
day American asylum process and the historical nature of it?
Mr. Ballard. I'm relatively familiar.
Mr. LaLota. If I told you that under this administration
the asylum process is one by which an asylum applicant merely
utters the right 20 or 30 words but has no bona fide proof that
they are under an imminent danger of persecution, they are
granted entry into our country, they are assigned an asylum
hearing, usually a couple of years ahead of time and that
ultimately around 80 percent of those seeking asylum, that
their applications ultimately get rejected on the merits, would
you agree that given these realities, that there are tremendous
loopholes in how our asylum process is currently administered?
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely. You just got to show up at the
border and there's various loopholes, and you're going to get
in.
Mr. LaLota. Now, would you agree that these loopholes that
you mentioned in your testimony just now isn't serving the
intended purpose of providing refuge to those who are truly
seeking shelter from imminent persecution of their home
country?
Mr. Ballard. It absolutely is not. In fact, it's affording
opportunities for traffickers and for children to be abused.
Mr. LaLota. That was my last question, sir. With respect to
our traditional immigration process, which is usually meant to
complement America's labor needs, in addition to the person or
people trying to come into our country, can you describe, with
just a minute or so remaining, how the diversion of the initial
intent of our asylum process has exacerbated the human crisis
that we are here to talk about today?
Mr. Ballard. Yes, absolutely. You know, our laws are good,
our laws would work. I wish we'd put more asylum courts. I wish
we would have immigration reform. I wish we'd put more asylum
courts as an attachment to our embassies in the central
American countries so they don't have to take this journey to
those who deserve asylum. Unfortunately, those who are showing
up, the vast majority don't. They're going to get in. They know
they're going to get in. Again, traffickers are taking
advantage of it, making fake families, hurting children that
way, letting them release to really anybody because they're not
vetting them. They're not affording foreign children the same
thing we would afford to any American child who turned up
unaccompanied in a city. Why wouldn't we afford them the same?
So they're taking advantage of what is a good process, an
asylum process. They're taking advantage of that because their
intent isn't to seek asylum, their intent is to get into the
United States or even worse, hurt children in the process to
make money.
Mr. LaLota. Well said, sir. I will say once again, thank
you on behalf of the committee for the sacrifice that you and
your family have made to make other lives better.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize. Mr. D'Esposito.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to all
our witnesses that are here this morning and now this
afternoon.
As you are all well aware, and as my colleague from New
York, Mr. LaLota, referenced, New York City is facing one of
the biggest issues that we have seen in a long time. Most
recently, the mayor has called for a 5 percent cut in all New
York City department budgets, one right now, one 3 months from
now, and one a few months after that, adding up to a 15 percent
decrease across the line in budgets of our police department,
our fire department, sanitation, building, our education
system, on and on. Those are huge cuts. I spent a career in the
NYPD as a detective and understand how crucial those funds are
to really keeping our city moving forward. Most recently,
someone has referenced the Billy Joel song about the lights
going out on Broadway, and it seems like they are certainly
dimming.
One of the questions I have for you, Mr. Ballard, is
yesterday we held a field hearing at the 9/11 Museum talking
about the global threats that have changed this Nation over the
last 22 years since 9/11. But most importantly, as the Chairman
of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology, we
talked about how we can do better coordinating Federal, State,
local level. What can we do better in order to keep this Nation
and the people who live here safe? I had to--yesterday during
the hearing was thinking about the hearing today and thought to
myself that we could really be posing the same question to the
issues that we are facing with our open borders and now so many
thousands upon thousands of migrants coming into the city of
New York and many Democrat cities throughout this country
because they praised themselves as cities and sanctuary cities
where they welcome everyone, but clearly had no plans in place
to welcome those into this so-called sanctuary city.
So my question to you is what can we do on a Federal level
to make sure that our partners, locally and on the State level,
have the resources that they need to deal with this
humanitarian crisis, with this disaster at the Southern Border,
and most specifically deal with human trafficking now in these
cities, where detectives like myself, it wasn't one of the
biggest crimes that you were investigating, but now could be?
What can we do to make sure that the local, the State,
obviously are getting the resources they need from the Federal
level?
Mr. Ballard. Well, thank you. It's a super important
question.
I've been fighting this fight for almost 20 years, trying
to make this a priority. The resources aren't given to State
and local law enforcement, as they should be. That's why the
foundations that I have worked with and founded do that. We
supplement budgets because we know that it's simply--
anecdotally I can tell you that there's about 5 anti-drug
agents for every one anti-child-trafficking agent. That's not
right. OK. As has been said before, you can sell a bag of
cocaine one time, you can sell a child ten times in a day. So
let's prioritize correctly and let's start resourcing correctly
so that we can fight this. Let's go overseas and work with our
partners. I met with the President of Honduras and the
President of Guatemala last week, and they said, help us
forward deploy and get these traffickers who are taking our
kids into your country. Let's work. We can forward deploy on
this stuff. So there's a lot we can do in that way.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
I know it was touched on before by Ms. Cantu, but I want to
address it with you real quickly. Obviously, when people take
oaths to serve in our military, to be members of law
enforcement, they take an oath and during that time they see
things, smell things, hear things that most humans probably
shouldn't. Obviously, the issues that we are facing, especially
when it comes to human trafficking, creates mental health
issues within law enforcement and those that are dealing with
this each and every day. What can we do better? What other
negative consequences are we seeing from Biden's failed border
crisis, but specifically to the mental health issue, what can
we do better?
Ms. Cantu. Thank you for your question.
I think our sectors need funding to create potential
scenarios for agents to either, No. 1, have events to honor
them. A great example is our Rio Grande Valley Sector had a
comedy show. Mind you, our agents are so--they never show up
for anything. I attended this comedy show and so many agents
showed up in uniform. They were allowed to leave a couple of
hours early. Those kind of scenarios is positive, uplifting.
But what ends up happening is when we create events like that,
our own agents have to fundraise for these events. I have a
committee right now, it's made out of Border Patrol wives. We
use our own money to show appreciation to our own agents. I
think it's a good idea if somehow we had a budget, some kind of
funding, so that each sector is allowed to have an annual thing
for our agents. Just the smallest of appreciation, just
something that unites them, that brings that morale, that hope
that somebody still stands behind them.
I think right now our chief, Ms. Gloria, has made a really
good example of that. It's just unfortunate that we have to do
our own fundraising. I think if anything create events like
that, wellness events where you bring just medical people to
come and see our agents and just talk to them and just things
like that.
Another thing I would say is I believe that each station
should have some kind of chapel with enough chaplains in this
station where they're accessible. We need God with our Border
Patrol agents.
Mr. D'Esposito. Absolutely. Well, thank you very much and
thank you all for being here. Appreciate it.
Mr. Chairman, my time is expired. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ms. Lee for her 5 minutes questioning.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you holding
this important hearing today. I thank all of our witnesses for
being here to share your stories.
This, in fact, is a crisis that we cannot adequately
describe by talking only about the staggering numbers of
unlawful crossings at our Southern Border or by talking about
the devastating economic impact or the failure to enforce our
laws. The true foundation of this crisis is the ultimate price
that is being paid by American families who have lost sons and
daughters, brothers and sisters to fentanyl poisoning or
children being stolen into human trafficking. You being here
today allows us to share with the American people the true
cost, what it really means when we fail to secure that border.
So I thank you all for being willing to share your stories with
us today.
Mr. Ballard, I would like to begin by returning to
something you testified about earlier this morning. You said
that in America today it is easier to be a host family for a
child coming across our border than it is to adopt a cat. Would
you please share with us some of the things that should be done
before a host family is approved as a safe place to place a
minor child?
Mr. Ballard. Yes. Thank you very much.
Again, having been through the process of adopting
children, I know the care that these kids deserve, and I
rescued these kids and I still went through it. I don't see why
these kids shouldn't have that same level of protection,
especially in a country that is the No. 1 country in consuming
child rape videos. This is not a safe country, unfortunately,
for children who are unaccompanied and just walking around
without a sponsor who's unvetted. So more needs to be done. You
can't just show a document and sign a paper. I mean, literally,
you have to do more than that to adopt a cat from a shelter.
I've done it, so I know. They need to be background checked,
fingerprints. They're not being fingerprinted, the sponsors,
unless they can make that exception in the moment if they'd
like to HHS. No, you have got to do it for everybody,
background check, criminal checks. If they're claiming to be
family, bring the DNA rapid technology. It's great, 20 minutes,
you can confirm. Instead, they ripped it away, this
administration, a few months ago. Why? Why? They're already so
less protected, why do you take the few tools we have to
protect these children? Why do foreign children deserve less
protection than American children would be given if found in an
endless number situation?
Ms. Lee. Ms. Snodgrass, I would like to return to your
testimony, please. One of the things that is important about
what you have shared with us today is the concept that fentanyl
is making it into every area of our country, every part of our
country. There are parts of Alaska in particular that are very
remote. Your organization has heard reports about how fentanyl
is getting into those communities. Would you share with us,
please, what you understand about that subject?
Ms. Snodgrass. Thank you for the question.
So another community I just came back from is Chevak,
Alaska. The only accessible route to Chevak, Alaska, is either
by sea plane or in the wintertime snow machines. I was asked to
come there to do a Fentanyl Response Project presentation
because they see the blue pills. That's what they call it in
that community. The blue pills have made it into that community
of less than 800 Alaskans. So you talked about the human toll.
One member of that community dies, and it affects that entire
community for generations to come. So the fact that cartels are
targeting those kinds of communities, not only in Alaska, but
also rural areas of the country, all around the country,
Michigan, Minnesota, other communities that are rural in
nature, native American communities. It's devastating,
absolutely devastating to a rural community in Alaska to lose
one citizen. In Dillingham recently, they lost an 18-year-old
girl and that family, that community will never be OK from the
loss of a child. I am not ever going to be OK again. Never will
I be OK again from the loss of my child.
Ms. Lee. What could Secretary Mayorkas be doing today that
is not being done that would help stop the flow of fentanyl?
Ms. Snodgrass. Today, Secretary Mayorkas and the Homeland
Security could stand up a Federal response to begin to discuss
and figure out how to take it--I said it already once today--
take it to them. We're on the receiving end of this deal and
have been for years. Quite frankly, the parents--my child is
dead, I'm here for other people's children. We need to take
this fight to them. We need to take it to China, we need to
take it to Mexico, and quit being recipients and victims of
this war that we're waging. We need to take it across the
border before it ever comes to the United States of America.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. Ms. Snodgrass.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Strong for his questions.
Mr. Strong. Mr. Ballard, as you mentioned in your
testimony, in 2022 alone immigration authorities encountered
152,000 unaccompanied minors, an all-time high. Many of these
children will enter the United States illegally and be put at
risk of sexual exploitation. In fact, it is estimated that 72
percent of those trafficked in the United States are
immigrants. My colleagues across the aisle regularly use words
like safe, compassionate, and humane to describe their border
policies. Do you think that the children being sold into sex
slavery would agree with these policies are humane?
Mr. Ballard. They would absolutely not agree that they're
humane.
Mr. Strong. What in your opinion would be more humane and
help lessen the risk of exploitation of these children?
Mr. Ballard. The most compassionate, humane thing to do is
to enforce our borders, as the laws require and streamline our
immigration processes. I do think that we can make it easier
for those who deserve asylum and that will thus suck the wind
out of the sails of the child traffickers, because they will no
longer be incentivized.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
The Health and Human Services Office, the Inspector General
report found that in response to the influx of unaccompanied
children, basic screening safeguards have been removed from the
sponsor vetting process in an effort to expedite children's
releases. Do you think these views--what do you think the
outcome of that would be, is that a positive or a negative?
Mr. Ballard. Extremely negative. It opens up all sorts of
opportunities for traffickers, for pedophiles, for people who
want to exploit children in labor. The bad guys are loving it.
Look, the human traffickers that are making $14 million a day
love our policies, and that should tell you all you need to
know. Why do they love our policies? They shouldn't.
Mr. Strong. Mr. Gelernt, you mentioned family separation of
illegal aliens, parents separated from children. If these
parents stopped crossing with children illegally into America,
would that solve this problem?
Mr. Gelernt. I think that the parents are coming with their
children out of desperation because they're in such danger. I
don't think we should be, as a country, saying we're not going
to accept asylum seekers, and the only thing we can do is take
them and separate them from their children. So I think we need
to have asylum system. We promised after World War II we would
never send people back to danger. We can talk about differences
in how the asylum system should run, but I don't think anybody
should be in favor of taking little children away from their
parents and using them as pawns.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Has your organization ever done a study related to American
parents being separated from their children by death because of
fentanyl overdoses? Over 300 a day, every day in America from
fentanyl, people die from overdoses where American children are
being stripped from the arms of their parents. You ever done a
study on that?
Mr. Gelernt. I don't know.
Mr. Strong. If a Member of Congress believes your district
supports illegal immigration, today is a good day to get on the
record and say it publicly. I am sure Governor Abbott would be
happy to route some buses your way and bring 100,000 to you to
create hell on your city economy, school system, hospitals, law
enforcement, first responders, court system, and your jail
system.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Crane for 5 minutes.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you guys for
coming here today.
Mr. Ballard, thank you for your service. My family and I
also saw the movie. Pretty tough movie to watch. Mr. Ballard,
are you aware that this week marks the 22d anniversary of 9/11
attacks?
Mr. Ballard. Yes, I do.
Mr. Crane. Looking back at that event, sir, do you come to
the same conclusion that I do, that it almost seems as if we
haven't learned a thing in this country?
Mr. Ballard. I do.
Mr. Crane. Isn't it true, sir, that some of these
trafficking networks that the cartels operate, they don't just
traffic little kids, but they also will traffic individuals on
the terror watch list into the country?
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely. We know that to be true.
Mr. Crane. Yes. The last numbers I was looking at showed
that within the last couple of years, 241 have been
encountered. That doesn't include the gotaways, does it, sir?
Mr. Ballard. That's absolutely right. Mohamed Atta himself
staged in Mexical and Mexico and crossed into the United States
that way.
Mr. Crane. Do you think it is possible that of the
estimated 1.5 million gotaways that any of the individuals on
that watch list or that might be on the terror watch list might
conduct another attack like we saw on 9/11?
Mr. Ballard. Absolutely.
Mr. Crane. Thank you.
Ms. Cantu thank you so much for being here today. I wanted
to tell you personally, thank you so much for your courage,
your dedication to your family and to the Border Patrol. I want
to say in this--I am a freshman here in Congress, I have only
been here for 8 months, but rarely do I see a witness that has
the courage to actually confront a Member of Congress and tell
him what is what. So thank you for doing that today.
It really bothers me when I see all the politics going on.
I know you have seen it today, haven't you, ma'am? I know you
have seen today why we are in this situation where our kids are
dying of fentanyl. We have members on the terror watch list
coming through our Southern Border, and our country is, quite
frankly, being overrun. It is sad because--no offense to the
witness from the other side, but clearly they brought this
witness in to talk about policies of the past, they didn't
bring him in here to talk about what is going on today, did
they? Mr. Ballard, did you notice that as well?
Mr. Ballard. I did notice that.
Mr. Crane. Why do you think that is, sir?
Mr. Ballard. It seems to me a bit of a distraction. Not
that we shouldn't talk about family separation, but we're here
to talk about this problem right now, right before us, and it's
devastating. I think some of this might have been used as a
distraction to not get these bigger points across.
Mr. Crane. Yes. Well, on that note of family separation, do
you think it is a little ironic that there is only a focus on
family separation under the last administration?
Mr. Ballard. I do, because there's a point that hasn't been
made about that. How come these families--look, I believe some
of those families absolutely were separated wrongfully. But
however, if the parents aren't coming back to get those kids,
how do you know that they weren't fake families that were
separated? We know there's cases where they were real families
I'm not saying there's not, but we don't know the number. How
many are fake families and those kids might have been rescued?
We have to ask that question. I don't have the answer, but at
least let's talk about it.
Mr. Crane. Yes.
Mr. Gelernt, on that same train of thought, it is
interesting to me that you just make the assumption that
because the sponsors aren't answering the phone that you guys
don't believe that these 85,000 kids are really missing.
Mr. Gelernt. Right. Well, that's based on talking to people
in years of working in this area that sponsors generally do not
like to answer the phone from a Government agency or do not
know who's calling. But our belief is that these are not
children who were lost. There are background checks. The Biden
administration does--notwithstanding what's been said here
today, the Biden administration does do background checks. If
there have been shortcuts taken at any point, those need to be
fixed and I believe that the agency is looking into that.
Obviously I don't to give----
Mr. Crane. Thank you. I take back my time. Thank you, sir.
My colleague from New York, before he left the room, he
made a couple of claims. He said, can the Biden administration
hire more immigration judges, can they print more money to hire
more Border Patrol agents. He was clearly trying to take
responsibility off of this administration. Then he said it is
because we have no--Republicans have no interest in actually
solving the problems, which is ironic. Then he actually brought
up something that he constantly talks about, about where the
vast majority of the weapons that the cartels are using is
coming from. Mr. Chairman, I have a question for you. Has my
colleague from New York ever presented the data to this
committee to back up this claim so the rest of us can see it?
Chairman Green. I was having a conversation, a sidebar, I
missed the question.
Mr. Crane. OK, well, I would like to know if my colleague
from New York has ever----
Chairman Green. I think you can ask him, but we can check.
Mr. Crane. OK.
Chairman Green. But I don't know the question, so.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back my time.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ms. De La Cruz for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for putting on
this important hearing and for allowing me to waive on today.
This is especially important for myself. I am the Congresswoman
and have the honor of serving South Texas as their
Congresswoman, where we house one of the largest Border Patrol
sectors in the entire Nation.
You know, sitting here as a guest of the Chairman that I am
so grateful to have me here, it is very frustrating to hear
from my friends on the other side of the aisle, first of all,
dismissing 80-plus thousand children who are missing,
dismissing the failed Biden administration policy that has not
only let the immigrants down, but has let our Border Patrol
agents down, has let South Texas down, and has let our country
down. It is disgusting that with record number--record number
of illegal immigrants who are coming through here, where
Texas--Texas has had to fill the gap that the Biden
administration has failed, Texas has stood up because Texas
loves Texas, Texas loves the United States. Sadly, Governor
Abbott and Texans are having to do the job that the Biden
administration refuses to do.
This has had devastating human consequences. In my
district, 40 percent of my district is in Hidalgo County, a
Democratic county. Democratic sheriff from Brooks County has
said, every immigrant body that they find, there is as many as
ten that are never recovered. Ten. You are talking about one of
the poorest counties in my entire district, Brooks County,
where they have to bring in coolers to actually hold the dead
bodies. These are people who are dying along the way, dying in
the South Texas heat. Why? Because they believe the border is
open, they believe they can go through the areas not at the
port of entries, but through those areas that are so unsafe.
Because of the hardships that our Border Patrol agents have
had to endure, we have seen the highest number of suicides in
13 years, 17 CBP suicides in 2022. This is what is happening to
our Border Patrol agents. Ms. Cantu, I thank you for your
service as a wife and as a mother who I am sure spends long
nights afraid to get a phone call from your husband's
supervisor, afraid that he may not come home that night. Those
are scary things.
Tell us about how the mental part of your husband's job has
not only impacted your husband and his colleagues, but also
your family.
Ms. Cantu. Thank you for your question, ma'am.
I can tell you that our community within the Border Patrol
has been so affected that now we actually get phone calls of
agents on that last straw, trying to speak to my husband, that
they're on the verge, that they're on the verge of taking their
life. That was unheard of. This is recent. We have to check up
on everybody now. We call agents that we haven't spoken to in a
while just to make sure how they're doing. This is real. The
frustration every single day at your job is real. The stories,
they are not used to the amount of stories that they hear, the
amount of frustration, the amount of adding on everything else
in life. These are humans. They're human beings, just like us.
It's a different environment now. The increase in the divorce
rate. Like I said, we create our own communities just to make
sure and check up on everybody. I mean, we contact, try to
reach out as many people as we can. We do what we can do just
for ourselves. That feels lonely that you don't have somebody
that's going to support you like our own Government.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you again, Ms. Cantu. You are
absolutely right. The Biden administration has failed again,
not only to secure our borders, but they have failed the very
people that are working hard to support our Nation and keep our
Nation secure.
Thank you.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul's
opening statement is submitted for the record.
[The statement of Honorable McCaul follows:]

Statement of Honorable Michael T. McCaul
Evidence uncovered by this committee has shown that this
administration bears full responsibility for the harm that Americans
have experienced as a consequence of its open border policies.
Secretary Mayorkas has repeatedly sat before this committee and
blindly defended the policies that are, quite literally, killing
Americans.
Based on the administration's policies, with Mayorkas at the helm
of DHS:

Mexican cartels are the primary supplier of illicit fentanyl
for the United States.

Fentanyl is now the leading cause of death for Americans
aged 18 to 49.

Since 2021, more than 100k Americans per year have died by
overdose, with the vast majority attributed to fentanyl.
CBP have been in the field, doing their best and have literally
turned their backs on Secretary Mayorkas.
The lack of leadership has clearly taken its toll on agents and
officers.

In 2022 alone, 17 CBP personnel took their own lives.

National Border Patrol Council Vice President Chris Cabrera
admitted, before Congress, that personnel are unable to perform
the job that they were hired and trained to do.
The refusal by the Secretary to lead the Department does not only
have political consequences--it has life-altering consequences for
personnel and their families.
Finally, it is obvious the crisis does not just adversely impact
Americans.
The U.S.-Mexico border is known as the world's deadliest overland
migration route, according to the United Nations.
In addition to deaths, women and children are trafficked by the
cartels, with many ending up in forced labor and sex trafficking rings.
The border crisis is no longer simply a failed policy--it has
developed into a catastrophic humanitarian crisis, in which Secretary
Mayorkas is complicit.
No one State has borne the brunt of this crisis more than the
people of Texas, who have witnessed it first-hand.
My Governor's decision to bus illegal immigrants to communities
across the country has finally raised this crisis to be recognized on a
national level.
The failure to acknowledge and address the crisis is a disgrace.
The United States can, and must, do better.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member for his
closing comments.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Before I close, I ask unanimous consent to include in the
record the opening statement of Mr. Ivey of Maryland.
Chairman Green. So ordered.
[The statement of Honorable Ivey follows:]

Statement of Honorable Glenn Ivey
September 13, 2023
Mr. Chairman, I am at home recovering from COVID and unable to
attend the hearing this morning but wanted to include a statement for
the record. I would like to express my sentiments to each of our
witnesses today who has experienced significant loss and tragedy. I
cannot imagine the despair and grief that you are experiencing. My
thoughts and prayers are with each of you. Please know that I am
committed to working across the aisle to promote a more humane
immigration system that prioritizes the well-being and safety of
everyone.
While I am sympathetic to the testimony given today, I must also
assert that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle have used this
hearing to paint the conditions at the border with an overly broad
brush. Republicans have criticized the Biden administration's handling
of the border situation and recklessly claim that it is the Democrats'
immigration policies that have led to an influx of migrants, strained
resources, and have compromised our national security.
My Republican colleagues' assertions have put politics over people
and have had a severe human cost. They have forgotten that our nature
as Americans is to uphold that which makes us human--our empathy and
compassion. Our national values dictate that we provide refuge to those
fleeing persecution and despair.
Our Nation was built by and for immigrants. However, this history
is often forgotten when Black and Brown migrants are involved.
Regrettably and far too often, the welcoming attitude toward migrants
from European countries gives way to concerns and bigotry when migrants
arrive from almost anywhere else.
Republicans claim they are concerned about migrants and Border
Patrol agents. Yet, those claims are meaningless lip service because
Republicans have voted to cap non-defense discretionary funding in the
fiscal year 2024 appropriation bill. Protecting our Southern Border
requires strategic, robust funding to mitigate the crisis.
Republicans claim that they are concerned about fentanyl being
smuggled into our country. Yet, they refuse to take any action to stop
the trafficking from the United States into Mexico of millions of guns
that enable the smuggling of fentanyl, and which have caused an
epidemic of violence and death.
The Republican fixation on magnifying crime and destruction at the
Southern Border also prevents the development of solutions by glossing
over the need for immigration reform.
According to the Washington Post, at least 91,000 migrants crossed
our Southern Border in August. Anytime there is a large influx and
concentration of people in an area, and their basic needs are unmet,
the likelihood of problems increases. I do not intend to make light of
daily tragedies along the Southern Border. However, tragedies occur and
are manifestations of the inhumane treatment of migrants who are
struggling for security and sustenance.
I also wanted to mention that I am grateful for thought leaders
like Congressman Trone, whose legislation Bruce's Law seeks to
facilitate Government cooperation and public awareness about the
dangers of fentanyl while allocating additional funding to community
organizations and coalitions. Legislation like Bruce's Law is a
solution that would help to mitigate the fentanyl crisis.
We must fulfill our role as a solution-oriented committee and
prevent further tragedies. Rather than political posturing, hearings
must be held to meaningfully improve our immigration system.

Immigrant Processing and Treatment.--Our immigration system
needs reforms to treat immigrants humanely at the border and
all stages of the immigration process.

Reuniting Separated Families.--Migrant children must be
reunited with their families. The Trump administration's zero
tolerance policy separated at least 5,500 children from their
parents. Despite the Biden administration's efforts, there are
still more than 500 children who have not been reconnected with
their parents. We must accelerate processing so that families
can be reunited quicker.

Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals.--The DACA program
protects those brought to the United States as children with no
home country other than the United States. Extending rights to
DACA beneficiaries (or DREAMers) is necessary to legalize their
immigration status fully and permanently. Extending rights to
DREAMers is both economically beneficial to the United States
and morally imperative.

Protecting Asylum Seekers and Refugees.--Asylum seekers and
refugees have rights pursuant to U.S. and international law
that must be respected. The United States must adhere to these
norms and allow eligible applicants to effectuate their rights.

Administering Immigration Laws.--The effective
administration of our immigration laws is based on the
imposition of penalties for employers who abuse H-2A and H-2B
visas while, at the same time, establishing a more
straightforward pathway to citizenship for immigrants. There is
also an urgent need to expand access to visas to bring skilled
IT talent from overseas so that our Nation does not miss the
opportunity to welcome great talent who can advance our world-
class innovation.
Mr. Chairman, these hearings would illuminate key issues and policy
changes, using the committee's time more effectively and efficiently to
ensure that our country is safer and more just for everyone. It is
crucial for us to hold hearings and pass legislation that establishes
humane immigration reform. We must always approach immigration with
compassion and empathy. Thank you.

Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Let me say to the witnesses for today's hearing, a lot of
us have heard you. I have indicated in my opening statement
that it will take Democrats and Republicans to solve the
problem. Some of the legislation I outlined, where former
Ranking Member Katko and I authored and became law, was an
example of that. I look forward to doing that going forward.
After we do the hearings I hope we have the strength to put
meaningful legislation forward to address this problem. It
requires more than just at the border. We talked about some of
the conversations with the embassies and consulates in the
south. That has to be a robust process. We can't do that. But
our committee doesn't have that jurisdiction. That is Foreign
Affairs Committee's jurisdiction. They have to do it. Some
committee is Judiciary. They have part of the jurisdiction of
what we are dealing with, as well as a couple more committees.
So what we really need as we address this is some form of
comprehensive immigration reform on one hand, but we also need
to address the drug issue coming into this country. There is no
question about it. We can't, in my humble opinion, be viewed as
the arrogant Americans, and we have to lead as a country, and
you can't lead from behind.
We have been fortunate. Our history of people coming to
this country is replete with examples of people coming from
other parts of the world coming to our shores seeking a better
way of life. For the most part, we have welcomed so many of
them here. I think that is why we have historically been the
shining example of why people want to come to the United States
of America. I think as we address this issue, we can't decide
that all of a sudden we are so good that nobody else ought to
come.
I have said this several times, my ancestors came here in
the belly of a ship. They didn't want to come here. They came
as slaves. I am here. I don't know anywhere else I want to be.
But I can sympathize and empathize with people who are trying
to come to this country because we have a value system that
everybody looks up to. So whatever we come up with as a
committee, I hope we look at the history of this great country
and what it has meant to so many people struggling to come to a
better way.
But I think for the record, we also have to kind-of outline
the policies that got us to where we are today. So it is
important for us to understand the human cost of the past Trump
policies my colleagues seem to want to go back to, like, family
separation. There are still hundreds of children who need to be
united, so it is stunning some of my Republican colleagues
would suggest the problem is minor and has to be solved.
President Trump's inhumane and ineffective border policies,
like Title 42 and Remain in Mexico, cause smugglers and
criminal cartels to realize unprecedented profits and transform
human smuggling into a multi-billion dollar illicit industry.
Because they figured it out. If we send them back to Mexico, we
will figure out a way to get them back to the United States.
But it will cost more for them to do it, and that is what
happened. The record reflects that.
The Biden administration and Democrats are taking action to
keep our borders secure. The Biden administration has ramped up
efforts like Operation Blue Lotus and Operation Artemis to go
after the traffickers, smugglers, and transnational criminal
organizations. We funded more technology and more offices to
increase inspection at ports of entry. We also funded more
Border Patrol agents for between ports of entry. Not a single
Republican on this committee voted for that increase. It was
only Democrats who voted to give our Border Patrol agents
exactly what they asked for.
I will continue to be one of those persons who say I will
continue. I won't play the politics. My Republican colleagues
did not vote for any increase in the Homeland Security budget
last year. They voted against it.
I would also like to set the record straight about what we
heard today about DNA testing. CBP did not stop DNA testing for
families. The vendor CBP has contracted with for DNA testing
now offers tests for single purchase through a Government-wide
contract, which is more cost-effective. When CBP has concerns
about whether a child is related to the adults they enter the
United States with, they absolutely should conduct a test. This
is not stopped.
As I said at the beginning of the hearing, this committee
has a bipartisan history of working together to address real
threats and protect vulnerable people. It is time that we
return to that, past time that we as Democrats and Republicans
finally get it right.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The Ranking Member yields.
You know, for my closing comments I just want to say I
think we have moved the needle some today. Your stories have
been amplified. There are a lot of people that have been
listening today. I think the American people know more now how
the policies, that despite having himself continued, those
policies have resulted in more trafficked children, more
trafficked fentanyl, more crime, more trauma and anxiety on the
Border Patrol agents and their families. You have gotten that
message out.
We have also heard today from even the Minority witness
that Biden's policies are part of the problem. At least two of
the Members of the Minority today actually admitted there is a
big border crisis. That is a movement of the needle. That is a
movement of the needle. Thank goodness. But one of the best
indicators that some success today is that the Minority never
really fought to defend Mayorkas' policies. The theme of
today's Democrat questions and even their selection of a
witness, it is about beat up Trump. The mantra is all back to
the kids in cages, which, by the way, the Minority seems to
forget this, the images from that the press used were from the
Obama administration. But that deflection speaks volumes. I
think that is a good thing for us all to observe.
I want to take a look too at one of the other deflections
from the Minority party. This echoing argument from almost all
of them about we have to fix immigration law. Well, I agree.
But we have to secure the border first, or the incentive just
keeps more mass waves of people coming. I really appreciate the
Ranking Member in his closing comments who just said other
committees are involved. It would be great if we could all
focus on the Homeland Security piece of this instead of
spending a lot of time talking about immigration reform,
because that is another committee. He is absolutely right, that
is Judiciary Committee. So I thank him for actually bringing
that up. This committee is about homeland security and the
issue, the greatest issue in homeland security right now is
border security.
We did pass a bill that contained many of the solutions our
witnesses talked about today and asked for, H.R. 2.
We also heard that this is just some kind of an impeachment
hearing. Well, I will remind my colleagues that oversight is
one of our responsibilities, we write laws and, yes, oversight
is one of our responsibilities. You know what, greater than
200,000 dead Americans, I think that warrants the time until we
get it stopped. Eighty-five thousand children that the sponsor
doesn't want to pick up the phone. OK, they are not picking up
the phone. I am sorry those people, those children deserve us
getting to the bottom of it.
But since they want to compare Trump and Biden, let's do
it. Let's look at some numbers. ACLU speaks about 5,500
separated children. Any child separated is bad, but they talk
about that almost to a person today, going back to Trump. This
administration has separated 400,000 children from their
parents by not sending them back to their parents in their home
countries--400,000 that have been separated--85,000, OK. Mr.
Bishop said 6 percent, which means 7 percent of that number. If
it is just 7 percent of that number, that is more than the
previous administration. Tens of thousands of American parents
permanently separated from their children because they are dead
due to the fentanyl pouring across our Southern Border.
The Minority members also mentioned the deaths of the
border migrants during Mr. Trump's administration. I remember I
was here during the hearing sitting right over there as a
Member of this committee when we were concerned about three
children that had died. Fortunately, as an E.R. physician I got
to be an expert witness, so to speak, in my questioning about
that. Many of the Members deferring to me, allowing me to keep
asking questions. There were three deaths we were talking
about. Seventeen-hundred deaths and they quit count or where
they quit telling the American people about it. If you look at
the rate, that is three times the rate of the previous
President. So if you want to compare numbers or you want to
compare Presidents, sure, we will do that.
There was also something I took offense to, and someone
said that we weren't upholding American values. I don't think
it was the Ranking Member. I don't know who it was. Someone
made the accusation we are somehow not upholding American
values. Yes, I believe we are a nation of immigrants, and I am
for legal immigration. We have jobs, unfilled jobs in this
country. I mean we have to get this fixed. But you can't fix
that first, you have to fix border security, which is our job
in this committee.
But I want to say this about American values. I think one
of our greatest values is upholding the rule of law. Mayorkas
is violating the rule of law. The Courts have deemed so that by
the way they are doing the judicial side of the INA, executing
the INA law, is against the law. CBP One app doesn't suddenly
create a legal pathway into the United States. I am sorry, it
does not. About the American value of upholding the rule of
law, and we have heard from our witnesses today that save
lives.
We have also heard, and I deeply believe it is true, that
Mr. Mayorkas knows his policies have increased the number of
trafficked human beings and knows that it has increased the
number of dead Americans due to drugs. Yet he has done nothing.
We heard in questions from Mr. McCaul that by ignoring this
fact, the fact that the policies have increased human
trafficking, Mr. McCaul, a former Federal prosecutor, that at a
minimum it is complicity and that it is potentially aiding and
abetting the drug cartels in their crimes. We will continue to
look into that.
There are also accusations of our side that we have not
done anything but investigate and just all we are about is this
investigation. But interestingly, the Ranking Member even
mentioned a co-sponsored bill between him and Representative
Garbarino that actually passed in this Congress. I recall a
bill that Mr. Swalwell and I reached across the aisle and did
on cybersecurity. It is time for oversight on these 200,000
dead Americans.
Ms. Snodgrass, I commend you. My son was born about the
same time your son was. Your loss is incomprehensible. But your
response for fighting for American families and the cause of
your son's bill, your son will live forever in that piece of
legislation because I told my team today to sign me onto that
bill and we will get it across the finish line.
Ms. Cantu, thank you for your service to this great
country. My spouse served as an army wife for 24 years. When
you are in that position, it is tough. The crisis that is going
on at our Southern Border right now, one of our own making, you
shouldn't have to be enduring. But I do appreciate you, and I
really thank you for being here today.
Mr. Gelernt, I think I heard you say that the ACLU, or at
least the Government, should be at least looking into these
85,000 phone calls that haven't been answered. So for that, I
want to appreciate you saying that. I think I did hear you say
that. I want to thank you for being here today. Really do.
Mr. Ballard, thanks for being an American hero and going
after those kids. These cartels who capture these kids are some
of the most violent people and most dangerous people on the
planet. I have seen the videos of what they do when they catch
people. You had the guts to go into the mouth of the dragon and
rescue little children. You are a hero. I hope America's youth
know your story and emulate you. It would be great for our
country if they would.
I agree, God's children should not be for sale. But
tragically, many are. As we have heard today, Secretary
Mayorkas' policies have increased the number trafficked and
increased the number of dead from fentanyl. Knowing this, he
has done nothing.
This hearing will be followed by a hearing on the financial
costs. Now, we have talked about the human costs, we also need
to look at the financial costs of an open border.
I want to thank everybody for being here. Again, thank our
witnesses, thank the Ranking Member.
This committee is adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:56 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]
