- STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON OSHA'S PROPOSED RULE TO UPDATE THE FIRE BRIGADES STANDARD

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON OSHA'S
PROPOSED RULE TO UPDATE THE FIRE
BRIGADES STANDARD

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND
TECHNOLOGY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

JUNE 4, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-68

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
58-845 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2025

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                  Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Mr. David Denniston, Second Vice President, Association of Fire
Districts of the State of New York:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Mr. Joseph Maruca, Director, National Volunteer Fire Council,
Former Fire Chief of West Barnstable Fire Department:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Mr. Evan Davis, Director, Government Affairs, International
Association of Fire Fighters:
Oral Statement.................................................    19
Prepared Statement.............................................    21
Mr. Grant Walker, President, Prince George's County Professional
Fire Fighters and Paramedics Association, International
Association of Fire Fighters, Local 1619:
Oral Statement.................................................    28
Prepared Statement.............................................    30

STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON OSHA'S PROPOSED RULE TO UPDATE THE FIRE
BRIGADES STANDARD

----------

Tuesday, June 4, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:04 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Anthony D'Esposito
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives D'Esposito, LaLota, Strong,
Brecheen, Carter, and Kennedy.
Also present: Representatives Lawler and Molinaro.
Mr. D'Esposito. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology, will come
to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to hear from fire service
associations on the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational
Safety and Health Administration's proposed rulemaking to
update and replace the current Fire Brigades Standard.
Without objection, the gentlemen from New York, Mr.
Molinaro and Mr. Lawler, are permitted to sit on the dais and
ask questions to the witnesses.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
First, I'd like to welcome our witnesses and thank you all
for your commitment to keeping, not only our neighbors and
residents, but this country safe. I want to thank you all for
testifying before this Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology, and, again, thank you for your public service.
We look forward to hearing your diverse perspectives on the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration's proposed rule
to upgrade the Fire Brigades Standard and its potential impact
on firefighters throughout the Nation.
As the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology, and also as a former chief of the Island Park
Fire Department, I know first-hand that the fire brigades
selflessly put the safety of their communities first, despite
experiencing a multitude of risks while serving on the job.
It is important that we mitigate unnecessary risks posed to
our Nation's firefighters. We must find a balanced approach
that promotes firefighter safety and prevents regulatory
burdens that ultimately make communities less safe.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 gave OSHA
the authority to create, modify, or revoke work standards for
private-sector employers, the U.S. Postal Service, and the
Federal Government.
While State and local fire departments are excluded from
OSHA enforcement if their State does not have an OSHA-approved
plan in place, there are 27 States whose State and local fire
departments are bound by OSHA's standard for fire brigades.
The fire brigade standard was created in 1980 to require
firefighting training, education, and protective gear for fire
departments. However, there have been no significant updates to
the rule since it was originally created in 1980.
The terrorist attacks of 9/11 highlighted the need for
improved coordination and emergency preparedness and response
for an updated safety standard for fire brigades.
Today we have a better understanding of the risks
firefighters have experienced over the years, and it's common
sense to consider updating the standard.
Earlier this year, the subcommittee held a hearing to
examine lithium-ion batteries and the unique challenges posed
to fire departments. It makes sense that as threats evolve,
safety standards should be updated to protect our Nation's
first responders.
That's why in 2007, OSHA requested information from
emergency responders on actions OSHA should take to improve
emergency response and preparedness across this great Nation.
Since then, OSHA has continued to take efforts to update
the safety regulations for fire brigades, and this February,
OSHA proposed a new rule for an Emergency Response Standard.
The proposed standard is wider scope and would apply not
just to firefighting but also emergency medical services and
technical search and rescue.
Among the requirements, OSHA's proposed rule would require
new written emergency response plans, hazard-vulnerability
assessments, training, personal equipment, medical screenings,
and behavioral health services for our Nation's fire brigades.
It also includes provisions to improve cardiovascular
health and cancer prevention.
Considering that OSHA started the process over a decade ago
to develop the proposed standard, I was pleased to see that the
proposed rule's comment period deadline was extended to June
21, but I hope that OSHA will consider extending the comment
period even further so that others have additional time to
review the 600-page proposal and ensure that their vital input
is heard.
As we review the impacts of OSHA and its proposed standard,
it is important that Federal regulators consider the impact
that a proposed rule could have on smaller fire departments
throughout the Nation.
It is unclear how the proposed standard would impact
volunteer-run fire departments in States with an OSHA-approved
plan.
Would volunteer firefighters be held to the same standard
as employed firefighters? How will this proposed rule affect
recruitment and retention? What are the costs associated with
adopting these new standards? Are additional training or
fitness requirements achievable, or have they become
burdensome?
I appreciate OSHA's efforts to improve firefighters'
operation environments, but there are concerns that volunteer
fire departments in smaller municipalities may not have the
resources to implement the proposed changes in their current
state.
It is estimated that over 1 million emergency responders
fall within the scope of the proposed rule, with over 331,000
of whom are volunteers.
Therefore, as I stated in a recent letter to OSHA's
assistant secretary of labor for occupational safety and
health, I encourage OSHA to consider the unique needs of
volunteer fire departments and to incorporate their feedback
into the proposed standard before the comment period ends.
Each community has different needs and capabilities, and I
am confident that we can find a balanced approach that
prioritizes safety without hurting these smaller volunteers
throughout the country.
I am committed to supporting our Nation's firefighters,
both career and volunteer, and ensuring that they have every
resource necessary to provide the best emergency response
services to their community.
I look forward to having a robust conversation to consider
the potential positive and some negative impacts that this rule
may have.
Thank you again to our witnesses for participating in this
hearing today.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]
Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito
June 4, 2024
Welcome to our witnesses. Thank you all for testifying before the
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology. Thank you for your
public service and for providing emergency response services in your
respective communities. We look forward to hearing your diverse
perspectives on the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA)'s proposed rule to update the Fire Brigades standard and its
potential impact on firefighters throughout the Nation.
As the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology and former chief of the Island Park Fire Department, I know
first-hand that fire brigades selflessly put the safety of their
communities first despite experiencing a multitude of risks while
serving on the job. It is important that we mitigate any unnecessary
risks posed against our Nation's firefighters. However, we must find a
balanced approach that promotes firefighter safety and prevents
regulatory burdens that ultimately may make communities less safe.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 gave OSHA the
authority to create, modify, or revoke work standards for private-
sector employers, the U.S. Postal Service, and the Federal
Government.\1\ While State and local fire departments are excluded from
OSHA enforcement if their State does not have an OSHA-approved plan in
place, there are 27 States whose State and local fire departments are
bound by OSHA's standard for fire brigades.\2\ The Fire Brigades
standard was created in 1980 to require firefighting training,
education, and protective gear for fire departments. However, there
have been no significant updates to the rule since it was originally
created in 1980.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CRS Memorandum.
\2\ CRS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The terrorist attacks of 9/11 highlighted the need for improved
coordination in emergency preparedness and response and for updated
safety standards for fire brigades. Today we have a better
understanding of the risks firefighters have experienced over the
years, and it's common sense to consider updating the standard.
Earlier this year, this subcommittee held a hearing to examine
lithium-ion battery fires and the unique challenges posed to fire
departments. It makes sense that as threats evolve, safety standards
should be updated to protect our Nation's first responders. That's why
in 2007, OSHA requested information from emergency responders on
actions OSHA should take to improve emergency response and preparedness
across the Nation.
Since then, OSHA has continued to take efforts to update the safety
regulations for fire brigades; and this February, OSHA proposed a new
rule for an Emergency Response Standard. However, the proposed standard
is wider in scope and would apply not just to firefighting, but also to
emergency medical services and technical search and rescue. Among the
requirements, OSHA's proposed rule would require new written emergency
response plans, hazard vulnerability assessments, training, personal
equipment, medical screenings, and behavioral health services for our
Nation's fire brigades. It also includes provisions to improve
cardiovascular health and cancer prevention.
Considering that OSHA started the process over a decade ago to
develop the proposed new standard, I was pleased to see that the
proposed rule's comment period deadline was extended to June 21, but I
hope that OSHA will consider extending the comment period even further
so that fire departments have additional time to review the 600-page
proposal and ensure that their vital input is heard.
As we review the impacts of OSHA's proposed standard, it is
important that Federal regulators consider the disparate impact that a
proposed rule could have on smaller fire departments throughout the
Nation. It is unclear how the proposed standard would impact volunteer-
run departments in States with an OSHA-approved plan. Would volunteer
firefighters be held to the same standard as employed firefighters? How
will this proposed rule affect recruitment and retention? What are the
costs associated with adopting these new standards? Are additional
training or fitness requirements achievable or overly burdensome?
I appreciate OSHA's efforts to improve firefighters' operating
environments, but I am concerned that volunteer departments and smaller
municipalities may not have the resources to implement the proposed
changes in their current State. It is estimated that over 1 million
emergency responders fall within the scope of the proposed rule, with
over 331,000 of whom are volunteer firefighters.\3\ Therefore, as I
stated in a recent letter to OSHA's assistant secretary of labor for
occupational safety and health, I encourage OSHA to consider the unique
needs of volunteer departments and to incorporate their feedback into
the proposed standard before the comment period ends.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ D'esposito Letter.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Each community has different needs and capabilities, and I hope we
can find a balanced approach that prioritizes safety without hurting
smaller fire departments throughout the country. I am committed to
supporting our Nation's firefighters and ensuring that they have all
the resources they need to provide the best emergency response services
to their community.
I look forward to having a robust conversation to consider the
potential positive and negative impacts of this proposed rule. Thank
you again to our witnesses for participating in this hearing today.

Mr. D'Esposito. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
Emergency Management and Technology Subcommittee, the gentleman
from Louisiana, Mr. Carter, for his opening statement.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here.
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today to
discuss the Occupational Safety and Health Administration's
proposed rule to update Fire Brigade Standards.
When I was a young member of the New Orleans City Council
many years ago, I was successful in creating our first
responders and firefighters, creating the reality that in most
cases, not all, firefighters are closest, easiest, and prepared
to be able to at least be the first on the scene to assess the
situation before EMTs arrive.
Somewhere in there, we admittedly neglected a bigger piece
of that puzzle, is making sure that we duly compensated you for
that extra work and also provided additional resources.
So here we are today to hear from you and to make sure that
we are recognizing the incredible work that you do and the
countless amount of lives that you have saved and will continue
to save as first responders, getting on the scene and providing
much-needed assessment and medical attention to a person in
need.
So let me tell you how much I appreciate you and how much I
fully support first responders and appreciate the witnesses
being here today before our subcommittee.
My understanding is that OSHA's proposed rule on Fire
Brigade Standards is not necessarily a new idea. It has origins
in some of Government's evaluations after September 11, 2001.
I understand that the comment period for the proposed rule
issued by OSHA in February and the deadline for submitting
comments has been extended.
I encourage all stakeholders to provide feedback to OSHA on
this proposed rule so that the Biden administration, in its
efforts to enhance the work environment for first responders,
is well-informed with the diverse perspectives that only you
can bring.
I'm eager to hear from our witnesses on how to strengthen
this new proposed rule. Your insights should be valuable in
ensuring that the standard effectively enhances the safety and
health of all emergency responders.
Along the same lines of looking at issues that impact first
responders, I feel it important to acknowledge that hurricane
season started on Saturday.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration warned
that the United States could face one of the worst hurricane
seasons in the last 2 decades.
I represent New Orleans, a place that is no stranger to
disasters. The city has been at the forefront of disasters,
from Hurricane Katrina to Ida, and so many more. The aftermath
of these hurricanes was nothing short of devastating, and
climate change will only lead to more frequent and intense
natural disasters.
More recently across the United States, we've had an
increase in tornado activity, with tornadoes touching down in
all but 2 days between April 25 and May 27, which is 94 percent
of the days past.
In fact, last month was the most active month for severe
weather since 2011. Over the Memorial Day weekend deadly
tornadoes killed at least 24 people, including children.
I take this subcommittee's oversight duties very seriously,
as does our Chairman. As we continue to see evidence of climate
change, it is important that this subcommittee focus on the
Nation's preparedness for disaster, and I encourage the
Chairman and my colleagues to work alongside both sides of the
aisle to recognize that storms don't recognize, nor appreciate,
any differences in people, party, or locale, that this, if
nothing else, is a bipartisan effort that we should always
swing together to hit to the benches, to make sure that we are
preparing for storms and giving you, our first responders,
every protection, tool, and resource that you need in order to
continue doing the great job that you do.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Troy A. Carter
June 4, 2024
I want to thank our witnesses for being here today to discuss the
Occupational Safety Health Administration's (OSHA) proposed rule to
update the Fire Brigades Standard. I want to say from the outset that I
fully support first responders and I appreciate the first responder
witnesses before our subcommittee today.
My understanding is that OSHA's proposed rule on the fire brigades
standard is not necessarily a new idea and has its origins in some of
the Government's evaluations after September 11, 2001. I understand
that the comment period for the proposed rule was issued by OSHA in
February and the deadline for submitting comments has been extended. I
encourage all stakeholders to provide feedback to OSHA on this proposed
rule so that the Biden administration, in its efforts to enhance the
work environment for first responders, is well-informed with diverse
perspectives.
I am eager to hear from our witnesses on how to strengthen this new
proposed rule. Your insights will be valuable in ensuring that the
standard effectively enhances the safety and health of all emergency
responders. Along the same lines of looking at issues that impact first
responders, I feel it important to acknowledge that hurricane season
started on Saturday. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) warned that the United States could face one of
its worst hurricane seasons in 2 decades.
I represent New Orleans, a place that is no stranger to disasters.
The city has been at the forefront of disasters from Hurricane Katrina
to Hurricane Ida. The aftermath of these hurricanes was nothing short
of devastating, and climate change will only lead to more frequent and
intense natural disasters.
More recently, across the United States, we have had an increase in
tornado activity with ``tornadoes touching down on all but 2 days
between April 25 and May 27, which is 94 percent of days.'' In fact,
last month was the most active month for severe weather since 2011.
Over the Memorial Day weekend, deadly tornadoes killed at least 24
people, including children.
I take this subcommittee's oversight duties very seriously. As we
continue to see evidence of climate change, it is important for this
subcommittee to focus on our Nation's preparedness for disasters and I
would encourage the Chairman and colleagues on the other side of the
aisle to make addressing climate change a priority.
I, also, think it is important for the subcommittee to confront
cuts to FEMA's preparedness grants that were pushed by House Republican
leadership. The 10 percent cut to the grant programs, including the
Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program, is a significant hit to our
first responders. Congress can and should do better to support those
who help our communities and I hope this subcommittee will do more
oversight of these grants.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
Other Members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
June 4, 2024
Good morning.
I want to thank our witnesses for appearing before the subcommittee
to discuss the Occupational Safety Health Administration's (OSHA) new
proposed rule to update the Fire Brigades Standard.
For 26 years, I served as a volunteer firefighter in my community.
I know the sacrifices of firefighters, and I applaud our fire service
witnesses here today for your continued service to your communities.
Thank you for the sacrifices you and your family make to help those in
need.
Given the threats our firefighters face in their daily work, robust
safety standards are important. The challenges and risks firefighters
face, especially in volunteer and rural settings, can be immense.
I commend the Biden administration for seeking to help first
responders. The new proposed OSHA rule to update the Fire Brigades
Standard is designed to benefit firefighters by including provisions
for mental health support and addressing other often-overlooked health
concerns. This holistic approach ensures that our firefighters receive
comprehensive care, promoting their physical and psychological well-
being.
The Biden administration is doing the right thing by extending the
comment period for proposed rule to ensure that stakeholders have ample
opportunity to provide input.
The American first responder community is strong, and it deserves
the utmost support from Congress. However, under the House Republican
leadership, a 10 percent cut was implemented to the full suite of FEMA
grants for fiscal year 2024 appropriations, which included cuts to the
Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program (AFG), the Staffing for
Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER), the State Homeland
Security Grant Program (SHSP), and the Urban Area Security Initiative
(UASI) for fiscal year 2024.
While cuts to the grants have been proposed by both Republican and
Democratic administrations, for nearly a decade Congress has resisted
cuts to these critically important grant programs. The fiscal year 2024
cuts were a departure from recent precedent and, more importantly,
undermine essential support for firefighters, compromising their
ability to respond effectively to emergencies and exposing them and
communities to greater risk.
Reduced funding means fewer resources for critical training,
equipment, and staffing, which are vital for ensuring safety and
preparedness during emergencies.
Last, I want to note that hurricane season started just days ago,
and it is predicted to be record-breaking. I would like to encourage
this subcommittee to do more oversight of Federal Emergency Management
Agency's preparation for hurricane season.
I yield back.

Mr. D'Esposito. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this very important topic.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. D'Esposito. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative.
Thank you. You may be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Mr. David Denniston serves as the second vice president of
the Association of Fire Districts of the State of New York. He
has 30-plus years in the fire service and is the past chief of
the Cortlandville Fire Department.
Mr. Joe Maruca is the director of the National Volunteer
Fire Council from Massachusetts and was the chief of the West
Barnstable Fire Department on Cape Cod for 18 years. Mr. Maruca
served as a volunteer firefighter from 1977 until becoming
chief in 2005.
Mr. Evan Davis currently serves as the director of
government affairs for the International Association of Fire
Fighters where he manages the organization's legislative and
regulatory initiatives to promote firefighter safety and
community emergency preparedness.
Mr. Grant Walker serves as president of the Prince George's
County Professional Fire Fighters and Paramedics Association
and previously served as a district representative for Howard,
Montgomery, Prince George's, Charles, Calvert, and St. Mary's
Counties in the Professional Firefighters of Maryland.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today, and, most
importantly, I thank you for your years of dedicated service.
I now recognize Mr. Denniston for 5 minutes to summarize
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID DENNISTON, SECOND VICE PRESIDENT,
ASSOCIATION OF FIRE DISTRICTS OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK

Mr. Denniston. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito,
distinguished Members of Congress, honored guests. My name is
David Denniston. I'm the vice president of the Association of
Fire Districts, State of New York. I also serve as the fire
commissioner of the Virgil Fire District.
Virgil is a small rural community in upstate New York, just
south of Syracuse. There are approximately 2,500 residents with
an annual household income of $78,000 and an average home value
of $162,000.
The Virgil Fire Department is a 100 percent volunteer
department with 35 active members and an annual budget of
$280,000. That's a total budget of $280,000.
We are not the largest department in New York State, but
we're certainly not the smallest either. We represent an
average-sized department in the upstate New York region.
Many of you on this committee either live or represent
small rural towns just like mine. I would ask you to consider
the impact this proposed rule would have on the community you
have been elected to represent.
What would happen in your community if a citizen dialed
9-1-1, and there was no emergency services agency to respond
because they're unable to meet a Federal standard?
As a fire commissioner, I've been reviewing the proposed
Emergency Response Rule and exploring the impact it would have
on my fire district. I'm working with authorities having
jurisdiction across New York State with the Association of Fire
Districts.
I would be remiss if I did not share I'm not alone in my
feelings that this proposed rule, as currently written, would
have devastating effects on our ability to operate and provide
fire protection to our communities.
The hardest-hit will be the small rural all-volunteer
departments. While we wholeheartedly agree that changes and
enhancements are needed to the 40-year-old-plus standard, this
proposed rule is neither economically or technically feasible
for our fire district.
There are two fundamental requirements by OSHA rule. The
agency has fallen far short in these areas. The proposed rule
is both arbitrary and capricious as both the process and logic
used to support these new requirements are severely flawed.
OSHA neither followed the required full negotiated rule-
making process, nor did it include adequate representation of
the volunteer fire service, which covers about 65 percent of
this country.
Just last week I met with over 40 fire chiefs from the
State of Indiana. Only 8 of the 40 fire chiefs even knew the
proposed change existed. OSHA has failed to follow the
Department of Labor Information Quality Guidelines, and several
of the data sources cited in the proposed rule change are not
representative of the documents.
For example, OSHA references the Firehouse Magazine Annual
Run Survey. This document is not statistically significant in
any fashion, and yet has been used as a main source of data
that will make it nearly impossible for small and rural fire
departments to function.
Based on this report, OSHA believes the average volunteer
or combination fire department budget in the United States is
$1.7 million.
We do not have a single all-volunteer department in my
county that has an annual budget of even a million dollars, let
alone an average of $1.7 million.
We compliment OSHA on trying to make first responders
safer. I, myself, have dedicated my life to this effort and
currently present fire leadership and safety training courses
across the United States.
While I wholeheartedly agree that changes are needed, this
proposal, as written, is not the answer. I believe that OSHA
had the best intentions in this process. However, it's fallen
short in producing an accurate picture of the fire service here
in the United States.
OSHA has failed to show the data or significant risk that
supports many of the changes proposed. Both the fire service
injuries and deaths are on a decline over the last several
years, while at the same time the thresholds to be considered a
line-of-duty death have been lowered.
The largest hurdle in all of this is the incorporated 22
NFPA standards to the rule. This takes a somewhat manageable
rule from over 40 pages to over 3,000. The 1,500 ``shalls'' and
``musts'' make it overwhelming at best.
Based on their incorporation, OSHA appears to be under the
impression that current NFPA standards are being followed by
agencies across the country. This simply is not the case. I
work with thousands of departments across the United States and
have yet to find one that comes close to meeting these in their
entirety.
In our opinion, OSHA has failed to follow the procedures
and rules it is governed by. One could argue that the door has
been left wide open for legal challenges should this proposed
rule be adopted as written.
This is neither our desire, nor our intent. We are simply
asking that the process be reopened, more transparent, better
communicated, and the rule be rewritten using reliable data
with the assistance of equal representation by those that it
will affect.
By working together, we can craft a rule that will not only
be obtainable, but will also do a better job in protecting
those that risk their lives to save the lives of their
communities.
Thank you for allowing me to share a few concerns in this
brief statement. We're not asking for this effort to go away or
kicking a can down the road. We are simply asking for an
appropriate seat at the table as we proceed to make
firefighting safer for all of us in this country.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Denniston follows:]
Prepared Statement of David Denniston
Distinguished Members of Congress and honored guests, my name is
David Denniston, and I am vice president of the Association of Fire
Districts of the State of New York. I also serve as a fire commissioner
of the Virgil Fire District. Virgil is a small, rural community in
upstate NY, just south of Syracuse. We have approximately 2,500
residents with an annual household income of $78,000 and average home
value of $162,000. The Virgil Fire Department is a 100 percent
volunteer department with 35 active members and an annual budget of
$280,000. We are not the largest department in New York State, but we
certainly are not the smallest either. We represent an average-sized
department in the upstate NY region. Many of you on this committee
either live or represent small, rural towns just like ours. I would ask
you to consider the impact this proposed rule would have on communities
you have been elected to represent. What would happen in your
communities if a citizen called 9-1-1 and there was no emergency
services agency to respond because they were unable to meet a Federal
standard?
As a fire commissioner, I have been reviewing the proposed
Emergency Response Rule and exploring the impact it would have on Fire
Districts. I am also working with authorities having jurisdiction
across New York State with the Association of Fire Districts of the
State of New York. I would be remiss if I did not share that I am not
alone in my feelings that the proposed rule would have devasting
effects on our ability to operate and provide fire protection to our
communities. The hardest-hit will be the small rural all-volunteer
departments. While we wholeheartedly agree that changes and
enhancements are needed to the 40-plus-year-old current standard, this
proposed rule is neither economically nor technically feasible for our
districts. These are two fundamental requirements of any OSHA rule, and
the agency has fallen far short in these areas. The proposed rule is
both arbitrary and capricious as both the process and logic used to
support these new requirements are severely flawed. OSHA neither
followed the required full negotiated rule-making process nor did it
include adequate representation of the volunteer fire service, which
covers 65 percent of this country.
Just this week I met with over 40 fire chiefs from the State of
lndianna. Only 8 of the 40 chiefs even knew this proposed change
existed. OSHA has also failed to follow the Federal Information Quality
Act, and several of the data sources cited in the proposed rule change
are not representative of all departments. For example, OSHA references
the Firehouse Magazine Annual Run Survey. This document is not
statistically significant in any fashion, and yet has been used as a
main source of data that will make it nearly impossible for small and
rural fire departments to function. Based on this report, OSHA believes
the average fire department budget in the United States is $1.7
million. We do not have a single all-volunteer department in my county
that has an annual budget of $1 million, let alone an average of $1.7
million.
We compliment OSHA on trying to make first responders safer. I have
dedicated my life to this effort, and currently present fire leadership
and safety training courses across the United States in firehouses,
conferences, and virtually. I have personally taught over 35,000
students on these subjects. While we have a lot more work to do, this
proposed rule is not the answer. I believe that OSHA had the best of
intensions in this process, it has fallen short of producing an
accurate picture of the fire service in the United States. OSHA has
also failed to show data or a significant risk that supports many of
the changes proposed. Both fire service injuries and deaths are on a
decline over the past several years, while at the same time the
thresholds to be considered a line-of-duty injury or death have been
lowered.
The largest hurdle of all is the incorporation of 22 different NFPA
standards into the rule. This takes a somewhat manageable rule from 40
pages to over 3,000. The 1,500 plus ``Shalls'' and ``Musts'' make it
overwhelming at best. Based on their incorporation, OSHA appears to be
under the impression that the current NFPA standards are for being
followed by agencies across the country. This is not the case. I work
with thousands of departments across the United States and have yet to
find one that comes close to meeting these standards entirely.
In our opinion, OSHA has failed to follow many of the procedures
and rules it is governed by. One could argue that the door has been
left wide open for legal challenges should this proposed rule be
adopted as presented. This is neither our desire nor intent. We are
simply asking that the process be reopened, more transparent, better
communicated, and the rule be rewritten using reliable data with the
assistance of equal representation by those that it will affect. By
working together, we can craft a new rule that will not only be
attainable but will also do a better job protecting those that risk
their own lives to benefit their communities.
I would offer the following proposals:
(1) If OSHA is truly interested in having input and working with
the fire service, we need to extend the comment period deadline
until at least 9/21/24. As I already stated, as have several
others in their public comments, the fire service in general is
just becoming aware of this process and proposed rule. It has
not been communicated well to the department level. The 608-
page document takes time to read and digest. I personally have
hundreds of hours invested at this point and I still am trying
to absorb all the details. It took OSHA several years to write
this proposal, and yet they want to give only 90 days for
others to communicate and understand it. The two short
extensions now by OSHA are appreciated, but we simply need more
time.
(2) Remove the incorporated by reference NFPA standards and replace
them with the desired and relevant wording in the rule itself.
Doing so will produce an understandable, clear document that
does not require hours of research, digesting, and trying to
sort out where the actual rule conflicts with the incorporated
standard as it has currently done.
(3) Consider tailoring specific requirements within the standard to
4 segments of the fire service. This proposed rule places
industry fire brigades, career departments, volunteer
departments, and EMS agencies all in the same box. We are 4
very different disciplines that are funded differently, respond
differently, exposed to hazards at different levels, and have
different resources to respond. This ``one-size-fits-all''
approach is extremely problematic, and in many cases tries to
place a square peg in a round hole.
(4) Give the Volunteer Fire Service a seat at the table equivalent
to the 65 percent of the country that it represents.
(5) Use relevant data. Much of the data cited by OSHA in the
document is outdated, not statistically relevant, or not used
in the manner for which it was intended lending to false
assumptions.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Denniston.
I now recognize Chief Maruca for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH MARUCA, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL VOLUNTEER FIRE
COUNCIL, FORMER FIRE CHIEF OF WEST BARNSTABLE FIRE DEPARTMENT

Mr. Maruca. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking
Member Carter, distinguished Members of Congress. My name is
Joe Maruca. I am a firefighter with over 45 years of
experience, and I am the director of the National Volunteer
Fire Council. I recently retired as chief of the West
Barnstable, Massachusetts, Fire Department, a combination fire
department with 5 career firefighter/paramedics and 45
volunteer firefighters on Cape Cod.
The NVFC is the leading nonprofit membership association,
representing the interests of the volunteer fire, EMS, and
rescue services. We serve as the national voice for over
670,000 volunteer firefighters who comprise 65 percent of the
Nation's fire service.
The NVFC appreciates OSHA's efforts to promote our mutual
goal of ensuring firefighter safety with this proposed
Emergency Response Standard.
However, if adopted as written, the standard would be
economically infeasible for most volunteer fire departments to
comply with and would cause many of these departments to shut
down, therefore, compromising the emergency response
capabilities in many small towns, particularly those in rural
areas.
In addition to its economic infeasibility, this proposed
standard would be problematic due to the incorporation by
reference of industry standards, uncertainty about volunteer
coverage, lack of staff expertise and availability to
facilitate the implementation of these standards, and an
unrealistic proposed time line for implementation.
For these reasons, the NVFC believes OSHA should exempt
volunteer firefighters from the proposed standard. The NVFC is
concerned that OSHA is unaware of the varied ways that
volunteer fire departments are organized, and therefore unaware
of the extent that their proposed Emergency Response Standard
would impact the volunteer fire service, especially when it
comes to how volunteer fire departments in many areas of the
country are organized as nonprofit and are unaffiliated with
any municipality, and these could fall within the scope of the
proposed standards regardless of what State they're in.
Due to the diverse nature of the volunteer fire service,
the NVFC believes it should not fall within the scope of OSHA's
proposed Emergency Response Standard.
When it comes to evaluating the economic feasibility of
OSHA's proposed standard, it's important to realize that 95
percent of volunteer firefighters serve populations of less
than 25,000 people, and about half of volunteers serve in
communities of fewer than 2,500 people.
National needs assessments of the Nation's fire service
consistently show that volunteer fire departments in small and
rural communities have the most difficulty affording up-to-date
equipment and operations.
In an NVFC department budget survey with 1,766 responses,
28 percent said their Department's budget is less than $75,000
per year. This happens to be the typical budget for an on-call
volunteer fire department in a Massachusetts town of 2,500 or
smaller people.
Departments with this budget struggle to pay for fuel,
supplies, and gear, with the average cost of equipping a single
firefighter with a bunker coat, bunker pants, and boots and a
helmet being $4,600.
OSHA estimates the average cost of their proposed standard
to be about $14,000 per volunteer fire department. When you
have a $75,000 budget, that's a huge bite.
It's economically infeasible to have small departments
adhere to the same standard as a large suburban or urban
community would.
The main source of Federal support to supplement these
local fire departments is the Assistance to Firefighters Grant
and Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response. Though
AFG and SAFER have been successful, there is not enough funding
available to address the needs of the fire service, especially
if we have an economic burden added by OSHA.
Since 2017, funding for AFG and SAFER has fallen by $81
million each. Last year, only 13 percent of funding requests
were funded by AFG and SAFER.
The NVFC urges Congress to pass the reauthorization of AFG
and SAFER before their September 30 sunset and increase funding
for these critically important grant programs.
Contributing to the economic infeasibility are numbers of
prohibitive requirements that are contained within the
Emergency Response Standard, including the incorporation by
reference of 20 standards.
I'm out of time, so I'm just going to say thank you very
much. We thank the subcommittee for holding this important
hearing and for the opportunity to testify about the needs of
the volunteer fire service.
We thank Chair--or should I say Chief--D'Esposito for his
years of service as a volunteer firefighter, and other Members
as well, for their leadership on this issue.
Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Maruca follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joseph Maruca
June 4, 2024
Good morning, Chair D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee. My name is Joseph Maruca and
I am a firefighter with 45 years of experience. In April, I retired as
chief of the West Barnstable Fire Department on Cape Cod, Massachusetts
and I served as a volunteer firefighter from 1977 until becoming chief
in 2005. West Barnstable is a combination fire department with 5 career
firefighters/paramedics and 45 volunteer firefighters.
Additionally, I represent Massachusetts as a director of the
National Volunteer Fire Council (NVFC) and I have represented the NVFC
as chair of the National Fire Protection Association's (NFPA) 1917
Technical Committee, which is the Standard for Automotive Ambulances.
During my time as a volunteer firefighter, my other career was
practicing as an attorney concentrating on estate planning. On behalf
of the NVFC, I'd like to thank the subcommittee for holding this
important hearing and allowing me to have the opportunity to speak
about the Occupational Health and Safety Administration's (OSHA)
proposed Emergency Response Standard.
The NVFC serves as the national voice for over 670,000 volunteer
firefighters comprising 65 percent of the Nation's fire service. The
NVFC formulates this national voice via our Board of Directors, which
are appointed by State firefighter associations from 47 States. Since
1976, the NVFC has been the leading nonprofit membership association
representing the interests of the volunteer fire, EMS, and rescue
services. The NVFC provides critical resources, programs, education,
and advocacy to support the interests of volunteer first responders
across the Nation.
position on osha's proposed emergency response standard
On February 5, 2024 the OSHA published a Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking (NPRM) in the Federal Register for a proposed new
``Emergency Response Standard'' [Docket No. OSHA-2007-0073]. This
proposed would replace the agency's ``Fire Brigades Standard'' (29 CFR
1910.156). The public comment period for OSHA's proposed Emergency
Response standard is currently scheduled to conclude on July 22, 2024.
The publication of this proposed standard is the latest step in a
rulemaking process dating back to 2007, which has involved a request
for information in 2007, a National Advisory Committee on Occupational
Safety and Health (NACOSH) Emergency Responder Preparedness
Subcommittee in 2015, and a Small Business Advocacy Review (SBAR) panel
in 2021. The NVFC was represented on the NACOSH and SBAR panels.
The NVFC appreciates OSHA's efforts to promote our mutual goal of
ensuring firefighter safety by putting forth this proposed Emergency
Response Standard. We believe the proposed standard contains many
provisions that would serve the fire service well and protect the well-
being of firefighters. However, if adopted as written, this proposed
standard would be economically infeasible for volunteer fire
departments to comply with and could cause many of these departments to
shut down. This proposed standard could also compromise the safety and
emergency response capabilities of many small communities, particularly
small communities in rural areas.
In addition to its economic infeasibility, this proposed standard
would be problematic due to a number of other factors including: the
incorporation by reference of industry consensus standards, numerous
ambiguities on how volunteers would be covered, the lack of personnel
expertise and availability to facilitate implementation, and an
unrealistic proposed time line for implementation. For these reasons,
the NVFC would like OSHA to exempt volunteer firefighters from this
proposed standard.
scope of the proposed standard
The new Emergency Response Standard would be broader than OSHA's
current Fire Brigade Standard. The NPRM for the proposed Emergency
Response Standard is very unclear on which volunteer fire departments
and personnel would be covered by the standard.
The NPRM contains a section that lists the SBAR panel's
recommendations and OSHA's responses. Some of these recommendations
include OSHA's need to clearly explain who falls within the scope of
the standard and determine which States consider volunteer firefighters
as employees who would be covered by the standard. OSHA responds to
these recommendations, explaining that both the text of the proposed
standard and the NPRM address which volunteers would be covered by the
proposed standard. However, there are many variables like compensations
level, department structure/funding sources, and location that may
impact how volunteers fall within the scope of this proposed standard
that OSHA still doesn't adequately explain.
Paragraph A of the proposed Emergency Response Standard is supposed
to address scope. Paragraph A does explain how emergency response
organizations and the personnel of these organizations would fall
within the scope of the standard but doesn't delve further into
specifics and leaves many unanswered questions regarding these
variables mentioned above.
The NPRM attempts to shed light on some of these specifics.
Regarding compensation, it explains that while the Occupational Safety
and Health (OSH) Act does not apply to volunteers, some workers labeled
as volunteers may actually be considered employees under Federal law
because they receive a certain level of compensation, which may include
the direct payment of money or other types of remuneration. Therefore,
any emergency responders who are referred to as volunteers but receive
``significant remuneration'' within the meaning of Federal law would be
included within the scope of this proposed standard as employees.
However, the NPRM does not define significant remuneration.
The NPRM goes on to explain that the OSH Act does not include the
United States (not including the United States Postal Service) or any
State or political subdivision of a State. However, there are 29 States
with OSHA-approved State Plans and there is variability as to whether
volunteer emergency responders are classified as employees under State
law within these States.
In the States with OSHA-approved State Plans, each State determines
what types of volunteer emergency responders it covers, and to what
extent they are covered. This determination of coverage is based upon
the State's definitions of what volunteers are considered employees and
whether or not volunteer organizations are covered by State legislation
relating to the OSHA-approved State Plan. Volunteers considered
employees by States with OSHA-approved State Plans would be covered by
this proposed Emergency Response Standard, because these States are
obligated to promulgate a standard that is ``at least as effective'' as
OSHA's proposed Emergency Response Standard. Additionally, regardless
of State law, any volunteers who receive ``significant remuneration''
in States with OSHA-approved State Plans would also fall within the
scope of this standard due to the obligation mentioned above. The NPRM
goes on to explain that 20 of the 29 States with OSHA-approved State
Plans are assumed to classify volunteers as employees that would be
covered by the proposed emergency response standard.
Though the NPRM explains a great deal about how volunteers may be
covered by the proposed Emergency Response Standard, it leaves a lot of
ambiguity. For example, OSHA says they believe that volunteer emergency
responders rarely receive compensation substantial enough to render
them employees under this ``significant remuneration'' legal test,
however they do not provide a definition for ``significant
remuneration.'' However, in 2006 the Department of Labor estimated 30
percent of all volunteer firefighters are paid a small fee for each
fire call to which they respond. The NVFC is concerned about the
accuracy of OSHA's determination that the ``significant remuneration''
threshold would rarely be triggered without them defining what
``significant remuneration'' is.
While the NVFC strongly believes the best course of action would be
to exempt volunteer firefighters from this proposed Emergency Response
Standard, a better metric to define a volunteer based off compensation
would be ``20 percent rule'' as defined in the Department of Labor's
August 7, 2006 opinion letter, which extends the application of the 20
percent rule to volunteer firefighters. The letter explains
``generally, an amount not exceeding 20 percent of the total
compensation that the employer would pay to a full-time firefighter for
performing comparable services would be deemed nominal.'' Due to the
nature of firefighting and the difficulties faced with recruitment and
retention we also suggest that this ``20 percent rule'' exclude the
value of overnight lodging in the firehouse while on call, insurance
policies that are comparable to those of career firefighters in the
region, and length of service award programs (LOSAPs).
Additionally, the NPRM says States with an OSHA-approved State Plan
do not define ``employee'' in a standard way. Therefore, determining
which employees are covered is not straightforward. For example, some
States may provide benefits in the form of insurance and tax benefits
to volunteers that might affect whether they are considered employees.
Some State Plans may also extend OSHA protections to volunteer
firefighters but not to volunteer EMS providers or other non-
firefighting volunteers, while other State Plans extend OSHA
protections to all volunteers or to no volunteers. There are also 4
States and territories in which OSHA was unable to determine whether
volunteers are considered employees under their State Plans.
The NPRM is also inconsistent with its estimated number of
volunteers that would be covered by the proposed Emergency Response
Standard. In one part of the NPRM OSHA says the ``of the 1,054,611
emergency responders anticipated to fall within the scope of the
proposed rule, 331,472 will be self-identified as volunteers.'' Later,
a chart in the NPRM says 187,621 firefighters in volunteer departments
and 100,417 firefighters in combination or ``mixed'' departments would
be impacted, a total of 288,038 firefighters in volunteer and
combination fire departments.
The NVFC is also concerned that OSHA is unaware of the varied ways
fire departments are funded and how they are organized. Funding can
come in the form of local taxes, Federal grants, and/or self-
fundraising and the degree to which each of these funding sources make
up a fire departments revenue vary greatly. The NVFC is particularly
concerned about OSHA not being aware of fire departments that are
organized as nonprofit organizations and are unaffiliated with any
municipality or political subdivision in States without an OSHA-
approved State Plan. Volunteer firefighters in these departments that
are compensated in a matter that is consistent with ``significant
remuneration'' could fall within the scope of this proposed standard
regardless of the State they work in.
The NVFC is also very concerned about State-level Departments of
Labor being pressured into adopting this proposed standard regardless
of whether the State has an OSHA-approved State Plan. The NVFC has
heard from our members in States without OSHA-approved State Plans that
their State Department of Labor have expressed the possibility that
they could be pressured into adopting the proposed Emergency Response
Standard if it is adopted by the 20-plus State Plan States.
Additionally, the NVFC's membership is very concerned that this
proposed Emergency Response Standard may become the standard of
compliance for the purpose of seeking municipal/department insurance or
for civil litigation regardless of the State a municipality and fire
department are located in.
In reviewing the NPRM for OSHA's proposed emergency response
standard, the NVFC believes OSHA does not adequately meet the SBAR
panel's recommendation of clearly explaining which volunteer
departments and firefighters would be impacted by this standard. The
NVFC also believes that OSHA does not have a complete understanding of
how far-reaching the scope this proposed Emergency Response Standard
could have on the volunteer fire service. The NVFC therefore recommends
that the volunteer fire service be excluded from OSHA's proposed
Emergency Response Standard.
economic feasibility
All- and mostly-volunteer fire departments, protect 82 percent of
the Nation's communities and 30 percent of the population. Small rural
communities are almost exclusively protected by volunteers. According
to the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), most volunteer
firefighters (95 percent) serve in departments that protect fewer than
25,000 people. Approximately half (48 percent) of volunteer
firefighters are with small, rural departments that protect fewer than
2,500 people.
Many fire departments, especially small volunteer departments, face
major obstacles such as basic staffing and equipment needs. National
needs assessments of the Nation's fire service consistently show that
volunteer departments have difficulty affording up-to-date equipment,
training, and apparatus. This is primarily for economic reasons.
Because fire protection services are funded at the local level, the
resources available to each department are dependent on the local tax
base, or the capability to fundraise, which can be very restrictive and
limited in small, rural communities.
Additionally, some departments are entirely self-funded with
fundraising efforts like pancake breakfasts, chicken dinners, and bingo
nights. When a single piece of apparatus can cost $1 million or more,
these poses a tremendous challenge. These efforts are often labor-
intensive with low yields. The SBAR panel recommended to OSHA that they
do more to take into account the economic feasibility of this proposed
Emergency Response standard on departments that self-fundraise. The
NVFC believes the NPRM still doesn't adequately accomplish this.
The NVFC conducted a survey of our membership and asked about
department budgets. Of the 1,766 responses we received 18.5 percent
said their department's budget was less than $50,000, and an additional
10 percent said their department's budget is between $51,000 and
$75,000.
The profile of a typical call/volunteer fire department in a
Massachusetts Town of 2,500 people or less is as follows:

17 Call or Volunteer Firefighters on Staff

0 Part-Time Firefighters on Staff

0 Career Firefighters on Staff

2 Auxiliary or Support Firefighters

1 Junior Firefighter/Explorer

2 Dedicated EMS Providers (who are not firefighters)

Has an annual budget of $74,932

Spends $2,926 per year on training

Serves a community with a population of 1,342 people

Provides EMS First Response/First Aid

Provides no Ambulance.
Operating with an average annual budget of about $75,000, these
fire departments barely subsist and have no financial capacity to do
anything more. These departments struggle to pay for fuel, maintain
their trucks and building, and purchase basic replacement gear and
supplies.
The 2021 SBAR panel recommend that OSHA make the proposed standard
less prescriptive and more scalable with performance-based provisions,
where practical, and where possible tailor the standard for small and
volunteer fire departments. Though OSHA did make some effort to make
this proposed emergency response scalable, much more needs to be done.
It is infeasible to have a department similar to the one described
above adhere to an Emergency Response Standard that is nearly identical
to the Emergency Response Standard that a large, well-funded department
such as Boston has to comply with.
Massachusetts fire departments cannot grow much beyond 2.5 percent
per year because State law caps municipal tax levy increases to 2.5
percent per year, unless the town votes at an election to increase the
levy beyond 2.5 percent. Many other States have similar caps. This
means that the typical Massachusetts department sees its budget
increase no more than about $1,875 per year. Department budgets are not
keeping up with inflation.
To make up the difference between income and expenses, these
departments often have to fundraise or apply for grant funding. This
becomes increasingly difficult when a department of this size has to
purchase additional equipment or an apparatus like a fire truck which
can add thousands to millions of dollars in expense to a department
budget.
The Colorado Fire Service recently estimated that the average cost
to equip a single firefighter with bunker coat, bunker pants, and boots
is $4,600 and this rises to $16,500 when you include self-contained
breathing apparatus (SCBA). This financial squeeze on small departments
has only been made worse by increasing prices. Between 2018 and 2023
the average cost of turnout gear increased by approximately 35-40
percent, while the cost of SCBA increased by 32 percent.
Some of the specific challenges revealed in the most recent NFPA
Needs Assessment of the U.S. Fire Service include major issues
providing firefighters with personal protective clothing (PPC) and
personal protective equipment (PPE). In fact, more than half of all
fire departments cannot equip all personnel with SCBAs. Departments
protecting less than 10,000 people have the highest rates of unmet need
for necessary and life-saving SCBA equipment. When it comes to PPC
availability in the smallest departments, 75 percent have at least some
PPC that is older than the 10-year life span recommended by the NFPA
and 57 percent of all fire departments cannot afford to equip all their
responders with wildland fire PPC.
Volunteer fire departments also face major challenges with
staffing, recruitment, and retention. Between 2010 and 2020 the number
of volunteer firefighters Nation-wide dropped 12 percent. Since 2000,
the percentage of firefighters over the age of 50 serving in
communities with populations of 2,500 or fewer residents has surged
from 18.9 percent to 34 percent. In some areas around the country,
there are communities where the entire volunteer fire department is
over 50 years old.
Understaffed departments do not have the human resources needed to
implement broad-sweeping requirements such as those outlined in the
proposed standard. Doing so would further increase the time burden
placed on volunteers and exacerbate the recruitment and retention
problem.
Some of the largest factors impacting retention and recruitment of
firefighters are the transformation taking place across rural America,
along with increased mental and physical fatigue. As jobs leave small
towns and young people move to the cities and suburbs in search of
work, there are fewer people available to volunteer as emergency
responders. As call volumes have risen and the amount of training
required to serve as a firefighter has increased, it is increasingly
difficult to convince people to volunteer. Additionally, the COVID-19
pandemic, increased hazmat incidents caused by lithium-ion batteries,
increasing wildland fires, and other factors have all made being a
firefighter more taxing and the need for additional firefighters more
pressing.
Federal grants and national organizations like the NVFC have done a
great deal to assist volunteer departments in receiving the resources
they need, but as seen in the data provided above there is still a
large, unfulfilled need for these resources. The most important Federal
grant programs that assist fire departments in achieving a baseline
level of readiness are the Assistance to Firefighters Grant (AFG) and
Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grants which
are managed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA). AFG
and SAFER are competitive grant programs that provide funds to fire
departments to help them reach a baseline level of preparedness.
Through AFG, local departments receive funding to purchase training,
equipment, and apparatus as well as pay for health and safety programs.
Through SAFER funds, local departments can pay for hiring career
firefighters or for recruiting and retaining volunteer firefighters.
While AFG and SAFER grants have been very successful, there is not
nearly enough funding available for these programs to adequately
address the fire service's need for equipment, training, and staffing.
Since fiscal year 2011, funding for both AFG and SAFER has fallen by
$81 million for each program going from $405 million to $324 million.
In fiscal year 2024 alone, each program was cut by $36 million. In
fiscal year 2022, FEMA received approximately $2.4 billion in AFG grant
applications for only $324 million in available funding, 10 percent of
AFG funding is used for Fire Prevention and Safety grants, and
approximately $2.8 billion in SAFER funding applications for only $360
million in available funding.
Additionally, Congress has allowed the authorizations of AFG and
SAFER lapse as of the end of fiscal year 2023 and still hasn't passed
reauthorization legislation with the September 30 statutory sunset date
for these programs less than 4 months away. Regardless of whether this
standard is adopted as written, the NVFC urges Congress to pass the
reauthorization of AFG and SAFER grants without delay and to increase
funding for each of these critically important grant programs.
The NPRM estimates the average cost of OSHA's proposed Emergency
Response Standard to be an average approximately $14,000 for each
volunteer department. Absent a dramatic increase in AFG and SAFER
funding, volunteer departments would not be able to comply with this
proposed standard.
Volunteers still step up to the plate every day to stretch every
dollar, by paying for gear and training out of their own pocket and
providing maintenance on trucks just to get them out the door. The NVFC
has also done its best to assist volunteer departments in receiving the
resources they need with protective PPE and helmet giveaways, small
grant programs made possible by our corporate partners, a Mental Health
Helpline, free training, and numerous guides and resources. Through a
SAFER grant, the NVFC also established the Make Me a Firefighter
program (MMAF), the first and only national recruitment and retention
campaign to help departments maintain or increase staffing levels.
However, like the Federal funding available, the need for these
resources is greater than what can be provided.
With our understanding of the Nation's volunteer fire service and
the data provided above, the NVFC strongly believes that many volunteer
fire departments throughout the country will not be able to comply with
OSHA's proposed emergency response standard. This lack of compliance
will not be due to inconvenience or a lack of desire. The staffing and
funding needed to do this just doesn't exist. This standard would not
meet its goal of improving firefighter safety if it sets impossible
standards for departments to meet.
Additionally, the small departments referenced above are often the
only emergency responders within miles and sometimes hours of response
time away. More firefighters and communities will be placed at risk if
they are required to comply with this prohibitively difficult standard
in order to operate as department resources would be stretched even
thinner, and some departments would be forced to close.
The NPRM also argues that this proposed rule is not an unfunded
mandate on State or local government because the agency's standards do
not apply directly to State and local governments.
To make this argument OSHA says that it is only States with
voluntarily adopted an OSHA-approved State Plan that must adopt a
standard at least as effective as the Federal standard that applies to
State and local government agencies. However, it is unrealistic to
assume that States would be easily able opt out of their OSHA-approved
State Plans because of this proposed rule. Therefore, the NVFC believes
this proposed rule would effectively be an unfunded mandate.
The NPRM does concede that OSHA is concerned with the potential
``downstream'' economic impact the proposed rule may have on emergency
response organizations with volunteer responders. Through the NPRM,
OSHA encourages stakeholders to engage with local and State officials
about reducing potential impacts of the proposed Emergency Response
Standard.
In the NPRM, OSHA says it understands that negative financial
impacts on volunteer emergency response entities could have undesirable
public safety implications. OSHA also says that they considered the
possibility of excluding certain categories of emergency response
organizations from certain provisions of the proposed rule based on
organization size, funding source, and/or the number of emergencies
responded to each year. However, OSHA said they decided not to because
it was unable to determine any appropriate exclusions in light of their
obligation to ameliorate significant risks to employees where
economically feasible. The NVFC believes the data expressed above about
the economic infeasibility of this proposed standard should make a
sufficient argument for volunteer firefighters to be excluded from the
proposed standard.
particularly burdensome requirements contained in the proposed standard
As mentioned previously in this testimony, the proposed Emergency
Response Standard contains numerous requirements that would be
prohibitive and economically infeasible for volunteer departments to
comply with. Particularly problematic would be the incorporation by
reference of over 20 NFPA and American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) industry consensus standards.
The incorporation of these standards by reference would pose a
number of issues.
First, most of these standards are updated every 3 to 5 years and
if a current standard is incorporated by reference into the proposed
standard, it will remain fixed and require a Federal Register notice to
be updated within the Emergency Response Standard. Second, NFPA is in
the process of consolidating many of its standards and it is not clear
how these standards would be impacted if they're incorporated by
reference and are consolidated into other standards afterwards. Third,
is the lack of access to these standards. NFPA standards are available
to view for free on-line, but printed copies of these standards are not
free. This limited access of NFPA standards is particularly problematic
since many volunteer fire departments in rural areas lack reliable
internet access.
Finally, the NVFC believes these industry consensus standards are
excellent as best practice that departments should strive to comply
with as much as resources permit them to do so. The NVFC also has great
respect for the process through which these standards are produced and
has representatives on over 20 NFPA technical committees that inform
the content of these standards. However, many volunteer fire
departments doe not have the economic, staffing, and administrative
resources to comply with these standards and the NVFC strongly believes
they should not become law by being completely or partially
incorporated by reference into OSHA's proposed emergency response
standard.
Some standards incorporated by reference that would be particularly
burdensome include NFPA 1582. NFPA 1582 contains provisions for an
occupational medical program that is designed to reduce risks and
provide for the health, safety, and effectiveness of firefighters while
performing emergency operations. For AFG grant award purposes, the
estimated cost an NFPA 1582 medical exam between $1,200 and $1,400,
however many NVFC members have been quoted much higher costs for these
physical exams for firefighters and per the economic data above, would
be overwhelming for many departments. Incorporation of this standard is
an example of where OSHA tried to make the proposed Emergency Response
Standard scalable, only requiring a full NFPA 1582 medical exam after a
firefighter is exposed to 15 combustion products exposure events per
year. However, the NVFC would like more clarity on what the definition
of a combustion products exposure event.
Another burdensome standard partially incorporated by reference
into this proposed standard would be NFPA 1910. NFPA 1910 contains
requirements for establishing an inspection, maintenance,
refurbishment, and testing program for emergency service vehicles and
marine firefighting vessels and provides the minimum job performance
requirements including the requisite knowledge and skills for emergency
vehicle technicians. Incorporating this standard by reference would
require all fire apparatus to be inspected weekly or within 24 hours of
responding to an emergency. Inspections would have to be conducted by
staff who are trained in chassis inspection. This would also require
periodic comprehensive, diagnostic inspections of up to 70 components
within an apparatus. This could be prohibitive for small departments
that have a single apparatus and lack the staffing and expertise to
conduct such an inspection.
NFPA 1021 would also be incorporated by reference into the proposed
Emergency Response Standard. This is the standard for fire officer
professional qualifications and contains the minimum job performance
requirements including the requisite knowledge and skills to perform
fire officer duties through 4 progressive levels of qualification.
Level 1 is a tier for an entry level/first-line supervisor, company
officer, or team leader. Level 4 is the top level or top tier for the
chief. Incorporation of this standard by reference would again fall
into the burdensome one-size-fits-all approach of this Emergency
Response Standard.
These courses require hours of training in addition to the hundreds
of hours of training volunteers have to go through while balancing
career and family obligations. Additional training requirements can
severely impact recruitment and retention efforts, therefore much care
needs to be taken in evaluating what training is essential for officers
in small volunteer departments. In many cases, the NFPA 1021 courses
provide training that are not essential to officers in these
departments. Additionally, availability of training is a particularly
large obstacle many volunteers face, specifically those in rural areas.
In speaking with NVFC members and other fire service stakeholders, the
NVFC has learned that NFPA 1021 Fire Officer 3 training is only offered
in 26 States. Unfortunately, this lack of availability is not unique to
Fire Officer 3.
The NFPA standards mentioned above only address a small portion of
the burdens small volunteer departments would be faced with if over 20
industry consensus standards are completely or partially incorporated
by reference into OSHA's notice of proposed Emergency Response
Standard. There are also other requirements outside these standards
included in OSHA's proposed rule that would be extremely burdensome to
volunteer departments. These include a number of written planning
requirements and procedures that require administrative staff and
expertise that small volunteer departments lack. Additionally, such
expertise may not be available in rural areas and may require expensive
outside consultants. There would also be a number of on-scene
requirements like identifying and clearly labeling control zones that
again would require time and personnel that many small volunteer
departments would not have when arriving on scene.
Finally, the implementation time line for the proposed standard
ranges from 2 months to 2 years depending on the paragraph. Volunteer
departments, particularly small departments in rural areas would not be
able to comply with this time line. As previously mentioned, many of
these departments would not be able to comply with certain provisions
in this standard at all, while other provisions would require at least
a decade for volunteer departments to comply with.
conclusion
The NVFC again thanks the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology for holding this important hearing and for the opportunity
to testify. We also thank Chair or Commissioner D'Esposito for his
years of service as a volunteer firefighter and his leadership in
ensuring volunteer firefighters can safely perform the duties, while
not compromising their ability to serve their communities.
While we appreciate OSHA's commitment to firefighter safety, for
the reasons explained in this testimony, the NVFC urges OSHA to exempt
the volunteer fire service from their proposed Emergency Response
Standard. The NVFC looks forward to working with OSHA on ways we can
promote firefighter safety without compromising emergency response in
communities served by volunteer fire departments.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, sir.
I now recognize Mr. Davis for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF EVAN DAVIS, DIRECTOR, GOVERNMENT AFFAIRS,
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE FIGHTERS

Mr. Davis. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking
Member Carter, and Members of the subcommittee. My name is Evan
Davis, and I serve as director of government affairs for the
International Association of Fire Fighters.
On behalf of General President Ed Kelly and our 345,000
firefighters and EMS personnel, thank you for holding today's
hearing to examine OSHA's proposed ERS.
We can all agree that firefighting is a dangerous
profession, and much more needs to be done to protect our
firefighters. Each year, approximately 60,000 firefighters are
injured on the job and another hundred are killed.
Together, these incidents have a cost of $3 billion per
year, and that doesn't account for the life-long pain,
suffering, and losses in quality of life that accompany these
injuries.
Simply put, our reliance on consensus standards with no
teeth and the good will of city administrators alone to protect
us is literally killing us.
Unlike nearly every other industry, firefighters have
almost no enforceable workplace protections. Before the ERS,
the best protection we had was a limited standard aimed at
private fire brigades that hadn't been updated since Jimmy
Carter was President.
We applaud OSHA for answering our decades-old call to
update these protections and doing so in a manner that is
almost unprecedented in its transparency, its commitment to
stakeholder input, as evidenced by the repeated delays OSHA's
already provided in the comment process.
The ERS looks daunting, that's true, but the fact is it's
based on common-sense standards that most fire departments are
already practicing or are well on the way to doing so.
The backbone of this document is an understanding that
firefighters must be prepared for known hazards in their
communities, fully trained and healthy, and equipped with safe
vehicles and equipment.
It's horrifically depressing to see how many line-of-duty
injuries and deaths we have each year due to preventible
circumstances.
In 2009, a Boston ladder truck lost its brakes going down a
hill, striking a building, killing 1 firefighter and severely
injuring 3 others. The fire truck had 3 prior instances of
brake failure, including once on the exact same hill.
Subsequent investigations found that the fire department
had no preventative maintenance program and no fleet manager.
If this happened in one of the largest cities in the
country, what challenges are facing firefighters in your own
districts?
It's 2024, and we firmly believe we need to require fire
trucks to have working brakes.
Last year, two Newark, New Jersey, firefighters were killed
on a shipboard fire. Newark often ran two-person firefighter
crews and provided their firefighters with zero training in
shipboard fire attack, despite being home to the fourth-busiest
port in the Nation.
Again, in the year 2024, how are we not preparing for known
hazards like the fourth-busiest port in the Nation?
I could go on about DOD firefighters falling through their
station floors that are crumbling, firefighters dying from
ladder trucks that are collapsing because the truck is decades
old, and 9 South Carolina firefighters dying on a single
incident because there was no clear incident command and no
effective standard operating procedures.
Our industrial members work for private EMS companies and
are equally at risk. We applaud OSHA for expanding the ERS to
include those personnel as well.
We must continue to hold for-profit companies accountable
when they prioritize profits over the safety and dignity of our
members.
The ERS is based on industry consensus standards that
simply say we should be fully staffed and trained, we should be
healthy and resourced to prevent our own suicides, and we
should have safe fire stations.
These recommendations came from a panel of fire service
experts in 2014, and all national fire service organizations
sat at that table and developed those recommendations.
The full NACOSH committee later adopted those proposals
unanimously, and that was the backbone and the basis for this
document.
Now, we recognize the ERS does have a cost to it, and,
quite candidly, that challenge is a lot harder since Congress
has slashed the AFG and SAFER grant programs by 10 percent in
the fiscal year 2024 appropriations bill, and the continued
inability to reauthorize these grant programs is an additional
challenge.
But let's be clear: Money will be spent one way or the
other. Agencies can invest in safety on the front end or they
can pay extra billions of dollars in the back end for
preventible injuries and deaths.
For those cities and agencies and companies that say
they've never had a serious injury and they can't afford to
make the change, we say the data is clear: They haven't had a
serious incident yet.
If cities and municipalities and companies continue to
ignore safety, their luck will run out, and our members will be
the ones that are forced to pay the price.
But it's important to recognize two things can be true at
the same time: This ERS can advance safety, and some small
agencies may have trouble implementing it.
One positive aspect is that OSHA acknowledges genuine
efforts by employers to improve safety. So jurisdictions simply
writing off compliance altogether ignore the fact that OSHA
does recognize good-faith efforts to achieve compliance.
Slow progress is better than no progress, and we urge
agencies to begin improving safety today.
Last, I'd like to make it clear that these investments in
our safety correlate directly with our ability to serve the
public. The public rightfully expects that when they call 9-1-
1, we will show up to their house ready and able to work.
A fire department without healthy, trained, and equipped
personnel is just giving their community a false sense of
security that will go up in smoke. This ERS fundamentally
supports the link between firefighter safety and public safety.
Thank you again for holding this hearing, and I look
forward to talking with you more about how we can fix the
broken status quo.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Davis follows:]
Prepared Statement of Evan Davis
June 4, 2024
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you today
about the need to establish legally-enforceable protections that ensure
fire fighter safety and our ability to serve our communities. My name
is Evan Davis, and I serve as director of government affairs for the
International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF). I am honored to hold
a leading role in developing our legislative and regulatory strategies
to ensure IAFF members stay safe on the job and have the tools and
resources they need to perform their duties effectively. While the IAFF
is active in many policy areas, none is more important than our efforts
to advance fire fighter safety. Since the founding of the IAFF in 1918,
we have stood at the leading edge of nearly every advancement in fire
fighter safety. OSHA's development of a basic, legally enforceable
workplace safety standard for our members is one of these watershed
moments in the history of firefighting.
The IAFF represents nearly 350,000 professional fire fighters and
emergency medical services (EMS) personnel serving at the local, State,
and Federal levels. Our members serve communities in all 50 States and
protect 70 percent of the United States' population.\1\ Professional
fire departments protect nearly all communities with populations of
more than 50,000.\2\ The IAFF's members are our Nation's all-hazards
emergency responders and protect their communities from a wide range of
emergencies, including structural fires, wildland fires, building
collapses, natural disasters, terrorist incidents, and more.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ National Fire Protection Association. US Fire Department
Profile 2020--Table 12. https://www.nfpa.org//-/media/Files/News-and-
Research/Fire-statistics-and-reports/emergency-responders/
osFDProfileTables.pdf.
\2\ Ibid. Table 14.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the IAFF is active in many policy areas related to our
members, our top priority is to protect our members' safety on the job
and ensure their ability to serve their communities. The lack of
legally enforceable safety standards for fire fighters is a glaring
omission that must be corrected. Our union applauds the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) for proposing a landmark
standard to usher in a new level of safety for fire fighters and their
communities. OSHA's commitment to public input and openness in
developing the standard should be commended.
Firefighting is a dangerous occupation. The data described below
and cited throughout the OSHA proposal is confirmation that poorly-
enforced safety standards are killing and injuring emergency responders
in the line of duty. OSHA's proposed Emergency Response Standard (ERS)
recognizes that we cannot rely on local and State governments' goodwill
alone to protect fire fighters. In a race to slash budgets, fire
fighters and public safety have emerged as the losers. We need the ERS
to reinforce our safety and affirm safe and efficient operations as the
backbone of every fire department.
overview of the american fire service
Today's fire service provides an all-hazards response role and
serves communities of all sizes. The IAFF's nearly 350,000 members
represent approximately 34 percent of the Nation's 1.1 million fire
fighters.\3\ These men and women protect their communities from various
emergencies, including fires, medical emergencies, motor vehicle
accidents, hazardous materials incidents, technical rescue situations,
natural disasters, and terrorism. In 2020, American fire departments
responded to more than 36.4 million calls for service.\4\ More than
23.8 million of these calls, or roughly 65 percent, were for medical
emergencies.\5\ Fire fighters cross-trained as EMS personnel are the
backbone of America's pre-hospital EMS system. Fire departments are the
most common type of EMS agency and are the providers of EMS care in
more than 90 percent of communities with populations over 50,000. On a
national level, 65 percent of communities receive EMS from their fire
department.\6\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ U.S. Fire Administration. National Fire Department Registry
Overview. https://apps.usfa.fema.gov/registry/summary.
\4\ National Fire Protection Association. US Fire Department
Profile 2020. P. 5. https://www.nfpa.org/-/media/Files/News-and-
Research/Fire-statistics-and-reports/Emergency-responders/
osfdprofile.pdf.
\5\ National Fire Protection Association. US Fire Department
Profile 2020. Table 12.
\6\ Ibid. Table 21.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fires are still a prevalent danger to communities of all sizes. In
2022, fire departments responded to approximately 1.5 million fires.
According to data from the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA),
a residential structure fire occurs somewhere in our Nation every 88
seconds, and a fatal home fire occurs every 3 hours.\7\ Fire
suppression is the most dangerous aspect of our jobs. In 2022, 33
percent of all fire fighter injuries occurred on the fire ground.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ National Fire Protection Association. Fire Loss in the United
States. https://www.nfpa.org/education-and-research/research/nfpa-
research/fire-statistical-reports/fire-loss-in-the-united-states.
\8\ National Fire Protection Association. US Firefighter Injuries.
December 2023. https://www.nfpa.org/en/Education-and-Research/Research/
NFPA-Research/Fire-Statistical-reports/Firefighter-injuries-in-the-
United-States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
limited existing safety standards
The reason OSHA proposed the ERS, and why Congress is holding
today's hearing, is because the current approach to fire fighter safety
has failed. Our brothers and sisters are being killed due to
complacency, negligence, and balancing municipal budgets on the backs
of fire fighters.
Below is a detailed discussion of the unacceptable injuries and
deaths that plague our industry. Nearly all national fire service
organizations--labor and management, professional and volunteer--are
actively involved in developing the NFPA standards, training curricula,
and best practices that guide our industry. Generally speaking, these
documents are accepted as the goals for which all fire departments
strive. However, there are virtually no legal requirements for fire
departments to adhere to these standards. Requirements for governments
to ensure proper staffing levels, safe vehicles, and effective
protective equipment largely exist only in fire departments' liability
insurance policies and an agency's Insurance Services Office (ISO)
rating.
It is unacceptable for nearly every other industry to have OSHA
protections, yet fire fighters must rely on ISO recommendations to
ensure their survival. Communities should never be lulled into a false
sense of security, thinking that they are protected by a fire
department, when in reality, that agency is ill-prepared due to poor
staffing levels, outdated equipment, and emergency response vehicles
that should have been retired decades ago.
line-of-duty deaths among fire fighters
As all-hazards response professionals, fire fighters and EMS
professionals work dangerous jobs fighting fires, providing EMS, or
mitigating hazardous materials releases. Despite our best efforts to
reduce occupational hazards, line-of-duty deaths and injuries continue
to plague the fire service. According to the U.S. Fire Administration,
our Nation lost 94 fire fighters in the line of duty in 2022.\9\ This
number has generally held steady when looking at the overall number of
fire fighters lost each year. These deaths are nearly evenly split
between professional fire fighters (48 percent) and volunteer fire
fighters (52 percent).\10\ These death rates are a testament to the
dangers fire fighters face--regardless of whether they receive a
paycheck--and the need for us to do better to protect the men and women
who serve their communities each day.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ US Fire Administration. Annual Report on Firefighter Fatalities
in the United States. https://www.usfa.fema.gov/statistics/reports/
firefighters-departments/firefighter-fatalities.html.
\10\ OSHA Proposed Emergency Response Standard. Table VII-A-2. Pg.
7779. https://www.Federalregister.gov/documents/2024/02/05/2023-28203/
emergency-response-standard.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However, we believe the true number of fire fighters killed in the
line of duty is significantly higher when considering the toll that
occupational cancer takes. In September, the IAFF held our annual
Fallen Fire Fighters ceremony, and we honored 173 IAFF members who
succumbed in 2022 to occupational cancer.\11\ These deaths must be
recognized as line-of-duty deaths and included in the statistics that
guide decision making and policy making for our industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ International Association of Fire Fighters. https://
www.iaff.org/news/iaff-fallen-fire-fighter-memorial-honors-more-than-
500-members/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Regardless of which number is recognized, these deaths are too
common and could have been prevented in many cases. It is especially
staggering to note that OSHA statistics show that 14 percent of these
deaths occurred during training activities \12\--a time when risks
should be most controlled. The failure to prevent such a substantial
number of fire fighter deaths should stop us in our tracks and force us
to find a safer way. Industry best practices can only do so much. We
need a comprehensive safety standard to ensure our brothers and sisters
go home every day.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ OSHA. Table VII-A-2.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
staggering rates of occupational injuries
As troubling as these death rates are, the frequency and severity
of fire fighter injuries are even more startling. In 2022, an estimated
65,650 fire fighters were injured on the job. Most were fireground
injuries such as overexertion, falls, and sprains/strains. However,
more than 16,000 injuries occurred in circumstances other than active
fire suppression, such as when traveling to/from an emergency incident
or during training activities.\13\ Vehicle accidents are also a common
threat to fire fighters' safety. In 2022, more than 20,000 collisions
involving fire department apparatus occurred, directly resulting in
more than 800 injuries.\14\ When looking at the complete picture
presented by these data, it is clear that current safety precautions
are not meeting fire fighters' needs. Our industry cannot continue to
view these injuries as the cost of doing business. America's fire
fighters and EMS personnel demand for OSHA to help us create a safer
atmosphere.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ National Fire Protection Association. US Firefighter Injuries.
December 2023. https://www.nfpa.org/en/Education-and-Research/Research/
NFPA-Research/Fire-Statistical-reports/Firefighter-injuries-in-the-
United-States.
\14\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These injuries are more than just statistics; they can take
profound and life-long tolls on individual fire fighters. These
injuries often force fire fighters to endure life-long effects, such as
chronic pain, reduced mobility, and even substance abuse. The IAFF
operates our Center of Excellence, which assists fire fighters who are
struggling with substance abuse and dependency issues, among other
behavioral health concerns. Often, these challenges arise for fire
fighters following a serious line-of-duty injury.\15\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ International Association of Fire Fighters. Substance Abuse.
https://www.iaffrecoverycenter.com/substance-abuse/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OSHA's ERS takes meaningful steps toward reducing these rates of
injuries by requiring fire departments to complete written plans
detailing how they will handle risk management (Paragraph F), pre-
planning incident response (Paragraphs M-N), incident operations and
management (Paragraphs O-P), and the development of standard operating
procedures (Paragraph Q). Most importantly, we applaud OSHA for
ensuring that the front-line emergency responders themselves have a
voice in developing these plans (Paragraph E) and using post-incident
analyses to inform these plans (Paragraph R).
One of the common factors that contribute to so many injuries is
the lack of planning, effective incident management, and safe staffing
levels. In 2007, the Charleston (SC) Fire Department suffered an
unimaginable loss when 9 fire fighters were killed when responding to a
fire in the Super Sofa furniture store. Post-incident analyses
identified a lack of pre-planning and failure to adhere to incident
management protocols as two leading factors for this tragic
incident.\16\ All of these points would be addressed in the various
components of the OSHA ERS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ NIOSH. Firefighter Fatality Report F2007-18. February 2009.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/fire/reports/face200718.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These components of the ERS would also help prevent the far more
common and non-fatal injuries that hurt fire fighters every day. The
OSHA ERS will require fire departments to confront the factors that
prevent their adherence to voluntary consensus standards and industry
best practices. These pre-planning, staffing, and incident management
considerations will help ensure fire fighters have the tools, staffing,
and SOPs to prevent them from being over-stretched, under-resourced,
and ultimately placed in inherently unsafe positions. Fire fighters in
major cities and rural communities alike are often forced to operate
with staffing levels far below what is safe. Studies have clearly shown
that crew sizes matter. The more fire fighters we can have per crew,
the safer and more efficient are their operations.\17\ It should be
unacceptable for local governments to allow companies of just 3, or
even 2, fire fighters. Our union applauds OSHA for recognizing the
importance of crew sizes in the ERS.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ NIST. Firefighter Staffing Studies. 2010 and 2013. https://
www.nist.gov/el/fire-research-division-73300/firegov-fire-service/
staffing-studies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We also strongly support Paragraph L of the ERS, which would force
fire departments to adopt common-sense vehicle inspection and safety
protocols. Far too often, municipalities skimp on vehicle safety due to
budgetary reasons. Fire fighters in professional and volunteer
departments alike routinely struggle with being forced to use unsafe
apparatus that should be pulled from service pending repairs. One of
the most notable incidents in this regard occurred in Boston in 2009
when a ladder truck lost its brakes when driving down a steep street
and crashed into a building, killing 1 fire fighter, and injuring 3
others. Investigations into this incident found that the City's failure
to adhere to proper vehicle maintenance protocols was a major
contributing factor.\18\ Sadly, Boston is not unique. Similarly unsafe
fire trucks are on the road throughout the Nation, and accidents like
this could easily happen again. The OSHA ERS brings common-sense
safeguards for fire fighters and their communities by requiring
jurisdictions to follow basic vehicle inspection, maintenance, and
repair policies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ NIOSH. Firefighter Fatality Report F2009-5. February 2010.
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/fire/reports/face200905.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
mental and behavioral health concerns
It is important to note that fire fighters and EMS personnel also
experience significantly increased rates of PTSD and other behavioral
health conditions because of their service. Studies show that PTSD
rates among first responders are 3 times higher than the general
population and are roughly equivalent to military veterans.\19\ Just as
fire fighters need policies to protect their physical health, they also
need help carrying the mental burdens of their jobs. Peer support
programs are one such way to assist fire fighters in monitoring their
mental health and help them access higher levels of care when the need
arises. When left unchecked and untreated, PTSD, depression, and other
common behavioral health conditions can deteriorate into behavioral
health emergencies such as suicide and dangerous levels of substance
abuse.\20\ Just as we would never allow fire fighters to be sent to a
fire without an SCBA, we should also demand local governments ensure
fire fighters have access to robust programs to monitor and treat any
behavioral health concerns they may experience.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ NIST. Technical Note 2078. P. 39. https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/
nistpubs/TechnicalNotes/NIST.TN.2078.pdf.
\20\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The IAFF applauds OSHA for recognizing the importance of mental and
behavioral health. We firmly support the requirements in Paragraph G
for agencies to provide their emergency responders with mental and
behavioral health resources, especially following each traumatic
emergency incident to which they respond. We are especially grateful
for Paragraph (G)(4)(iii) of the proposed ERS, which highlights the
importance of connecting emergency responders with clinically competent
and informed mental health practitioners who are experienced in
treating emergency responders. Fire and EMS professionals have unique
needs compared to the general population, and local and State
governments must assist them in accessing the most appropriate levels
and providers of care.
occupational cancer among fire fighters
Fire and EMS professionals are exposed to a vast number of toxins
and biological threats while performing their duties. Carcinogens are a
pervasive threat that our members are exposed to each day. Fire
fighters encounter a range of carcinogens in smoke and vehicle exhaust,
and even our protective gear is manufactured with added PFAS chemicals.
NIST studies have proven that the amount of PFAS released onto fire
fighters increases as our turnout gear ages and experiences more wear
and tear.\21\ Every time fire fighters don and doff our gear, we
experience yet another exposure to known carcinogens. Cancer is so
prevalent among fire fighters that the International Agency for
Research on Cancer has recognized the occupation of firefighting itself
to be a Category 1 carcinogenic exposure.\22\ Sadly, these exposures to
carcinogens claim a tremendous number of fire fighters' lives each
year. According to our data, nearly two-thirds of fire fighters' line-
of-duty deaths each year are due to occupational cancer.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ NIST. Wear and Tear May Cause Firefighter Gear to Release More
Forever Chemicals. January 2024. https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/
2024/01/wear-and-tear-may-cause-firefighter-gear-release-more-forever-
chemicals.
\22\ IARC. Occupational Exposure as a Firefighter https://
publications.iarc.fr/Book-And-Report-Series/Iarc-Monographs-On-The-
Identification-Of-Carcinogenic-Hazards-To-Humans/Occupational-Exposure-
As-A-Firefighter-2023.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the prevalence of cancer, fire fighters must receive annual
cancer screenings so that they have the best chances of catching
occurrences of cancer in the earliest stage. The failure of governments
to provide annual cancer screenings to fire fighters is deplorable. The
IAFF applauds States like New Jersey and New Hampshire, which are
aggressively working to provide these much-needed screenings. The
meager costs of preventative screenings pale in comparison to the costs
associated with treating cancer at a more advanced stage.
Paragraphs G and K of the proposed OSHA ERS are essential in
combatting the cancer epidemic in the fire service by establishing
requirements for regular medical screenings of fire fighters (Paragraph
G) and issuing modern, effective personal protective equipment for fire
fighters. These provisions within the ERS will be critical tools in our
efforts to stem the growth of occupational cancer rates.
We also applaud OSHA for recognizing the dangers of continued usage
of PFAS-laden turnout gear and for asking stakeholders about how this
should be addressed in the final ERS. While the IAFF is still
developing our full comments, we anticipate urging OSHA to continue
investigating the connection between PFAS-laden gear and occurrences of
occupational cancer for fire fighters. Once PFAS-free gear is
available, we will urge OSHA to mandate its adoption and use.
One of the few places where we disagree with the ERS is in
Paragraph (G) and Question G-2, where OSHA proposed using a benchmark
of 15 exposures per year as the criteria for needing an annual medical
examination. The IAFF urges OSHA to require all fire fighters and EMS
personnel to receive an annual medical examination and cancer
screening. Our union has fought for presumptive cancer coverage for
fire and EMS personnel because it is impossible to pinpoint which fire
caused cancer. Similarly, we feel 15 exposures per year is an arbitrary
number. A fire fighter may respond to a single fire per year, but
carcinogens will be present in the smoke, and that fire fighter will be
at risk for developing cancer. While we plan to yield to local
collective bargaining agreements to inform the type of medical
examination and handling of subsequent medical records, we do feel that
every fire fighter and EMS provider should have some level of annual
medical examination--even if it is just for the individual's personal
knowledge.
costs of occupational injuries for fire fighters
When looking at these injuries, it is essential to realize that
their impacts extend beyond just the time and place in which they
occur. Fire departments across the Nation also incur significant
monetary costs as a result. In 2019, the National Institute for
Standards and Technology (NIST) published Technical Note 2078 (TN
2078), Economics of Firefighter Injuries in the United States. This
document provides us with a comprehensive analysis of the costs of
injuries among fire fighters. NIST found that each year, the cost of
fire fighter injuries ranges from $1.6 billion to $5.9 billion. NIST
concluded that these costs are the equivalent of approximately $50,000
to $200,000 per fire department or $1,500 to $5,500 per individual fire
fighter.\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ NIST. P. i.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Every time safety advancements have come to the fire service--such
as closed cab apparatus or mandating the use of self-contained
breathing apparatus--naysayers have always said that we would break
fire department budgets and force agencies to close. Yet today, these
are all commonly-accepted practices and standards for virtually all
fire departments. We recognize that adhering to the ERS has costs.
However, as NIST has shown, failure to adhere to safe operating
procedures also has costs. If the choice is ultimately whether to spend
funds preventing injuries and deaths or responding to them, the choice
should be clear.
considerations to claimed challenges in complying with the ers
When reviewing the comments shared through the Federal Register, it
is noteworthy that few commenters argue that the ERS itself will fail
to make the fire service safer. It is well-established in the fire
service that long-standing life-safety dangers continue to exist and
that lives are lost in often preventable situations. The primary
opposition to the ERS comes from agencies claiming an inability to meet
these safety standards and private companies and town/city/county
managers who refuse to invest in the safety of their workforce. Sadly,
we recognize that economics always plays a role in funding a host of
public services; we are not ignorant of the realities within which both
workers and employers live.
We also understand that there are some rural and volunteer agencies
serving communities with finite funding from their tax base, and that
the fire fighters in these communities perform admirable work under
challenging circumstances. For the first time in the history of our
organization, the IAFF has collaborated on many of the issues that
impact all stakeholders in the fire services industry. The stark
reality we face is that fire fighter safety, whether professional or
volunteer, and the safety of the communities we serve, must be guided
by principles and guidelines that place a supreme value on saving lives
and protecting communities.
This subcommittee should provide no safe harbor to municipalities
that risk fire fighter safety, and the safety of their citizenry,
because they are costly. Countless IAFF locals are forced by municipal
leadership to make unsafe responses with too few fire fighters,
outdated apparatus, and ineffective tools and safety equipment. These
ill-guided policy positions have cost lives. We look forward to OSHA
using the full force of Federal law to protect fire fighter safety when
local and State governments fail to do so. Firefighters and communities
should never again be forced to tolerate intentionally browned-out
firehouses and fire apparatus without working brakes.
The IAFF also represents several bargaining units of first
responders who work for private companies and are considered workplace
emergency response employees (WEREs) under the ERS. These companies
must also prioritize safety as a core mission of their corporate
identity. Enactment and implementation of the ERS will make a dangerous
job safer and will compel all stakeholders to achieve a never-before-
seen level of interest in the lives of our Nation's fire fighters.
The nomenclature is immaterial, whatever a fire department calls
itself, if it is well-enough-resourced to have personnel who receive
significant remuneration as defined by the Department of Labor, answer
thousands of emergency calls per year, or provide round-the-clock
operations in an urban community, it too should be required to meet
minimum levels of safety for their personnel.
proposed congressional assistance
The IAFF recognizes that some jurisdictions may have challenges in
meeting the ERS. We urge Congress to increase its investment in the AFG
and SAFER programs, the Federal Government's primary forms of support
for all fire departments Nation-wide. Since these programs' inception
more than 20 years ago, Congress has directed more than $15 billion in
assistance to fire departments. Sadly, for fiscal year 2024, Congress
slashed funding for AFG and SAFER by 10 percent--reducing the programs'
full-year funding level from $370 million each to just $336 million per
program. The IAFF and all other national fire service organizations
have repeatedly urged Congress to reverse these cuts and make
meaningful investments in fire departments by funding these programs at
no less than $405 million each in fiscal year 2025. Considering the
pending ERS, funding for these programs is more important than ever.
We also urge Congress to immediately pass the Fire Grants and
Safety Act (H.R. 4090/S. 870) and provide a long-term reauthorization
for these grants. Fire departments need to have long-term assurance
that these programs will continue beyond the end of this fiscal year.
This bill has passed both the House and Senate by overwhelming margins.
However, partisan politics is holding up the bill in the Senate. Every
Member of this committee ought to be committed to ensuring swift
passage of the bill.
The IAFF also recommends Congress increase its funding levels for
the Urban Areas Security Initiative (UASI) and the State Homeland
Security Grant Program (SHSGP) grant programs. These grants play a
critical role in ensuring the preparedness of fire departments in 41
major metropolitan areas across the Nation. Funding for UASI and SHSGP
helps these agencies have the personnel, apparatus, resources, and
training to maintain readiness to respond to acts of terrorism and
major disasters. In fiscal year 2024, Congress provided $553.5 million
for UASI and $373.5 million for the SHSGP program. As Congress develops
its fiscal year 2025 appropriations bills, we urge Congress to provide
no less than $615 million for UASI and $520 million for SHSGP.
conclusion
Safety standards come with financial costs, but so do line-of-duty
funerals, PSOB payments, and wrongful death lawsuits. As mentioned
earlier, even survivable injuries come at a significant economic cost.
A basic industry minimum safety standard, such as the proposed ERS,
could significantly reduce these costs. For the IAFF, the choice of
where we spend money is clear.
The question for this hearing is not whether the fire service is
fraught with avoidable injuries and deaths, and whether the ERS
identifies safer practices to protect fire fighters and communities
alike. The sole question we are wrestling with is whether this ERS
should be imposed on local and State governments Nation-wide. The
answer is a resounding yes. Jurisdictions have failed to keep our
public servants safe, and it is time for them to be forced to take our
safety seriously. When municipalities choose to deprioritize our safety
and dismiss the needs of their communities, OSHA should be fully
empowered to step in and place safety first. Our fire fighters and the
communities they serve deserve nothing less than the full support of
Congress and the Federal Government.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Davis.
I now recognize Mr. Walker for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF GRANT WALKER, PRESIDENT, PRINCE GEORGE'S COUNTY
PROFESSIONAL FIRE FIGHTERS AND PARAMEDICS ASSOCIATION,
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF FIRE FIGHTERS, LOCAL 1619

Mr. Walker. Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking
Member Carter, and Members of this esteemed subcommittee. My
name is Grant Walker. I am the president of the Prince George's
County Professional Fire Fighters and Paramedics Association,
IAFF Local 1619, representing the 1,800 active and retired
members of my association.
Additionally, I currently serve as the legislative policy
chair for the Professional Fire Fighters of Maryland,
representing the 10,000 IAFF members that reside within the
State of Maryland.
I want to thank you for the opportunity to testify on this
critically important rule making.
I started my fire service career shortly after graduating
high school in 2004, where I moved into the College Park
Volunteer Fire Department as part of the Prince George's County
Fire and EMS system.
While attending college, I worked full-time and had a
regularly assigned shift at the volunteer firehouse, and I was
not unique as this program had been in place for many years
prior to my arrival.
I completed my undergraduate degree in fire science from
the University of Maryland in 2009 and began working for the
Federal Government as a firefighter at the National Institute
of Standards and Technology.
I would leave there in 2012 and regain my position in
Prince George's County as a firefighter under employment. I
currently hold the rank of lieutenant in that fire department.
As a recent graduate of the Executive Fire Officer Program
from the National Fire Academy in Emmitsburg, Maryland, it is
critically important that we address this issue.
Our Nation's firefighters are facing a crisis of massive
proportion. Not a day goes by where a firefighter doesn't
experience a lack of staffing, aging apparatus, substandard
working conditions, with no discernible standard to turn to.
The OSHA standard aims to make significant improvements to that
problem.
No firefighter should be concerned about whether the
working conditions they're subjected to will lead to their
injury, illness, or even worse, their death. Too often our
firefighters are reliant on the good will of community or
elected officials to maintain or update our facilities,
apparatus, or personal protective equipment.
Our Nation's firefighters need a standard to point to, a
place to go when status quo is just not safe.
While school systems point to test scores, police forces
point to crime statistics, our metrics are more nuanced and are
not normally easily converted to the direct impact on a
person's everyday life.
We measure our successes by our failures in property loss
and loss of life. Response times and personnel on the unit are
rarely reported or compared from department to department,
region to region.
In September 2023, Station 820, Upper Marlboro, in my
department had an ambulance catch fire in its apparatus bay.
Had it not been for the ambulance siren shorting out and
causing a loud noise, and then shorting out the electrical
system for the doorbell of the fire department, Lieutenant
Michael Carey might not be with us today.
Fortunately, those things happened, he was able to
extricate himself from the window, and he is still serving
proudly in our department.
Many fire stations across the county are historic or even
significant in age and not required to meet the applicable
modern fire safety codes. It seems monthly that a piece of
apparatus catches fire in a station apparatus bay.
We have firefighters from all walks of life who answer the
call to serve. Not all these personnel are medically fit to
serve. For many, annual medical physicals are the only way
they've discovered life-threatening diseases and illnesses.
Lieutenant Jeffrey Chandler from my department went in for
his annual medical physical and ended up having 2 stints in
place the next morning.
On the operating table he would go into cardiac arrest.
Three weeks later he would have 3 more cardiac stints put in
place.
Fortunately, Lieutenant Chandler survived and has been able
to see his son become a firefighter in Prince George's County
Fire Department and watch his grandchildren grow up.
Unfortunately, too many firefighters discover their medical
illnesses when it's too late. In 2023, 72 percent of all IAFF
member line-of-duty deaths were caused by occupational cancer.
In 2022, 33 firefighters died of a heart attack.
In Prince George's County, annual medical physicals are a
benefit as part of our collective bargaining agreement. While
our members are fortunate to be in a State with collective
bargaining, safety shouldn't be reliant on whether or not
firefighters have a contract or if appropriate safety standards
are mandated as part of negotiations.
Safety should not need to be negotiated. It should be
required.
Even with the protections of a collective bargaining
agreement, aging apparatus and firehouses and substandard
working conditions plague most fire departments across the
Nation. When money is involved, the committee will understand
that there is never enough to go around.
Too often fire departments across this Nation are vying for
public grants, community funding, like the UASI, SAFER, and AFG
grants programs. Not getting one of these grants can mean the
difference between a safe piece of apparatus or safe
firefighters.
We have watched as the prices of apparatus have ballooned,
sometimes costing nearly $2 million, not to mention the $3
million to $4 million to take delivery for said apparatus.
We've watched manufacturers push back on the idea that PFAS
in firefighter gear is safe, even though the science disagrees.
We've watched as the IAFF took the lead on developing peer
support resources so that when our members were in their
darkest hour, they'd be able to seek treatment without the fear
of stigma or reprisal.
Many of these issues would be corrected by putting in place
a standard, one that's been needed for many years, a standard
that moves us past the status quo into a realm where every
firefighter in America is ready to respond with the appropriate
apparatus, facilities, and health that is needed to do this
dangerous profession.
I look forward to talking with you more and answering any
questions you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Walker follows:]
Prepared Statement of Grant Walker
June 4, 2024
Good morning Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
Members of the subcommittee. My name is Grant Walker, I am the
president of the Prince George's County Professional Fire Fighters and
Paramedics Association IAFF Local 1619 representing the 1,800 active
and retired members of IAFF Local 1619. Additionally, I currently serve
as the legislative policy chair for the Professional Fire Fighters of
Maryland, which represents 10,000 active and retired IAFF Members of
the IAFF that reside in Maryland. I want to thank you for the
opportunity to testify today on this critically important rule making.
I started my fire service career shortly after graduating high school
in 2004, where I would move into the College Park Volunteer Fire
Department as part of the Prince George's County Fire and EMS system.
While attending college, I worked full time and had a regular assigned
schedule at the volunteer firehouse. I was not unique as this program
had been in place for many years prior to my arrival. I completed my
undergraduate degree in fire science from the University of Maryland in
2009 and began employment as a firefighter at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology in Gaithersburg, Maryland. In 2012 I left NIST
and began my employment with the Prince George's County Fire/EMS
department where I currently hold the rank of Lieutenant. I am a recent
graduate of the Executive Fire Officer Program from the National Fire
Academy located in Emmitsburg, Maryland.
Our Nation's firefighters are facing a crisis of massive
proportions. Not a day goes by where a firefighter doesn't experience a
lack of staffing, aging apparatus, substandard working conditions with
no discernable standard to turn to. This OSHA standard aims to make
significant improvements to that problem. No firefighter should be
concerned about whether the working conditions they're subjected to
will lead to their injury, illness, or even worse, their death.
Too often our Firefighters are reliant on the goodwill of the
community or elected officials to maintain or update facilities,
apparatus, or personal protective equipment. Our Nation's fire fighters
need a standard to point to, a place to go when status quo is just not
safe. While school systems point to test scores, and police forces
point to crime statistics, our metrics are more nuanced and are not
normally as easily converted to the direct impact on a person's
everyday life. We measure our successes by our failures in property
loss and loss of life. Response times and personnel on a unit are
rarely reported or compared from department to department, region to
region.
In September 2023, Station 820, upper Marlboro, had an ambulance
catch fire in its apparatus bay. Had it not been for the ambulance
siren shorting out causing a loud noise and the station doorbell going
off due to the electrical system going haywire Lt. Michael Carey may
not be with us today. Fortunately, Lt. Carey was able to self-extricate
out a window and is currently serving alongside my Brothers and Sisters
just up the road. Many fire stations across the country are historic or
significant in age, and not required to meet the applicable modern fire
safety codes. It seems monthly that a piece of apparatus causes a fire
in a station apparatus bay.
We have fire fighters from all walks of life who answer the call to
serve. Not all of these personnel are medically fit to serve. For many
annual medical physicals are the only way they discovered life-
threatening diseases and illnesses. Lieutenant Jeff Chandler went in
for his annual medical physical and ended up having 2 stints placed the
next morning. On the operating table he would go into cardiac arrest.
Three weeks later he would have 3 more cardiac stints put in place.
Fortunately, Lieutenant Chandler survived and has been able to see his
son become a firefighter and watch his grandchildren grown.
Unfortunately, too many firefighters discover their medical illnesses
when it is too late. In 2023 72 percent of all IAFF member line-of-duty
deaths were caused by occupational cancer. In 2022 33 firefighters died
of a heart attack. In Prince George's County, annual medical physicals
are a benefit as part of our collective bargaining agreement. While our
members are fortunate to be in a State with a collective bargaining
agreement, safety shouldn't be reliant on whether or not firefighters
have a contract or if appropriate safety standards are mandated as part
of negotiations. Safety should not need to be negotiated, it should be
required.
Even with the protections of a collective bargaining agreement,
aging apparatus and fire houses, and substandard working conditions
plague most fire departments across the Nation. When money is involved,
this committee will understand that there is never enough to go around.
Too often fire departments across this Nation are vying for public
grants, community funding like the UASI, SAFER, and AFG Grants
programs. Not getting one of those grants can mean the difference
between safe responders and not. We've watched as the prices of fire
apparatus has ballooned. Sometimes costing nearly $2 million dollars,
not to mention the 3 to 4 years it will take for delivery of said
apparatus. We've watched a manufacturer's push back on the idea that
PFAS in firefighter gear is safe, even though the science disagrees.
We've watched as the IAFF took the lead on developing Peer Support
Resources so that when our members were in their darkest hour they
would be able to seek treatment without the fear of stigma or reprisal.
Many of these issues would be corrected by putting in place a standard,
one that has been needed for many years. A standard that moves us past
the status quo and to a realm where every firefighter in a America is
ready to respond with the appropriate apparatus, facilities, and health
that is needed to do this dangerous profession.
I look forward to talking with you more and answering any questions
you may have.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, sir.
Without objection, the committee will briefly recess and
reconvene 10 minutes after the conclusion of the vote series.
Thank you.
[Recess.]
Mr. D'Esposito. We'll return from recess. I want to thank
you all for your time. I tried to make it across as quick as
possible after votes.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Just to the witnesses, if we're able to and we have the
time, I know that Mr. LaLota and I have another Homeland event
to go to, but we will try to do a second round of questioning,
depending on who's here.
So I'm going to start my questioning for Mr. Davis.
First, I want to thank you for not only being here but for
the work and the cooperation that you bring to your office. I
know that we've worked together on not only this but many other
initiatives.
So you went through a long list of reasons as to why this
new standard is so important, and you talked about 60,000
injured, 100,000 killed, the cost of the issues that we're
facing in the fire service.
I know what's most important to all of us is make sure that
our firefighters are trained, that they're educated, that
they're prepared, and that they have everything that he or she
needs to keep themself safe, each other safe, and obviously do
the job that they're supposed to do.
So we also talked about the fact that the Fire Brigades
Standard was established in 1980. I wasn't even born yet. Jimmy
Carter was President. So obviously there's been no significant
updates since then.
I know you went through it in 5 minutes, but if you could
tell me, what is the most important issue in the 1980 standard
that needs to be updated?
Mr. Davis. Yes. Congressman, first and foremost, likewise,
thank you for all your partnership as well. I can't thank you
enough for your leadership in helping us address the issue of
PFAS and turnout gear in particular.
That is a huge challenge to the health and safety of our
members, and looking forward to hopefully getting H.R. 4769
included in a markup in this committee in the near future.
Phenomenal question about what is most in need of update.
It really truly is hard to pick just one answer. I think health
and safety issues are critical to our members.
I think when you look at the rates of cancer in the fire
service, the number of firefighters we're losing to cancer,
particularly ones that would be and could be detected far
earlier, those health screenings are really critical.
I think a lot of those details of the health screenings are
probably best determined at the local level. I think some level
of health screening is important. So I think that's certainly
one.
But I also think recognizing minimum training standards is
critically important. You know, a common thing we see in a lot
of our line-of-duty death investigations, be it on the career
or the volunteer side, are either folks acting beyond their
skill level, beyond their certification level, and that is just
such an easy area that we can crack that--and get that training
to folks.
Mr. D'Esposito. I don't want to rush you. I just want to
make sure I get to Mr. Denniston.
Is there anything in the--and I know that we've had
conversations about carve-outs, about having conversations
about removing certain things.
Is there anything in the proposed standard that you think
is completely unnecessary?
Mr. Davis. That's for me?
Mr. D'Esposito. Yes.
Mr. Davis. Yes, yes. I mean, I think one of the biggest
challenges and frustrations we have is kind-of an artificial
benchmark, that 15 exposure number. It is part of the standard
that says if you have 15 or more exposures per year, that's the
benchmark at which you need to get some type of medical
evaluation.
I think our research on not only PFAS and turnout gear,
which is not even a smoke exposure, but certainly other
products of combustion being what they are, any one exposure
could be sufficient to cause cancer in our members. Fifteen is
an arbitrary number. We'd love to see that walked down.
Mr. D'Esposito. Great.
Mr. Denniston, the NFPA reported that risks, training
costs, and unpredictable schedules are a barrier to firefighter
recruitment.
I would argue that in places like New York there are other
concerns that we have to recruitment in the volunteer fire
service. I mean, people are now working 2 or 3 jobs because
they can't afford what is probably one of the highest-tax
States in the country.
But the supply of volunteer firefighters has decreased from
an estimated 120,000 in 2000 to 75,000 today.
In your view, how would the OSHA's proposed rule impact
firefighter recruitment and retention in order to maintain the
volunteer fire service across not only New York State, but I
know very important to both Mr. LaLota and I, across Long
Island.
Mr. Denniston. You know, I think when we look at the
proposed rule as written, we're not opposed to the majority of
the things that are in there, and we 100 percent agree that a
lot of that needs to be done.
Our objections, I guess to this point, are in some of the
details of that. With the incorporation of those 22 NFPA
standards you would take--our basic firefighter training in New
York right now is around 124 hours. We've had the Nassau and
Suffolk Fire Academies have given us estimates that that would
raise that number of hours in training up to 260-plus hours.
Our fear is with that I get a volunteer that's interested,
they walk in the door, and then I tell them, ``Oh, before you
can do anything, I've now got to have you sit through 268
hours' worth of training,'' they're not going to have that time
to commit to their local organization, and they're going to go
find another place to volunteer.
So, again, we firmly believe in training. We think there's
a lot of things that need to be done. But we would like to see
that worked into the rule itself instead of the incorporation
of the standards, which raises to a benchmark that's
unobtainable.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Denniston, just one last thing, and my
time's expired. But I just want to get it on the record that--
and please correct me if I'm wrong--in New York State, the
volunteer fire departments, those are considered New York
workplaces?
Mr. Denniston. That is correct. Because of some court cases
that have been established, volunteers are considered employees
in New York State.
Mr. D'Esposito. Very good.
With that, I recognize for 5 minutes the Ranking Member,
Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Walker, you mentioned in your opening comments about
the health concerns, about finding out about these death-
defying issues quite by accident.
We know that the country's facing a staffing shortage which
forces firefighters to work longer hours. It can take a toll on
their mental health.
Given these challenges, can you paint a picture of how
these staffing shortages and extended work hours affect
firefighters' safety and mental health?
Mr. Walker. Sure.
So in Prince George's County last year we had roughly
32,000 hours of mandatory overtime. That's on top of the
elected overtime that my members were working.
It ends up in marital fights, ends up in missed birthdays,
ends up in changed plans at the last minute, having to find
child care, having to find someone to put your kid on the bus,
take them off the bus.
That's a stressor. Anyone with children, anyone that has
plans that they've made, having to change them last-minute and
find emergency care for your family members is extremely
stressful.
Our peer support team is the second-largest peer support
team in the Nation, and there are calls daily directly linked
to mandatory overtime and forced working conditions due to
either low staffing or slow hiring practices.
At the end of the day, that takes an extremely big toll on
our members' ability to be mentally and physically prepared for
their workplace.
Nobody likes to go into work tired, nobody likes to go into
work overworked, and especially not when you're expected to
perform at 100 percent all the time.
When the bells go off, our citizens expect us to be at our
best. When you're working too many hours, without the approved
rest periods, it becomes a very burdensome problem, and we see
the direct correlation between things like substance abuse,
mental health crises, because of those problems.
Mr. Carter. Do you think the proposed OSHA rule will help
retain staff?
Mr. Walker. I do. I think too often a lot of the safety
measures that should be put in place have to get overlooked due
to either funding mechanisms coming short, there being no
requirement for a lot of these things to be put in place.
Look, when I started in the fire service 20 years ago,
mental health and wellness wasn't something we talked about.
Mr. Carter. Unfortunately, we don't talk about it enough in
America today.
Mr. Walker. Agreed.
Mr. Carter. It's a huge issue, and there's a stigma
associated with it. We have to do everything in our power to
stamp out that stigma, because we know that mental health is a
real issue.
Like any other issue that plagues us, there's treatment
available, and people are not alone, and we need to make sure
that we continue to make a comfortable place for people to
acknowledge that mental health is not something that is
insurmountable and that it's not taboo. Our professionals face
it, and certainly firefighters and professionals do as well.
Let me ask you real quickly, Mr. Davis, you mentioned in
your comments suicide. How prevalent is the issue with suicides
within the organizations?
Mr. Davis. Thank you, Congressman. Fantastic question.
Suicide is a tremendously large problem plaguing fire
service. Looking at rates of PTSD and other mental and
behavioral health challenges among first responders compared to
the average population, I believe the data is around 3 times
higher occurrence among first responders than the average
person.
The IAFF, we're proud to operate the Center for Excellence
in Maryland, which is an inpatient treatment facility for first
responders, for firefighters.
One of the biggest challenges we have is finding bed space
for folks who are seeking treatment. We're actively working to
try to expand the availability of that treatment. But I think
the demand is clearly there, and I'm excited to work with you
in any way possible to support----
Mr. Carter. We stand ready to do that also.
Real quickly, I've got about 50 seconds left, but I'd like
each of you to just briefly give me a quick answer to this.
FEMA preparedness grants were pushed to a 10 percent cut.
Tell me how has that impacted your--the 10 percent cut to
programs, Assistance to Firefighter Grant Program--how has that
impacted your operation?
Mr. Denniston.
Mr. Denniston. I think the Assistance to Firefighter Grant
Program is very important for our firefighters, and it gives us
some additional initial funding to look at a lot of the things
that have been proposed in this standard. So that it's
devastating to us when those numbers are cut.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Maruca.
Mr. Maruca. When the program was, I'll call it, fully
funded, it didn't cover what we needed it to cover, and now
that it's less, it's difficult.
It's difficult on small volunteer organizations that have
no support staff to write these grants. They're becoming
discouraged. They're trying to write them, but they're not
being successful. As the money goes down, they're less
successful. It's devastating for us.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. I believe the fiscal year 2023 cycle we had
around $2 billion of unmet applications that were rejected. A
further 10 percent cut on appropriations for the program just
drives that even higher.
That's more aging fire trucks that shouldn't be on the
road. That's more short-staffed fire departments. Whether it's
a career or a volunteer operation, I think every community
suffers from that.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. We currently have a fiscal year 2023 SAFER
grant application in for 45 firefighters. I expect that that's
also going to be the case for the fiscal year 2024 budget.
Without those firefighters, it means the firefighters that
you currently have are still working those longer hours,
filling in spots that we don't have a firefighter to fill in
because the funding wasn't there or the ability to hire those
people wasn't there.
Mr. Carter. So as we're here to listen and to help, I think
I hear you clearly across the board that the 10 percent cut to
the Assistance for Firefighters Grant Program is devastating.
It's something that hurts you and doesn't help you.
So I'm going to reach over to my colleagues on the other
aisle and ask that we join forces in working to restore those
cuts, because we hear, in a bipartisan way, that this is not
something that's Democrat or Republican, but this is about
saving lives and preparing, giving you the tools to do your
job.
My time is expired, Mr. Chairman. I yield.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize my good friend and colleague from Long
Island, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman. I appreciate it.
If adopted as currently written, OSHA's proposed rule will
devastate our Nation's volunteer fire departments, decreasing
public safety and increasing costs.
This has been made clear to me after many meetings with
volunteer firefighters in Nassau and Suffolk Counties back on
Long Island.
Small and volunteer firefighters are crucial in ensuring
community safety, especially in suburban and rural underserved
communities. These departments often serve as the first line of
defense in emergencies, providing rapid response times that can
save life and property.
Volunteer firefighters demonstrate exceptional dedication,
often balancing their service with other jobs and
responsibilities.
Their presence enhances local resilience, fosters community
spirit, and ensures that even the most remote areas can access
essential firefighting and emergency services.
We all agree, Democrat and Republican, that safety must be
a top priority, including the rigorous training, adherence to
safety protocols, and the use of proper equipment.
But I am increasingly concerned that these new safety
standards will force small and volunteer fire departments to
shutter, drastically impacting their work to keep our
communities safe every day.
Gentlemen, thanks so much for being with us here today, and
thank you for your dedication to keeping America's communities
safe.
I'd like to ask a few questions of you to get some more
details of how this proposed rule meets the needs of small and
volunteer fire departments.
Mr. Denniston, I'd like to start with you first, sir.
As it relates to safety standards, and in your position as
a risk management professional, would it be fair to say that
most, if not all, fire departments have a mission statement in
which the safety of the community and its firefighters is
paramount to their operation?
Mr. Denniston. Absolutely. I mean, our No. 1 principle is
the safety of our firefighters. We work very hard to do that.
We work to the best that we can within the NFPA standards that
apply to that, and we do everything we can to increase the
safety of our firefighters.
We're just concerned with this, as currently written, the
level of detail that it would go into would be devastating to
our budgets.
Mr. LaLota. With that foundation and long-term dedication
in mind, do you still see a need to improve emergency responder
safety?
Mr. Denniston. Absolutely. Again, as we've stated several
times, we're not opposed to firefighter safety, and we think a
lot of the things that are in this standard are long overdue.
We just would like a seat at the table to be able to
discuss this and work on some of the details so that we have a
piece that's obtainable by all. If it's not obtainable, no
one's going to follow it. But if we can work to make it
obtainable, then we'll do a better job protecting firefighters.
Mr. LaLota. In a few sentences, though, can you describe
what's in this rule that you do like and that you do support
that would enhance the safety of your members?
Mr. Denniston. I think, as several of the panelists have
already mentioned here, the physical component of it is very
important for our firefighters, and we want to make sure that
our firefighters have the proper screening.
The problem with the rule as proposed is, by incorporating
NFPA 1582, we're going to take the average price of a
firefighter physical in my district from $300 up to about
$1,300 per firefighter.
When I look at the amount of documentation that would be
needed for the preplans and all of that kind of stuff, we don't
have any paid personnel in my department. So we would have to
hire somebody to come in and do that.
When I look at the cost of doing that and I look at the
cost of the physical increase for my firefighters, I'm taking
my $280,000 budget and moving it to $400,000. That is a 42
percent increase in my budget. It's just not obtainable or
agreeable to my taxpayers.
Mr. LaLota. From where would those funds come if they had
to?
Mr. Denniston. Again, we would either have to raise taxes
42 percent or, as we mentioned earlier, Congress would have to
refund some of the grant programs.
But the problem with a grant program is that's a one-time
thing. So that may get us through 1 year, it may help us out a
little bit, but that's not going to help us to continue doing
the level and provide the services that we need to down the
road.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks.
I only have about a minute left, so I just want to shift
gears here real quick.
OSHA has indicated that the incorporated by reference
standards should not be problematic as fire departments already
follow them. Can you explain why this would be a problem now?
Mr. Denniston. I sit on 2 NFPA tech committees, so I've
helped to write 2 of those NFPA standards. I know that from the
work on the committee, we build those to be the gold standard.
We build them to what everybody should aspire to do in a best-
case solution with all the resources available that we want for
our departments to meet.
Unfortunately, that's not the world that we live in today,
and we just don't have the necessary funding.
If we had all the time and all the resources, we would be
100 percent in favor of this thing as written. The problem is,
we don't have all the time, and we don't have all those
resources.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. I appreciate your dedication, you
coming to Washington to provide testimony to this committee.
It's going to be very useful for us to help balance the needs
of ensuring that we have firefighter safety and very awesome
community service volunteer fire departments for decades, if
not centuries to come.
Thank you, Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. LaLota.
I now recognize the newest Member of the subcommittee, from
New York, Mr. Kennedy.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you very much, Chairman D'Esposito,
Ranking Member Carter, for holding this hearing, and thank you
to the witnesses for testifying here today.
Emergency response workers in America face considerable
health and safety risks as you all work, and they all work, in
dynamic and unpredictable environments. It's critically
important that we ensure the safety of all of our first
responders, including firefighters who risk their lives every
day to keep our communities safe.
Unfortunately, current OSHA standards are outdated and
incomplete and leave our brave first responders in danger. As
it stands, they do not address the full range of hazards facing
emergency responders, lag behind changes in protective
equipment performance and industry practices, conflict with
industry consensus standards, and are not aligned with many of
the current emergency response guidelines provided by other
Federal agencies.
Emergency responders, firefighters, and others are entitled
to OSHA safety standards that nearly every other occupation
enjoys.
As the brother-in-law of a Buffalo firefighter and
representing a community in Buffalo that lost Jason Arno, a
brave firefighter, in the line of duty just last year, I have
serious concerns about what we're dealing with. Again,
appreciate you all being here in Washington today.
I have a question I'll send to Mr. Davis and Mr. Walker as
representatives of the International Association of Fire
Fighters.
Can you elaborate on the significance of OSHA's proposed
Emergency Response Standard, particularly for the 345,000
firefighters and emergency medical workers that you both
represent?
Mr. Davis. Yes, absolutely. Fantastic. Appreciate the
question, Congressman, and thank you so much.
This really, I think, represents an unprecedented
advancement in safety for firefighters. Again, we are dealing--
again, speaking specifically for the IAFF membership at least--
we're dealing with unfathomable breakdowns in safety for our
members, whether it's apparatus failures, whether it's lack of
equipment, whether it's lack of staffing levels, lack of basic
health resources being provided to our members.
It's downright demoralizing when our members look at other
industries and see that nearly every other industry has some
form of legally enforceable protection and we don't have those
basic protections. I think when you do an incredibly dangerous
job, you deserve to have at least some semblance of enforceable
safety protections.
Our EMS personnel also appreciate the extension of this
onto the EMS realm as well. EMS practitioners equally face
assaults from patients, face difficult working conditions, and
to include them in the emergency response proposal was a
significant step forward by OSHA.
Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. I would say that this proposed rulemaking makes
a good step forward toward making our workplaces safer and more
accountable to that safety.
Too often politics comes in between doing what's right,
because of lack of funding or special interests that have more
political power, slash, will. Quite frankly, the fire service
ends up being the forgotten service because we're not flashy,
we don't create the bad headlines, we create the good
headlines.
Too often in politics, it's the squeaky wheel that gets the
grease. It's the one that creates more work for the group in
front of me that ends up getting more funding.
We've seen police forces in the United States, after the
summer of 2020, have more funding now than ever before for
training and education. I can't say that that's true in the
fire service because that money has to come from somewhere.
In the State of Maryland, we're pouring money into the
Blueprint for Maryland Education. As a husband of a teacher, I
support public education, but understand that there's only so
much money to go around, and without this applicable standard
to be held accountable, we'll continue to be the forgotten
service.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
The firefighter community obviously faces a heightened risk
of exposure to toxins and hazardous materials on a daily basis
during emergency responses.
In this context, DHS preparedness grants play a vital role
in supporting initiatives aimed at mitigating these risks and
improving the safety and well-being of firefighters.
Considering the current challenges faced by the firefighter
community, particularly concerning the increased risk of death
from exposure to these toxins and other hazardous materials,
how crucial are these grants in addressing the issues, and what
specific types of funding and resources are needed to better
protect those who are serving our communities?
Mr. Davis. Fantastic question.
You know, I think there's a couple protections we need.
Certainly ability to access health screenings, and cancer
screenings in particular, is critically important to our
members.
I think anyone who's had the misfortune of seeing a cancer
case play out in front of them knows that recognizing and
detecting that cancer in an earlier stage is far easier to
treat and far more successful to treat than a more advanced
stage.
We're very grateful Congress in the FAA reauthorization
bill provided a very large sum of money to help transition away
from PFAS-laden firefighting foams, or AFFF. I think that goes
a long way in terms of reducing our members' exposures to PFAS.
I mentioned earlier we've got some legislation out there to
spur development of next-generation turnout gear. That is of
critical importance. NIST studies have shown that PFAS is
there. More wear and tear of gear exposes our members to more
PFAS, which leads to cancer cases, and would love to crack
that--and work with you all on getting there.
Mr. Kennedy. Thank you.
Mr. D'Esposito. All right. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize, from the State of Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
witnesses being here in regard to OSHA and this proposed rule.
Mr. Denniston, you represent, even though you're from New
York--now, coming from Oklahoma, most people from my State
would think of New York and think high population density.
But in reading your bio information, you represent--apart
from representing rural fire departments with the association
that you have an official position with, you are involved in a
2,500 rural fire department. You have a position there.
I heard you say just a minute ago, if this new OSHA rule
takes effect, you're looking at a 40 percent budget cut. Is
that correct?
Mr. Denniston. It would be a 40 percent increase--42. We'd
have to raise taxes 42 percent.
Mr. Brecheen. I'm sorry. That's correct. That's what you
said, a 40 percent. You'd have to find 40 percent more of
almost a $2 million annual budget? Is that what I remember
reading, that you have like a----
Mr. Denniston. Two hundred eighty thousand dollars.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. I saw 1.7 million----
Mr. Denniston. One-point-seven is the estimated number in
the OSHA document that they say is the average budget for
career and volunteer departments.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. But yours is 200. I got it.
Mr. Denniston. Ours is 280,000.
Mr. Brecheen. OK.
Mr. Denniston. We're fairly representative of upstate rural
New York.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. What's interesting, also part of your
commentary was that you just went to Indiana and you had only,
like, 8 out of 20 different fire chiefs that you're presenting
this information, talking about this 605-page document, that
you only had just a handful of fire chiefs that knew they had a
90-day window to read this 600-page document that took OSHA 2
years to write.
How many fire departments do you think Nation-wide--I know
Indiana is an odd sample--but do you think most fire
departments even today, here we are the first part of June, how
many fire departments do you think actually know about this?
Mr. Denniston. I think we're doing a better job
communicating this to the fire departments and they're starting
to catch on. We were at FDIC, which is one of the premier fire
conferences in the country, just a few weeks ago, and couldn't
believe the number of firefighters that we talked to, when we
asked them what they were doing about the proposed OSHA
document, ``What are you talking about? We don't know anything
about it. We haven't heard about it.''
It really hasn't garnered the attention in the press and
the publications, and the smaller rural departments are just
not aware. That's why we've asked.
We appreciate the two extensions that have been given so
far by OSHA for our comments, but we think we've got a long way
to go. Then, as people digest this 608 pages, they feel like
they don't have time--enough time--to look at it, digest it,
and make meaningful comments, so they just kind-of throw their
hands up and walk away.
Mr. Brecheen. What do you think the average American, if
they studied their Constitution and tried to look in Article I
and find, ``I can't lay my finger on that power that's been
granted to Congress to get involved in telling rural fire
departments what they can do''?
Now, Army, Navy, militia, letters of marque and reprisal,
that's a little different deal. You can find that in the
Constitution.
But is it not just lunacy this Federal Government is
marching toward a place where we're taking away from State and
local entities authority over how they run governance?
Mr. Denniston. You know, it could be argued that this
certainly borderlines on that or oversteps those bounds.
But, again, the majority of us are not opposed to what OSHA
is trying to do. We are not opposed to firefighter safety. We
have some questions on the way the process was conducted and
how we've been able to respond to it. We need adequate time,
and we'd like a seat at the table so that we can express and
look at each one of these pieces and decide what is feasible
and make a rule that's obtainable for all.
Mr. Brecheen. You all represent enforcement, emergency
response, the broader--people group you in their mind with law
enforcement and just the images of what you portray in
protecting and serving communities.
I think it's also important for this narrative to be built
among my colleagues that because we do believe in the rule of
law, if the Tenth Amendment is there and it says the power is
not delegated by the United States in the Constitution to the
Congress, it should be left to the States. The Tenth Amendment
is very plain.
So I would say to you that in an effort to help you all, I
think you're the best positioned to determine the safety for
those that you work with on a day-to-day basis. I think the
States are the best poised to make these determinations.
I think the thing that we need to be shouting from the
rooftops in Washington, DC, is we are headed toward bankruptcy
as a country because we continue to do things the Constitution
never gave us permission under the rule of law to do.
It's because we support law enforcement that we want to
make sure, operating under the rule of law, that these
boundaries that our Founders left us, that we empower you to
protect and serve without Federal interference.
With that, I appreciate you being here today. I hope that
we, through the Congressional Review Act, can put a stop to
this.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I would yield.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize my friend from New York, Mr. Lawler.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for being here today and
sharing your knowledge and expertise on this issue.
I'd like to start by echoing the sentiments of my
colleagues that we certainly appreciate what OSHA is trying to
do to improve safety conditions Nation-wide for all of our fire
service.
I think certainly in a State like New York, where we have a
large number of career firefighters, including in New York
City, many of whom are constituents of mine, and a large
volunteer base, safety is paramount.
We want to make sure that all of our firefighters, both
from a health standpoint and from the ability to effectively do
their job, have the resources and support that they need.
The district that I represent, just north of New York City,
as I said, is home to certainly a very large community of
active and retired FDNY, but it is also a district where almost
all of my fire departments are volunteer.
So I have met with them on numerous occasions now, and I
know there is great concern about some of the provisions that
are being proposed for a number of reasons, not the least of
which is timing and making sure that there's enough time to
review, to digest, to come back with information for OSHA
during the comment period.
It's why, along with Chairman D'Esposito, we fought to get
an extension for an additional 45 days and fought again to get
another extension, which was just granted, for an additional 30
days.
In your estimation, is that sufficient or should more time
be granted to review this? You can each answer.
Mr. Walker. So in the State of Maryland, when this proposed
rulemaking came out, our State MOSH office, or our State MOSHA
office, actually put together a broad team of stakeholders,
brought together our Maryland State Firemen's Association, the
Maryland State Fire Chiefs, the Metro Chiefs, as well as the
IAFF, to go line by line through this proposal and review every
single thing that's in there.
We're finalizing our document on what we're going to send.
But, quite frankly, Maryland took a proactive stance, and
each State is required to meet this standard. I can't speak for
other States and how they handle business on something like
this.
But another 30 days will give, I think, every stakeholder
enough time to go through this process. I mean, people made
time for this because it's important.
Mr. Lawler. Mr. Denniston, has New York taken the same
proactive approach as Maryland?
Mr. Denniston. We started back in December trying to get
the information out and disseminate that amongst the fire
service agencies. It took a while for the traction to be
gained, but we've started the process now. We're holding
informational meetings across the State. We're getting
concerns.
We were in your district just last week----
Mr. Lawler. Yep.
Mr. Denniston [continuing]. Sharing some of those same
messages.
But, again, it still amazed me the number of people in the
room that were completely unaware of what was going on at this
point in time.
So we certainly feel like some more time is needed. We're
not just trying to kick this can down the road. We're just
trying to make sure that everybody has a voice as this moves
forward.
Mr. Lawler. Yes or no, just because we're running short on
time, do you all believe there should be an in-person hearing,
certainly a virtual one, but an in-person hearing hosted by
OSHA so that they can engage on this with stakeholders?
Mr. Denniston. We certainly feel that there should. One of
the problems that we're having at this point is we've got
questions trying to understand some of what's in the document,
and OSHA at this point is not willing to answer any questions.
So we are making statements on things that we don't have
true answers. We feel that in-person hearing would give us the
opportunity for some dialog so that we can get some of these
things worked out.
Mr. Lawler. Yes or no, Mr. Maruca?
Mr. Maruca. Yes, it would be useful.
Mr. Lawler. Mr. Davis.
Mr. Davis. We would actively look forward to defending our
members' safety.
Mr. Lawler. Mr. Walker.
Mr. Walker. I echo the sentiments of the panel.
Mr. Lawler. OK.
Chief Maruca, the National Volunteer Fire Council did have
two seats on the panel as this rule was being written, but do
you feel that the volunteer fire service was properly
represented in this process and concerns taken into account?
Mr. Maruca. We participated in the process. I think we were
surprised at the scope and the scale of what was proposed
relative to the process up to that point and its impact on the
small community departments.
Particularly, that half of the fire departments in the
United States are in these towns of fewer than 2,500 people.
It's an overwhelming burden that's going to fall onto
departments that have no budgets and no administrative staff at
all.
Mr. Lawler. Yes. I think many of the standards that are
reflected in OSHA certainly have previously been adopted by a
State like New York, which certainly has been proactive in
being in favor of safety. But I think it's important that we
make sure that we get this right and that the input of all the
stakeholders is taken into account.
So I certainly would hope that OSHA will hold an in-person
hearing and ensure that all the feedback is made available to
everyone so that we can get it right going forward.
But I also think, from a New York standpoint, we should be
very proactive, as Maryland has been, to make sure there's a
coordinated response.
I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize my good friend from New York, Mr. Molinaro.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and certainly thanks
for allowing us to waive on to your committee.
This OSHA standard, of course, could provide real benefit
to career departments and the need of career departments to
meet those standards. Certainly, I'm hopeful that we can find
ways to support that effort.
As a member of a local volunteer fire company myself, and
have been since 1994, as you have, Mr. Chairman, I join
thousands upon thousands of New York volunteer firefighters and
their families in suggesting--and, by the way, the local
governments that support them--in suggesting that these
standards just are not attainable by local volunteer fire
departments and the support of municipalities.
I recognize that you've had a series of questions today.
Mr. Denniston, I'm glad you're with us--full disclosure,
Mr. Denniston is a constituent--and grateful for your service.
New York has over 100,000 volunteer firefighters. We like
to say that that likely results in about a $4 billion savings
to local property taxpayers. New York State, having the highest
burden of property taxes of any people in the country, knows
that in order to transition from volunteer to career is a big
challenge, and we've seen multiple departments engage in that.
The standard here would be such--the standards that, as
suggested, would be such a financial burden that property taxes
could rise by 27 percent on average State-wide. This could be
50, 60, 70 percent in small communities of 500 and 600 and 700
residents who support volunteer fire companies.
Rather than getting far afield, I'll focus here.
Mr. Denniston, does the State of New York have enough
training capacity to get volunteer firefighters up to the
training standards as suggested by OSHA?
Mr. Denniston. With the standards the way they're currently
written, one of the proposed NFPA standards that's incorporated
by reference would require us to have Fire Officer I for our
captains and lieutenants, Fire Officer II for our assistant
chiefs, Fire Officer III for our chief officers. We do not have
the capacity currently in New York State to offer Fire Officer
III.
Office of Fire Prevention and Control is working on that
now so that we can get that put together, but they're
estimating between 5 and 7 years to get the corps stood up, to
get the instructors trained, and to make it available to reach
the masses that we would have to reach.
Unfortunately, with the way that this has been proposed by
OSHA, they're looking at a 2-year time line for us to have that
done. So they're looking for it in 2 years and it's going to
take us 5 to 7 years to incorporate that.
So we would like to get to that point, but we're just not
there yet.
Mr. Molinaro. So, Mr. Denniston, you come from a part of
the State that, obviously, I represent.
Truly upstate, Mr. Chairman, by definition.
Do our communities have the medical staff, physicians, to
meet the physical examination requirements as proposed?
Mr. Denniston. So the 1582 standard that's been
incorporated by reference, we're being told by our providers
that they do not have the capacity to do that, to meet that
standard.
Again, we're all for firefighter physicals. We think that
there should be screenings. We think there should be a lot of
things. But the 1582 standard is just so detailed in what it
requires that our providers are telling us they do not have
that capacity to meet right at this point.
Mr. Molinaro. Mr. Denniston, how many--you deal with a
number of volunteer fire departments. Do any of them get direct
revenue from the Federal Government?
Mr. Denniston. Most of our fire departments are all
taxpayered, other than the grant programs which have been cut.
Mr. Molinaro. Do any of our local volunteer fire
departments get direct financial assistance from the State of
New York? No competitive grant, just a check thanking you for
your service?
Mr. Denniston. No, sir. It's all the local taxpayers.
Mr. Molinaro. OK. So all of this, of course, lands on local
property taxpayers. This is not to suggest that we shouldn't
have the highest standards; in fact, I think volunteer
firefighters try to meet those standards.
Certainly, as a former county executive, I can assert that
in the State of New York especially county governments through
the departments of emergency management are required to
establish training platforms and to engage in mutual aid
planning and prop up an emergency response system when local
communities can't shoulder that entire burden.
Mr. Davis, I have the greatest respect for the career
firefighters, have a great number in my district that I work
with. There is little question that these standards could
provide great value to career departments, and we ought to meet
the highest standard. I agree with that.
Do you think, though, right now agencies--would they or
would they not, once--if this standard were to go into effect,
don't you think volunteer and career would turn to AFG and
SAFER grants unlike ever before in order to access dollars to
meet these standards? Would you suggest that that's probably
true?
Mr. Davis. Sure. I mean, I think there's a logical
assumption that departments will look for those grant
opportunities. But I think there's also a likelihood it's going
to drive discussions in the local government itself, as well as
the State government, for ways we can find, ways to meet these
requirements.
I think certainly in places where there are high property
tax levels could see difficulty in raising taxes. But, again,
those discussions need to be had. Just because it's costly
doesn't mean we need to shy away from safety.
Mr. Molinaro. Without--my concern with the Chairman--I
won't further the questions, only to assert that that is very--
that's a very thoughtful response.
I think we all acknowledge, in the State of New York in
particular, there are 5 separate ways you can create a fire
department. None of them make any sense. It's a municipal
department. It's a district. It could be contract, it could be
501(c)(3), or it could be municipally-owned.
You and I all know that to bridge that particular
conversation won't take more than 7 years, it'll take 700 years
to have that kind of conversation. The State of New York has
never--has never--put dollars on the ground effectively to
support volunteer fire departments. I think we all agree that
we want Federal dollars to get to the men and women on the
front line, whether they be career or volunteers.
So I do hope, Mr. Chairman, that OSHA commits to another
hearing. I hope that we can consider standards that get our
volunteers to the highest degree practical, but acknowledge the
reality that we live in.
We don't have the resources. The taxpayers are already
overburdened. Municipalities don't have the technical strength
to engage in this.
Oh, by the way, thanks to New York being the leader in
outward migration--more people leave the State of New York to
other States in this country--we don't even have the human
beings to engage in the kind of effort that it would take to
make that sort of transition.
But I respect you all. I appreciate you all.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Molinaro.
With that, I want to thank all the witnesses for being
here. I just want to, last, say a couple of comments after this
hearing.
I think that this was an opportunity for us to further
conversation. I want to thank the International Association of
Fire Fighters. Like was mentioned, this OSHA standard hasn't
been touched since 1980, and you have been the driving force of
making firefighters' lives safer throughout this country. It's
not just career firefighters but volunteers and everybody in
between. So I want to thank you for that.
I also want to thank those that have served the volunteer
fire service for much of their lives for the same thing, for
being here on Capitol Hill today and traveling from different
parts of the country in order to speak on behalf of
firefighters throughout the Nation, people who work their
regular jobs and get out of their beds and leave their dinner
tables to respond to alarms because they love their community.
This is an opportunity that we have here that probably--I
know it sounds cliche--but they haven't been changed since
1980. It's probably a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to change
a standard, to make things safer, to make apparatus safer, to
make sure that firefighters have the resources they need to do
their jobs.
I want to thank you all for being here, for speaking out
and being passionate about the things that matter most. I
really, truly hope that, as you could see here today, we had
individuals waive onto this committee from different parts of
the country, because it matters to everyone. This isn't a
Republican or a Democrat issue; I think it's an American public
safety issue and one that we take very seriously.
So I hope that this is the start of many more conversations
not only with just the stakeholders in this room but with OSHA
and others to make sure that everyone is represented and that
everyone is kept safe, because at the end of the day that is
exactly what we are here to do and what we're here for.
So the Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for witnesses, and I would ask that the witnesses
respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned. I
ask you all to please remain safe.
[Whereupon, at 12:03 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
