- EVALUATING CISA'S FEDERAL CIVILIAN EXECUTIVE BRANCH CYBERSECURITY PROGRAMS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EVALUATING CISA'S FEDERAL CIVILIAN EXECUTIVE
BRANCH CYBERSECURITY PROGRAMS
=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 19, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-29

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-816 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Robert Menendez, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New Jersey:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6

Witnesses

Mr. Brian Gumbel, President, Armis, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. Stephen Zakowicz, Vice President, CGI Federal, Inc.:
Oral Statement.................................................    13
Prepared Statement.............................................    14
Mr. Joe Head, Chief Technology Officer, Intrusion:
Oral Statement.................................................    17
Prepared Statement.............................................    19
Mr. Rob Sheldon, Senior Director, CrowdStrike:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    23

EVALUATING CISA'S FEDERAL CIVILIAN EXECUTIVE BRANCH CYBERSECURITY
PROGRAMS

----------

Tuesday, September 19, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., at
Room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Andrew R.
Garbarino [Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Garbarino, Gimenez, Ezell, Lee,
Carter, and Menendez.
Chairman Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order. Without objection, the Chair may recess at
any point. The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony
from industry experts on CISA's two flagship cybersecurity
programs for the Federal Civilian Executive branch. I now
recognize myself for an opening statement.
Thank you for our witnesses for being here to talk about a
very important topic CISA's Federal cybersecurity programs. One
of CISA's core missions is the protection of the Federal
Civilian Executive branch, or FCEB. Although CISA has been
pulled in many different directions in recent years, it is
crucial that it continues to focus on its foundational
responsibilities, chief among them being the protection of FCEB
networks. Today, we will focus on two programs, the Continuous
Diagnostic and Mitigation Program, or CDM, and the National
Cybersecurity Protection System, or NCPS, which includes
EINSTEIN.
In recent years, CISA officials have indicated their intent
to revamp and improve these programs. We will discuss with
industry partners who participate in and have perspectives on
these two programs, some of the successes they have had so far,
and the ways they can improve in the future. CDM provides tools
to agencies to defend their networks, which feed data into
dashboards to allow agencies to monitor their real-time network
security. Conceptually, those agency-specific dashboards send
data to a Federal Government-wide dashboard that CISA uses to
monitor the state of FCEB security. The current model provides
2 years of CISA-sourced funding for CDM tools at agencies,
after which point agencies must pick up the bill.
NCPS is a set of capabilities that includes EINSTEIN,
CISA's Intrusion Detection and Intrusion Prevention System.
EINSTEIN sensors reside on the perimeter of an agency's network
and detect and block known malicious traffic. While this
perimeter security function is important, it is not sufficient
for a cybersecurity program, given the current threat landscape
and the ability of bad actors to evade many perimeter security
mitigations. What is more, EINSTEIN has faced long-standing
downsides, including limitations in detecting and preventing
encrypted traffic and focusing only on what we already know is
malicious traffic.
NCPS's authorization expires at the end of the fiscal year.
In the President's fiscal year 2024 budget request, CISA
included a $425 million request for the Cyber Analytics and
Data System, or CADS, which is meant to take the place of NCPS.
CISA intends to transition certain legacy capabilities of
EINSTEIN into the new CAD system, and others will be taken over
by new CADS capability. While CISA has not provided many public
details about its plans to build CADS, I am looking forward to
hearing from our witnesses their thoughts on how CISA should be
approaching this new analytic capability.
As the administrator of Federal cybersecurity requirements,
CISA has the broad and important role in ensuring the security
of Federal networks. While the ultimate responsibility for an
individual agency's security is the head of that agency through
programs like CDM and EINSTEIN, CISA has the potential to make
a real impact on Federal network security. The direction CISA
takes with these programs, and to what extent they are
administered as true shared service with the CISA covering
continued cost, will dictate CISA's posture toward other
Federal agencies moving forward.
Whether CISA acts as a service provider or an advisor
toward other agencies is a fundamental question, and Congress
and CISA must both be consistent in how they approach it across
CISA's many missions and programs. I look forward to our
witnesses' testimony and to discussing these questions with
them in depth.
[The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino
September 19, 2023
Thank you to our witnesses for being here to talk about a very
important topic: CISA's Federal cybersecurity programs. One of CISA's
core missions is protection of the Federal Civilian Executive branch,
or FCEB. Although CISA has been pulled in many different directions in
recent years, it's crucial that it continues to focus on its
foundational responsibilities, chief among them being the protection of
FCEB networks.
Today we will focus on two programs: the Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation program, or CDM, and the National Cybersecurity Protection
System, or NCPS, which includes EINSTEIN. In recent years, CISA
officials have indicated their intent to revamp and improve these
programs. We will discuss with industry partners, who participate in
and have perspectives on these two programs, some of the successes they
have had so far and ways they can improve in the future.
CDM provides tools to agencies to defend their networks, which feed
data into dashboards to allow agencies to monitor their real-time
network security. Conceptually, those agency-specific dashboards send
data to a Federal Government-wide dashboard that CISA uses to monitor
the state of FCEB cybersecurity. The current model provides 2 years of
CISA-sourced funding for CDM tools at agencies, after which point
agencies must pick up the bill.
NCPS is a set of capabilities that includes EINSTEIN, CISA's
intrusion detection and intrusion prevention system. EINSTEIN sensors
reside on the perimeter of an agency's network and detect and block
known malicious traffic. While this perimeter security function is
important, it is not sufficient for a cybersecurity program given the
current threat landscape and the ability of bad actors to evade many
perimeter security mitigations. What's more, EINSTEIN has faced long-
standing downsides, including limitations on detecting and preventing
encrypted traffic and focusing only on what we already know is
malicious traffic. NCPS's authorization expires at the end of this
fiscal year.
In the President's fiscal year 2024 budget request, CISA included a
$425 million request for the Cyber Analytics and Data System, or CADS,
which is meant to take the place of NCPS. CISA intends to transition
certain legacy capabilities of EINSTEIN into the new CADS system, and
others will be taken over by new CADS capabilities. While CISA has not
provided many public details about its plans to build CADS, I am
looking forward to hearing from our witnesses their thoughts on how
CISA should be approaching this new analytic capability.
As the administrator of Federal cybersecurity requirements, CISA
has a broad and important role in ensuring the security of Federal
networks. While the ultimate responsibility for an individual agency's
security is the head of that agency, through programs like CDM and
EINSTEIN, CISA has the potential to make a real impact on Federal
network security. The direction CISA takes these programs, and to what
extent they are administered as true shared services with CISA covering
continued costs, will dictate CISA's posture toward other Federal
agencies moving forward. Whether CISA acts as a service provider or an
advisor toward other agencies is a fundamental question, and Congress
and CISA must both be consistent in how they approach it, across CISA's
many missions and programs.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony and to discussing these
questions with them in more depth.

Chairman Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from New Jersey, Mr. Menendez, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Menendez. Good morning. I want to thank Chairman
Garbarino for holding this important hearing to assess how CISA
is modernizing its signature Federal network security programs
to keep pace with the rapidly-evolving threat environment and
advancements in technology. Two-and-a-half years ago, the solar
wind supply chain attack forced the Federal Government to
overhaul its approach to securing its networks and supply
chains. The Biden-Harris administration made revamping Federal
network security a top priority, issuing an ambitious Executive
Order that brought to bear the full resources of every Federal
agency with a cybersecurity mission. Together with Congress,
the administration made historic investments in improving
Federal network security.
Not since the 2015 Office of Personnel Management breach
had there been as much momentum for change in how we secure
Federal networks. While President Biden and Congress certainly
deserve credit for giving needed attention to Federal network
security, it is critical that we continue our work to modernize
Federal network security to avoid crisis-driven policy making.
We must ensure that the programs we rely on to secure our
networks can adapt to and integrate with new technologies and
modern network architectures. We must endeavor to stay a step
ahead of our adversaries, building upon our recent momentum to
better detect malicious activity quickly and mitigate the risk
posed by cyber intrusions.
CISA plays a central role in securing our Federal networks
as the administrator of the National Cybersecurity Protection
System, commonly referred to as NCPS, and the Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation Program, commonly referred to as
CDM. These programs complement CISA's other important powers,
including the authority to issue security guidance and best
practices, binding operational directives and emergency
directives, which require agencies to take expedited action to
secure their networks against a pressing threat or
vulnerability.
Over the past 2\1/2\ years, CISA has laid out its plans to
modernize both NCPS and CDM programs. Earlier this year, CISA
announced plans to sunset and replace its EINSTEIN intrusion
detection system, which has limited effectiveness against novel
threats and newer network architectures and shift remaining
NCPS capabilities to a new program called the Cyber Analytics
and Data System. Together, the legacy EINSTEIN capabilities and
CADS will become the joint collaboration environment, commonly
referred to as JCE, which CISA predicts will be, ``best-in-
class analytical environment'' that utilizes increased
automation to more efficiently analyze classified and
unclassified data.
JCE holds tremendous promise, but successful implementation
requires a clear vision and buy-in from both Federal and
private-sector partners. CISA has worked to rapidly mature its
CDM program to ensure that its Federal customers can tailor it
to accommodate their unique security requirements. CDM is
limited, however, in that it is deployed on IT technologies,
not operational technology, or internet of things devices.
Moreover, the Government Accountability Office recently found
that CISA lacks the authority to test CDM tools on agency
networks, which undermines its ability to ensure those tools
are working as anticipated. I am interested in learning from
witnesses today how we can improve the security value of both
programs.
Before I close, I want to remind my colleagues that
Government shutdowns are bad for Federal network security. We
are nevertheless 2 weeks away from Government funding running
out. During the last shutdown, which lasted 35 days, CISA
issued its first emergency directive to Federal agencies ever.
Having employees and IT contractors across the Government and
at CISA furloughed at the time was not helpful. A continuing
resolution would also impair CISA's critical work, as it would
restrict CISA's ability to start new programs that match the
current threat environment.
It is detrimental to our national security to slow
investments in our Federal network security programs at such a
critical moment in their maturation. Moving forward, the House
and Senate need to pass a Homeland Security Appropriations bill
that provides needed funding to CISA to carry out its vital
missions. Now is not the time to take our foot off the gas.
With that, I thank the witnesses for being here today. I look
forward to their testimony.
[The statement of Hon. Menendez follows:]
Statement of Hon. Robert Menendez
September 19, 2023
Two-and-a-half years ago, the SolarWinds supply chain attack forced
the Federal Government to overhaul its approach to securing its
networks and supply chains. The Biden-Harris administration made
revamping Federal network security a top priority, issuing an ambitious
Executive Order that brought to bear the full resources of every
Federal agency with a cybersecurity mission. Together with Congress,
the administration made historic investments in improving Federal
network security.
Not since the 2015 Office of Personnel Management breach had there
been as much momentum for change in how we secure Federal networks.
While President Biden and Congress certainly deserve credit for giving
needed attention to Federal network security, it is critical that we
continue our work to modernize Federal network security to avoid
crisis-driven policy making.
We must ensure that the programs we rely on to secure our networks
can adapt to and integrate with new technologies and modern network
architectures.
And we must endeavor to stay a step ahead of our adversaries,
building upon our recent momentum to better detect malicious activity
quickly and mitigate the risks posed by cyber intrusions.
CISA plays a central role in securing our Federal networks as the
administrator of the National Cybersecurity Protection System, commonly
referred to as NCPS, and the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
program, commonly referred to as CDM. These programs complement CISA's
other important powers, including the authority to issue security
guidance and best practices, Binding Operational Directives, and
Emergency Directives, which require agencies to take expedited action
to secure their networks against a pressing threat or vulnerability.
Over the past 2\1/2\ years, CISA has laid out its plans to modernize
both NCPS and CDM programs.
Earlier this year, CISA announced plans to sunset and replace its
EINSTEIN intrusion detection system--which has limited effectiveness
against novel threats and newer network architectures--and shift
remaining NCPS capabilities to a new program called the Cyber Analytics
and Data System (CADS). Together, the legacy EINSTEIN capabilities and
CADS will become the Joint Collaboration Environment, commonly referred
to as JCE, which CISA predicts will be a ``best-in-class analytic
environment'' that utilizes increased automation to more efficiently
analyze classified and unclassified data. JCE holds tremendous promise,
but successful implementation requires a clear vision and buy-in from
both Federal and private-sector partners.
CISA has also worked to rapidly mature its CDM program to ensure
that its Federal customers can tailor it to accommodate their unique
security requirements. CDM is limited, however, in that it is deployed
on IT technologies, not operational technology or internet of things
devices. Moreover, the Government Accountability Office recently found
that CISA lacks the authority to test CDM tools on agency networks,
which undermines its ability to ensure those tools are working as
anticipated. I am interested in learning from witnesses today how we
can improve the security value of both programs.
Before I close, I want to remind my colleagues that Government
shutdowns are bad for Federal network security. We are nevertheless 2
weeks away from Government funding running out. During the last
shutdown--which lasted 35 days--CISA issued its first Emergency
Directive to Federal agencies ever. Having employees and IT contractors
across the Government--and at CISA--furloughed at the time was not
helpful. A continuing resolution would also impair CISA's critical
work, as it would restrict CISA's ability to start new programs that
match the current threat environment.
It is detrimental to our national security to slow investments in
our Federal network security programs at such a critical moment in
their maturation. Moving forward, the House and Senate need to pass a
Homeland Security appropriations bill that provides needed funding to
CISA to carry out its vital missions. Now is not the time to take our
foot off the gas.

Chairman Garbarino. I want to thank the Ranking Member for
that rousing opening statement. Other Members of the committee
are reminded that opening statements may be submitted for the
record.
[The statements of Ranking Member Thompson and Honorable
Jackson Lee follow:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
September 19, 2023
We all remember learning about the SolarWinds intrusion in December
2020, which highlighted how vulnerable Federal agencies were to foreign
espionage campaigns and how outdated our Federal network cyber defenses
were. While the creation of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency in 2018 represented a major step forward in developing
an organization charged with leading the operational defense of Federal
networks, Congress did not initially provide the agency with sufficient
resources to match the modern threat environment.
Fortunately, upon taking office shortly after the SolarWinds
incident, President Biden quickly took critical actions to modernize
our cyber defenses. By issuing Executive Order 14028, President Biden
began a process of updating the Federal Government's cybersecurity to
combat the threats we face from our adversaries. Along with the $650
million Congress provided to CISA in the American Rescue Plan Act and
steady increases in CISA's budget, efforts over the last 3 years have
brought meaningful gains in improving CISA's visibility and response
capabilities throughout the Federal Civilian Executive branch.
Investments in endpoint detection and response technologies across
Federal agencies have helped improve the Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation program and has brought the Federal Government in line with
the cybersecurity practices standard in much of the private sector. In
recent cyber incidents, we have seen how an improved CDM dashboard and
increased visibility have enabled CISA to move quickly to identify
vulnerabilities across the Federal Government and mitigate risk. I look
forward to hearing from our witnesses about how CISA can continue to
improve the CDM program, including how it can gain visibility into
operational technology, a priority for me.
In this year's budget request, the administration has now proposed
a much-needed restructuring of the National Cybersecurity Protection
System. By establishing the Cyber Analytics and Data System, CISA hopes
to more efficiently analyze the ever-increasing amount of data it
receives from Federal agencies, State and local governments, and
critical infrastructure. Hearing from private-sector partners should
help ensure CISA develops this new program in a way that reflects the
expertise of leading cybersecurity companies, while maintaining and
evolving the network detection and prevention capabilities of the
EINSTEIN program. Without sustained support for CISA's Federal network
security programs going forward, the progress we have made in recent
years may stall.
A Government shutdown or a year-long continuing resolution would
restrict CISA's ability to move forward with efforts to continue CDM
modernization or deploy the new CADS program. Operating under a CR is
problematic for any agency; in the world of cybersecurity, where our
adversaries are constantly innovating, operating under last year's
budget or no budget at all could be devastating for our national
security.
I hope my Republican colleagues will stop holding Government
funding hostage to their inhumane and ineffective border proposals and
instead come to the negotiating table to develop a bipartisan full-year
appropriations agreement.
I am proud of the tremendous achievements we have had in recent
years to provide CISA the resources and authorities it needs to better
secure Federal agencies. Only with bipartisan support for CISA and its
mission can we continue to build on our previous work.
______

Statement of Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee
September 19, 2023
Chairman Garbarino, and Ranking Member Swalwell, thank you for
holding today's hearing on ``Evaluating CISA's Federal Civilian
Executive Branch Cybersecurity Programs''.
I look forward to the questions that will follow the testimony of:

Mr. Brian Gumbel, president, Armis;

Mr. Stephen Zakowicz, vice president--consulting services,
CGI Federal;

Mr. Joe Head, chief technology officer, Intrusion; and

Mr. Rob Sheldon, senior director of public policy and
strategy, Crowdstrike (Democratic Witness).
I welcome the witnesses and thank them for their testimony before
the House Homeland Security Committee.
The purpose of this hearing is to assess CISA's efforts to
modernize its two signature Federal network security programs, the
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program (CDM) and the National
Cybersecurity Protection System (NCPS).
The Federal Executive branch is comprised of civilian Federal
agencies that provide the full scope of benefits and services to
residents of the States and territories as well as support of domestic
law enforcement and homeland security needs.
Cybersecurity for non-civilian agencies is primarily managed under
the Department of Defense.
The Federal Executive branch cybersecurity coordination was not as
robust as national defense networks, but this dramatically changed
following the SolarWinds attack.
In December 2020, the Federal Government learned the Russian
government had executed a malicious cyber campaign targeting Federal
networks and certain critical infrastructure.
Russian hackers used a combination of traditional tactics,
techniques, and procedures (e.g.: password guessing) and a supply chain
attack to infiltrate targeted networks.
In a supply chain attack, malicious actors infiltrate a target
network by exploiting security vulnerabilities in the network of a
trusted partner to gain access to the targeted network.
In this case, one of the trusted partners was Solar Winds, a U.S.-
based vendor whose Orion Platform provided network monitoring services
to entities across the world, including the U.S. Government.
To execute the attack, hackers gained access to SolarWinds and
injected malicious code into an Orion software update sent to customers
in March 2020.
The malicious code created a backdoor in the affected networks that
caused servers to communicate with a U.S. IP address after a dormant
period.
In response, hackers sent additional malicious code to some, but
not all, affected networks.
Ultimately, the additional malicious code allowed hackers to access
elevated credentials and move around a victim's network, monitoring
activity and slowly taking data.
To deceive security products on customers' networks, actors
disguised their activity as normal network traffic and were able to
persist through the creation of additional credentials from other
applications.
A total of 18,000 SolarWinds customers downloaded the compromised
version of Orion, but far fewer have identified activity beyond the
creation of a backdoor.
Nearly 40 Federal agencies downloaded the compromised SolarWinds
Orion update.
It is important to note that about 30 percent of both Government
and non-Government victims of the Russian cyber campaign had no direct
connection with SolarWinds.
According to news reports, hackers also breached networks by
``exploiting known bugs in software products, by guessing on-line
passwords and by capitalizing on a variety of issues in the way
Microsoft Corp.'s cloud-based software is configured.''
Bugs can also be called Zero-Day Events that if exploited could
cost significant disruption in the function of application or services
that rely on computers or remote computing services.
The SolarWind Orion exploit was not intended to damage or disrupt
computing systems, it was designed to spy on networks and spread to
other systems.
The SolarWinds campaign illustrated many of the shortcomings in the
Federal Executive Branch civilian cybersecurity, which lacked the
ability to effectively monitor and respond to threats on civilian
agency networks.
At that time there was also no overarching Federal law requiring
private entities to report cybersecurity incidents, there is little
public information on the number of victims that installed the infected
versions of Solar Winds Orion or experienced second-stage intrusions.
At the time of the attack, there was a critical need to modernize
the Federal Government civilian agency cybersecurity and SolarWinds
became the catalysis to begin this important work.
Until the SolarWinds attack civilian Federal agencies had been slow
to adapt to the demands of new technologies, network architectures, and
the evolving threat landscape.
Harnessing that momentum to revamp Federal civilian agency network
security, the Biden-Harris administration implemented ambitious
policies to transform how the Federal Government and its contractors
secure their networks and supply chains, most notably through Executive
Order 14028, Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity.
Under the skilled guidance of the Biden-Harris administration CISA
has worked quickly to revamp its signature FCEB network security
programs, the National Cybersecurity Protection System (NCPS) and the
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation program (CDM).
These programs complement other authorities provided to CISA under
the Federal Information Security Modernization Act, including the power
to issue Binding Operational Directives, Emergency Directives, and
technical security guidance to FCEB agencies, among other things.
Additionally, the William M. (Mac) Thornberry National Defense
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, authorized CISA to hunt for
malicious activity across FCEB's networks, with or without an agency's
permission.
CISA's authorities outside NCPS and CDM, though critical to its
FCEB network security mission, are outside the scope of this hearing.
Prior to the SolarWinds attack another major civilian agency attack
in 2015 involved the Office of Personnel Management.
In 2015, the Office of Personnel Management data breach targeted
information provided by security clearance applications submitted under
the Standard Form 86 (SF-86).
At the time this attack was one of the largest breaches of
Government data in U.S. history, the attack was carried out by an
advanced persistent threat based in China.
In the aftermath of the 2015 Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
breach, Congress enacted the Federal Cybersecurity Enhancement Act.
That legislation authorized NCPS and directed the department to
deploy a Federal intrusion detection and prevention system to better
detect breaches of Federal networks.
NCPS is a ``system of systems'' that, in addition to the EINSTEIN
intrusion detection system, includes data analytics, information
sharing, and core infrastructure capabilities.
Earlier this year, CISA announced plans to restructure NCPS and,
over time, sunset the EINSTEIN intrusion prevention program.
EINSTEIN is designed to observe traffic going in and out of agency
networks and relies on detecting known threats and, therefore, has
limited effectiveness in modern network architectures or against novel
attacks.
The remaining NCPS capabilities include data analytics, information
sharing, and core infrastructure capabilities, which will be integrated
into CADS.
CADS and the legacy EINSTEIN capabilities will be housed within the
new Joint Collaboration Environment (JCE).
CISA boasts that the JCE will be a ``best-in-class analytic
environment that centralizes mission-relevant classified and
unclassified data to enable more efficient analysis in large part due
to increased automation.''
Last year, Congress extended CISA's NCPS authorities until
September 30, 2023, and they will expire at the end of the month unless
Congress acts.
CISA intends for the new CADS program to support expanded
capabilities that will improve the intake, integration, and automated
analysis to facilitate the rapid identification, detection, mitigation,
and prevention of malicious cyber activity.
According to CISA, CADS marks a significant expansion of NCPS's
existing systems engineering, information technology infrastructure,
and cyber operations tools and services.
The new JCE--and CADS, in particular--have the potential to
dramatically improve how the Federal Government identifies and
mitigates threats to Federal networks.
These new capabilities, however, rely on close collaboration with
CISA's private-sector partners and vendors.
It is not clear that CISA has clearly articulated a complete vision
for how it will implement its plans for JCE or CADS.
CISA also does not have a concrete plan for replacing or retaining
EINSTEIN capabilities, even though ``the visibility provided by
existing EINSTEIN sensors remains a crucial enabler of CISA's mission
to protect FCEB agencies.''
In June, the General Services Administration issued a Request for
Information on behalf of CISA seeking industry feedback on how to
modernize the ``legacy capabilities'' of the EINSTEIN program.
I am interested in knowing if CISA has responded to the GSA or
intends to respond to the question regarding EINSTEIN.
I thank today's witnesses and look forward to asking questions
following the testimony of witnesses.
Thank you.

Chairman Garbarino. I am pleased to have four witnesses
before us today to discuss this very important topic. I ask
that our witnesses please rise and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Garbarino. Let the record reflect that the
witnesses have answered in the affirmative. Thank you. Please
be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses. Brian
Gumbel is the president of Armis, where he leads the company
and its efforts to drive innovation in cybersecurity and
emerging technology. Mr. Gumbel has spent 25 years in the tech
industry, where he has worked for many companies, and is part
of several advisory boards.
Steven Zakowicz is the vice president of CGI Federal, where
he leads the DHS CISA account for the company. In this
capacity, he leads a large team supporting 7 Federal agencies'
participation in CISA's CDM program. In part of this role, Mr.
Zakowicz oversaw a team providing environmental, health and
safety, and regulatory compliance solutions and services to the
chemical and energy companies. He also serves as a member of
the American Council for Technology and Industry Advisory
Council and the Washington Exec Cyber Council.
Joe Head is the chief technology officer and cofounder of
Intrusion. He has held many roles with the company since its
founding in 1983, and prior to that, he worked at Honeywell
Optoelectronics. That was a tough one.
Finally, Robert Sheldon is the director of public policy
and strategy at CrowdStrike. He leads corporate engagement on a
variety of U.S. Federal, State, and local government policies,
programs, and initiatives. He is the company's representative
to CISA's Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative and the IT Sector
Coordinating Council. In addition to his role at CrowdStrike,
Mr. Sheldon serves as an adjunct professor lecturer on
international cybersecurity policy at American University
School of International Service.
Thank you all for being here today. Mr. Gumbel, I now
recognize you for 5 minutes to summarize your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF BRIAN GUMBEL, PRESIDENT, ARMIS, INC.

Mr. Gumbel. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Menendez,
and Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity
to testify regarding our experience and perspectives on key
programs designed to protect our Nation's most critical assets.
As the leading asset intelligence security company, we share
the mission and passion with all of you to ensure the
protection and security of our Nation's critical assets. Many
legacy programs tend to focus on what's commonly known as
managed IT assets, but the growth beyond traditional managed
assets is absolutely staggering. Our submitted testimony has a
chart that highlights the explosion in what is referred to as
unmanaged assets, or IOT, the internet of things, also
operational technology, OT, and IOMT, which is medical
technology.
When we discuss critical infrastructure, we must talk about
and account for all unmanaged assets. We are encouraged by the
focus and resources this committee and key agencies like CISA
are putting toward building dynamic, resilient, and effective
cybersecurity frameworks. A few of these programs that exist
today, namely the CDM and EINSTEIN programs, have been in place
for several years but need updating considering the expanding
threat surface.
In the recent Executive Order on improving our Nation's
cybersecurity, there are references made to the Federal
Government partnering with private sector. This is a positive
development, and Armis looks forward to teaming with those
agencies who are most responsible for protecting our Federal
Government systems. The Executive Order states, incremental
improvements will not give us the security we need; instead,
the Federal Government needs to make bold changes and
significant investments in order to defend the vital
institutions that underpin the American way of life. It
mentions that the Federal Government must bring to bear the
full scope of its authorities and resources to protect and
secure its computer systems, whether they are cloud-based, on-
premise, or even hybrid. That the scope and protection of
security must include systems that process data, such as
information technology or IT, and that those that run the vital
machinery that ensure our safety, operational technology, or
OT.
The convergence of technologies and the discrepancies
between devices offers a more complex and challenging task than
the Federal Government has had to face just a few years ago. At
Armis, our growing customer base consists of almost 50 percent
of the Fortune 100, many large State and municipal governments,
airports, ports, defense contractors, and key Federal agencies.
These customers partner with us to achieve complete visibility
and intelligence for all assets within their converged
environments. Without such, we cannot be fully prepared for the
growth of today and the uncertainties of tomorrow.
As stated in CISA's Binding Operational Directive, B.O.D.
23-01, continuous and comprehensive asset visibility is a basic
precondition for any organization station to effectively manage
cybersecurity risk. This directive focuses on asset discovery
and vulnerability enumeration. To keep pace with technological
change and rapidly-evolving threat landscape and deliver upon
the letter and spirit of this Executive Order, bold change is
needed now. CISA should align the CDM program updates to
directives like B.O.D. 23-01 and should ensure that CDM
dashboard is reflective and inclusive of existing and
innovative technologies.
The Federal Government can no longer rely on legacy models,
contracts, or solutions. What has worked in the past simply
will not suffice now. Our adversaries are using automation to
move at the speed of now, as should we. Armis is committed to
working with CISA and other leading agencies to bring a
holistic and inclusive approach where more complete and
contextual cyber situational awareness and intelligence can
lead to a resilient and responsive security posture.
I want to thank you all again for the opportunity to engage
with the subcommittee. The resources of our entire organization
stand ready to assist in the honorable mission of protecting
our most critical national assets. I look forward to any
questions that you may have.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Gumbel follows:]
Prepared Statement of Brian Gumbel
September 19, 2023
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify and share our
perspective on civilian agency cybersecurity programs. I applaud the
committee's efforts in working to provide oversight and help improve
impactful programs such as Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM)
and Einstein. In accordance with a core function of the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework that highlights the need to go beyond merely
identifying devices but also understand the interdependence each asset
has with each other and their relative importance to business
objectives, we are honored to bring a contextual asset intelligence
platform to our customers, partners, and Federal agencies.
Armis is THE leading asset intelligence cybersecurity company. We
have been recognized by industry-leading analysts and publications as a
platform provider who brings a level of insight, awareness, and
actionable intelligence to our customers. Today it is important to not
only know what exists in your network and cloud infrastructure, but the
interdependencies and vulnerabilities within each asset. We are honored
to be under consideration to become a member of CISAs JCDC, sharing the
mission and passion with all of you in ensuring the protection and
security of our Nation's critical assets.
We are encouraged by the focus and resources this committee and key
agencies like CISA have put toward building dynamic, resilient, and an
effective cybersecurity framework in protecting these assets. On May
12, 2021, the Executive Order on Improving our Nation's Cybersecurity
states ``Incremental improvements will not give us the security we
need; instead, the Federal Government needs to make bold changes and
significant investments in order to defend the vital institutions that
underpin the American way of life . . . ''. It mentions that ``The
Federal Government must bring to bear the full scope of its authorities
and resources to protect and secure its computer systems, whether they
are cloud-based, on-premises, or hybrid.'' And that ``The scope of
protection and security must include systems that process data
(information technology (IT)) and those that run the vital machinery
that ensures our safety and national sovereignty (operational
technology (OT)).''
In the Armis State of Cyberwarfare and Trends report 2022/2023
where 6,021 IT security professionals where surveyed we found that 73
percent of IT professionals in the United States say their company has
experienced one or more cybersecurity breaches. Threat activity against
the global Armis customer base increased by 15 percent from September
to November 2022 with the largest threat activity coming from critical
infrastructure organizations followed by health care organizations as
compared with other industries.
Our job as the industry leader is to raise awareness and identify
areas in need of attention and improvement. Our experience has shown
that intrusions outside traditional IT ``managed devices'' have become
more prevalent. Programs and frameworks that in the past have been
primarily focused on these managed devices will be limited in their
ability to address the larger growing attack surface.
At Armis our comprehensive contextual intelligence engine includes
over 3 billion assets and growing and includes the entire spectrum of
IT/OT/IoT/IoMT assets. We bring a level of contextual asset
intelligence to our customers that introduces a holistic and responsive
platform to assist in their mission. Our public-sector customers
include several States, large city agencies, and cities and counties as
well as the following highlighted below:

An agency within HHS as well as numerous State agencies
leverages Armis for Asset visibility and intelligence through
integrations.

A large defense contractor leverages the Armis platform for
Asset Discovery, Intelligence, and Vulnerability Management

A DOD agency leverages our platform for Asset Management and
Security Workflow Remediation

Department of Energy leverages Armis to increase automated
identification and organization of the asset infrastructure
across an entire lab.
Our enterprise and commercial customers include Drug and
Manufacturing companies, Utility, Transportation, Aviation, and
Healthcare organizations, and many others.
Our mission is to help organizations understand where and what
exists in their environments and help put them in a position to
identify and manage vulnerabilities to respond rather than react to a
breach. You can't protect what you can't see and without addressing a
visibility gap, organizations cannot be fully prepared for the growth
of today and uncertainties of tomorrow.
We work with organizations throughout the globe to gain complete
visibility into their managed and unmanaged assets. A ``whole-of-
nation'' approach cannot be achieved without a complete view and deep
level of intelligence of both managed and unmanaged assets.
As you can see in the chart below, the growth and in our opinion
the growing attack surface introduce vulnerabilities heretofore unseen
and even unknown. The convergence of technologies and the dependencies
between devices has introduced a more complex and challenging task for
those who are responsible for securing critical assets and operational
environments.

As stated in CISA's Binding Operational Directive (B.O.D.) 23-01,
``Continuous and comprehensive asset visibility is a basic pre-
condition for any organization to effectively manage cybersecurity
risk.'' This directive focuses on Asset Discovery and Vulnerability
enumeration. Many agencies and enterprises are fortunate to have strong
endpoint technologies in place (EDR) and solutions that help protect
the perimeter, but the attack surface continues to grow and the
cybersecurity perimeter which was well-defined just a few years ago is
now dynamic and borderless. The introduction of unmanaged devices and
operational technologies present challenges that cannot be addressed
with legacy models and legacy technology. Present-day challenges and
national security threats are now implementing AI and automated
capabilities to identify the weakest link in the chain. Automated
threats from U.S. adversaries requires automation and scalability
delivering prioritization of cyber defense operators.
We applaud the activities toward the next-generation Einstein
program, Cyber Analytics and Data System (or CADS). According to CISA's
Eric Goldstein the system will integrate data from multiple sources,
including ``public and commercial data feeds; CISA's own sensors such
as Endpoint Detection and Response, Protective [Domain Name System],
and our Vulnerability Scanning service, which has thousands of enrolled
organizations across the country; and data shared by both public and
private partners,''.
Creating next generation programs are crucial and as our customers
would attest, knowing where every asset exists, what the profile of
that asset is, and whether it is aged, vulnerable, or compromised in
real-time will help to make the investment in next generation and
existing solutions more effective.
We are committed to continuing to work with CISA and other leading
agencies to bring a holistic and inclusive approach where more complete
and contextual asset awareness, contextual intelligence, and attack
surface definition can lead to increased resiliency and a responsive
cybersecurity posture.
Some important and consistent feedback we hear from existing and
former Federal CISOs, and CIOs includes the following:

``The focus should be on building modern security models, not
perimeter-based, and should acknowledge and focus on cloud, zero trust,
and IT/OT convergence.
``Many of the legacy models and contracts served us well in the past,
but a new approach and model is needed.''

These converged technologies deliver more efficiencies in the way
we work but they introduce new vulnerabilities and complexities that
legacy technologies are not built to identify, profile, or defend.
The ``bold changes'' highlighted in the E.O. call for a
collaborative and inclusive programmatic and procurement directive that
does not rely on legacy models, contracts, or solutions. What worked in
years past will not suffice. Our adversaries are actively trying to
exploit our visibility gaps, particularly in critical infrastructure.
Our approach should be engaging with new and innovative 21st Century
technologies. Lest we forget, bad actors are moving at the speed of now
as should we!
recommendations

Design and implement a procurement path that allows for more
expedient purchase and implementation of newer technologies
built to align with the growing attack vectors and surface.

Improve coordinating between programs like U.S. Digital
Services, the Technology Modernization Fund, and CISA to create
programs which enable agencies to quickly integrate and
maintain newer technologies and services into their framework
portfolios.

Fund the Technology Modernization Fund so that return on
investments can reliably cover both the simultaneous deployment
of new technology and the retirement of legacy services.

Align program updates to stated directives. For example, if
Directives state cloud-first and all assets, agencies should
have the ability to implement those solutions that are not
limited to a subset of technologies. Currently the CDM program
addresses only IT devices rather than the full spectrum of
connected risk: IT/OT/IoT/IoMT. BOD 23-01 focuses on Asset
Discovery and Vulnerability Enumeration. Requiring that the
full spectrum of converged and connected technologies be
inventoried and reported would give these programs more
alignment to stated administration and agency objectives.
Having only most of your roof covered in a storm won't prevent
water from entering!

The CDM program and dashboard should reflect all existing
and upcoming technologies that need integration vs. a limited
few to be effective.

We encourage continued strong support of the CDM program
with the appropriate measures taken to be more inclusive of
technologies that may not be part of the existing program.
Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with this committee.
The resources of our entire organization stand ready to assist in the
honorable mission of protecting our Nation's most critical assets.

Chairman Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Gumbel. Mr. Zakowicz, I
now recognize you for 5 minutes to summarize your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF STEPHEN ZAKOWICZ, VICE PRESIDENT, CGI FEDERAL,
INC.

Mr. Zakowicz. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Menendez,
and other distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection, thank you for the
opportunity to testify today. My name is Steve Zakowicz. I am a
vice president at CGI Federal, and for the past 4 years, I have
served as a project manager on CGI Federal's contract with the
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation, or CDM, program. At the
subcommittee's invitation, I'm here on behalf of CGI Federal
today to provide perspective on the achievements of CDM and its
path forward. Since 2016, CGI Federal has played an important
role in the CDM program, providing capabilities to
participating agencies through tailored solutions and a robust
shared services platform.
Our company is currently the system integrator on two CDM
Dynamic and Evolving Federal Enterprise Network Defense, or
DEFEND, contracts. The first provides tailored CDM solutions to
seven large Federal agencies: Departments of Commerce, Justice,
Labor, State, FCC, TVA, and USAID. The second provides a state-
of-the-art, cloud-based shared services platform currently
supporting 65 smaller and independent Federal organizations
leveraging those CDM capabilities.
CGI Federal has almost 300 skilled professionals and
specialized subcontractors supporting the CDM program today.
Given our experience in the CDM program, I would like to use my
opening remarks to highlight four points regarding the
program's success to date and suggestions to meet evolving
objectives.
First, civilian agency partners must be appropriately
resourced, funded, and committed for CDM to be successful. CISA
cannot do this alone. Congress can help to ensure civilian
agencies are approaching cyber preparedness with the
appropriate level of attention and investment. Also, funding
lapses or limitations stemming from uncertainties surrounding
shutdowns and continuing resolutions do impact CDM's continuity
and ability to carry forward new initiatives. Second, Executive
Order 14028 called Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity
enhanced CISA's ability to effectively perform its mission.
For example, authorizing CISA to engage in cyber hunt,
detection, and response activities through endpoint detection
and response, or EDR, solutions deployed via CDM. Congress
could bring stability to CISA's authority to perform these
critical activities by codifying appropriate authorities within
the Executive Order into law. I understand this is currently
under consideration by Congress in pending updates to the
Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, also
known as FISMA.
Third, emerging opportunities exist to leverage CDM
capabilities for State, local, Tribal, territorial, as well as
critical infrastructure entities by using this existing shared
service platforms and capabilities. The shared services
approach can provide these target-rich but resource-poor
stakeholders across the Nation the ability to leverage proven
capabilities in a cost-efficient way to defend against threats
they face, including nation-state actors and ransomware
attacks.
Fourth, the evolution of the CDM dashboard ecosystem is an
especially promising development. The dashboard has become the
first venue of consultation for a wide variety of users within
CISA's cybersecurity division, including threat hunt,
vulnerability management, and directives and guidance
organizations. The level of visibility across the Federal
enterprise provided through the dashboard, combined with agency
network visibility through EDR, has been a force multiplier and
is a terrific case study in the innovation and power of
combining data from multiple sources to accelerate progress.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm to the subcommittee
CGI Federal's continued and unwavering commitment to our
partnership with CISA on its core mission of strengthening
America's cybersecurity. Thank you. I look forward to your
questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Zakowicz follows:]
Prepared Statement of Stephen Zakowicz
September 19, 2023
introduction
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and other
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection, my name is Stephen Zakowicz. I am a vice
president at CGI Federal Inc. (``CGI Federal''). As a wholly-owned U.S.
operating subsidiary of CGI Inc. (``CGI''),\1\ CGI Federal and its
7,100 employees partner with Federal agencies to provide solutions for
homeland security, defense, civilian, health care, justice,
intelligence, and international affairs. During the last 4 years, I
have served as the project manager on CGI Federal's contract with the
Department of Homeland Security (``DHS'') Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (``CISA'') for the Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (``CDM'') Program. On behalf of CGI Federal
and its employees, I am pleased to submit this written testimony to the
subcommittee regarding the CDM Program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Founded in 1976, CGI is among the largest independent
information technology (``IT'') and business consulting services firms
in the world. With 90,250 consultants and professionals across the
globe, CGI delivers an end-to-end portfolio of capabilities from
strategic IT and business consulting to systems integration, managed IT
and business process services, and intellectual property solutions. CGI
works with clients through a local relationship model complemented by a
global delivery network that helps clients digitally transform their
organizations and accelerate results.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CDM is a mission-critical Federal program that provides
participating agencies with solutions and services to identify and
combat cybersecurity risk. Since its original contract award in 2016,
CGI Federal has provided this support to 100 participating agencies
through tailored solutions and a robust shared services platform. CGI
Federal is currently the prime contractor on two CDM Dynamic and
Evolving Federal Enterprise Network Defense (``DEFEND'') Task Orders--
DEFEND C and DEFEND F. Under its DEFEND C Task Order, CGI Federal
provides tailored CDM solutions to 7 large Federal agencies: Department
of Commerce (``DOC''), Department of Justice (``DOJ''), Department of
Labor (``DOL''), Department of State (``DOS''), Federal Communications
Commission (``FCC''), Tennessee Valley Authority (``TVA''), and United
States Agency for International Development (``USAID''). Under its
DEFEND F Task Order, CGI Federal developed a state-of-the-art cloud-
based Shared Services CDM platform, and currently operates and provides
access to that platform to 65 non-Chief Financial Officer Act (``CFO
Act'') Federal agencies. Roughly 300 CGI Federal employees and
subcontractors support the CDM program.
cdm: current program structure
As stated in the DHS fiscal year 2024 Congressional Budget
Justification for CISA, ``the CDM program provides the Department,
along with other Federal agencies, with capabilities and tools to
identify cybersecurity risks to agency networks on an ongoing basis. It
prioritizes these risks based on potential impacts and enables
cybersecurity personnel to mitigate the most significant problems first
. . . Furthermore, CDM enables CISA and agencies to proactively respond
to threats through the deployment of multiple different security
capabilities, including data protection technologies, Endpoint
Detection and Response (EDR), cloud security platforms, and network
security controls, and enables CISA to continually evaluate the
cybersecurity posture of [Federal Civilian and Executive branch
(``FCEB'')] systems and networks.''
As CISA describes on their public website, the CDM program is
structured to provide cybersecurity protections and capabilities in
four key areas:

The Asset Management (AM) capability is aimed at providing
agencies with a centralized overview of their network devices
and the risks associated with such devices. Asset Management
enables an agency to maintain and improve its cyber hygiene
through 5 capabilities: hardware asset management (HWAM),
software asset management (SWAM), configuration settings
management (CSM), vulnerability management (VUL), and
enterprise mobility management (EMM).

The Identity and Access Management (IDAM) capability is
intended to manage the access and privileges of agency network
users. Managing who is on the network requires the management
and control of account and access privileges, trust
determination for people granted access, credentials and
authentication, and security-related behavioral training.

The Network Settings Management (NSM) capability is designed
to provide agencies with greater visibility into what is
happening on their networks, which also gives them a better
understanding of how the networks are being protected.

The Data Protection Management (DPM) capability is intended
to provide additional protections to the most critical mission
data and systems on Federal civilian networks. While the other
CDM capabilities provide broader protections across Federal
networks, the DPM capability is focused on protecting sensitive
(especially private) data within the agency.
These capabilities are centrally managed and reported through the
CDM Dashboard Ecosystem, a cloud-based visualization and data analytics
layer that allows agencies and CISA to obtain a top-level view of
cybersecurity risk posture and access details regarding how individual
systems and endpoints contribute to that risk posture. This allows
agency personnel to quickly identify and address the highest risk
cybersecurity vulnerabilities first.
The current CDM program consists of 7 individual Task Orders to
provide consistent, prioritized CDM capabilities to FCEB agencies.
Those Task Orders are:

CDM DEFEND A: Providing CDM program requirements to DHS

CDM DEFEND B: Providing CDM program requirements to DOE,
DOI, DOT, OPM, USDA, and VA

CDM DEFEND C: Providing CDM program requirements to DOC,
DOJ, DOL, DOS, FCC, TVA, and USAID

CDM DEFEND D: Providing CDM program requirements to GSA,
HHS, NASA, SSA, and Treasury

CDM DEFEND E: Providing CDM program requirements to DOED,
EPA, FDIC, HUD, NRC, NSF, SBA, and SEC

CDM DEFEND F: Providing CDM program requirements to up to 75
small and medium FCEB agencies through a Shared Services
platform

Dashboard Ecosystem: Developing and hosting a common CDM
Dashboard platform on behalf of CISA to receive and consolidate
information from participating CDM DEFEND agencies.
cdm past and present
Since its inception in 2012, the CDM program has evolved to meet
the priorities and relative maturity of the FCEB cybersecurity risk
posture. When the CDM program began, it focused on implementing a
standard set of commercial solutions to meet CDM-identified technical
capabilities for enterprise visibility and protection. At that time,
the program implemented cybersecurity risk management across the FCEB
enterprise. Over time, however, the program recognized the need for
flexibility to accommodate unique requirements and differing maturity
levels from one agency to the next. Through CDM DEFEND, CISA addressed
that need, and built a model focused on long-term, sustained
engagement, delivering custom solutions tailored to each agency's
unique environments and cybersecurity needs.
Within the DEFEND model, CISA has further refined its approach to
delivering cybersecurity services. For example, CDM DEFEND activities
initially focused on delivering a single capability (e.g. Asset
Management or Identity and Access Management) to all participating
agencies. After deploying these foundational capabilities, CISA evolved
to deliver services based on agency readiness model. In advance of
agency engagement, CISA works with the agency to identify where program
priorities align with an agency's ability to implement and maintain a
specific capability. Using this readiness model, CISA validates that
both CISA and the agencies are adequately funded and have the resources
necessary to successfully deploy, operate, and maintain the
cybersecurity solutions.
The evolution of the CDM program is also driven by new regulations
and executive guidance. For example, Executive Order 14028 ``Improving
the Nation's Cybersecurity'' (the ``EO''), issued on May 12, 2021,
provides greater visibility to agency environments as it grants CISA
access to object-level cybersecurity data collected through CDM (see
Section 7(f)). The EO also authorizes CISA to engage in cyber hunt,
detection, and response activities through Endpoint Detection and
Response (``EDR'') solutions deployed through CDM. These EO
requirements grant CISA unprecedented visibility into agency network
environments to proactively identify and remediate threats and apply
observations in one agency environment across the FCEB enterprise.
Through the CDM program, CISA has gained critical visibility into
the cybersecurity posture across the entire FCEB enterprise and is
well-positioned to quickly identify, assess, and remediate potential
threats to agency network environments and, by extension, U.S. national
security. Specific accomplishments include the broad roll-out of EDR to
FCEB agencies and the onboarding of roughly 250 CISA threat hunters to
conduct analysis through EDR and CDM Dashboard Ecosystem solutions.
That access coupled with the availability of object-level data through
the Dashboard Ecosystem has been a ``force multiplier'' in providing
CISA the ability to identify, assess, and remediate anomalies across
the Federal enterprise network.
future of cdm
CISA continues to evolve its CDM program to meet the needs of its
stakeholders. Further, as CISA prepares for the next generation of CDM,
it has actively engaged with industry and identified likely future
priorities that include:

Issuing Task Orders based on CDM capability to be applied
across the entire FCEB community to promote consistency in
solutions across agencies.

Delivering CDM capabilities to State, local, Tribal,
territorial (SLTT), and critical infrastructure (CI)
stakeholders.

Expanding access to Shared Services across CDM capabilities.

Enhancing alignment and collaboration among CISA, FCEB
agencies, and the cybersecurity tool vendor community.
concluding observations
As a Federal contractor proudly supporting the CDM program, CGI
Federal offers the following observations for consideration:

Success of CDM's mission depends heavily on FCEB agencies
applying the resources and funding to invest in cyber
preparedness. Further, funding lapses or delays due to
government shutdowns or Continuing Resolutions impact program
continuity and ability to operate sustainably.

Executive Order 14028 ``Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity'' enhanced CISA's ability to effectively perform
its mission through, for example, authorizing CISA to engage in
cyber hunt, detection, and response activities through EDR
solutions deployed via CDM. Congress could ensure stability in
CISA's authority to perform these critical activities by
codifying these authorities into law.

CISA could enable SLTT and CI stakeholders to leverage
existing CDM shared service platforms and capabilities to
defend against cyber threats such as ransomware attacks. These
strategies would allow stakeholders to leverage valuable
capabilities in a cost-efficient way to defend against threats
such as ransomware attacks.

The use of the Dashboard Ecosystem and EDR as a ``first
venue of consultation'' for newly-identified critical
vulnerabilities or anomalous network activity by CISA
represents a force multiplier and a new era of centralized hunt
and response capabilities within the FCEB. These foundational
capabilities can be further leveraged in innovative ways to
improve our national security risk posture.
CGI Federal appreciates the critical nature of the CDM program, as
well as CISA's core mission. CGI Federal is proud to support CISA and
the CDM program in working to secure the Federal Government's networks
for citizens across the United States. CGI Federal also thanks the
subcommittee for its continued oversight to ensure the continued
success of the CDM program.

Chairman Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Zakowicz. Mr. Head, I
now recognize you for 5 minutes to summarize your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF JOE HEAD, CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER, INTRUSION

Mr. Head. Thanks so much. Pleasure to be here with you guys
today. We spent a lot of time, as do most I guess, on making
the submittal perfect and word crafting, but I think me reading
it is boring. So, what I'd like to do is just talk to a few
things that aren't on there that I think are important.
You mentioned the CRs. We've got one critical breach we've
been waiting on working for 4 years against the U.S. military,
and they were first under a CR. Then when they were not under
CR, they didn't have a budget. Then when they had a budget,
they were back under a CR again, and we haven't spent dime one
on anything yet.
So, when you start looking at major programs like you're
discussing today, it is a layup that they will continue
somehow. But when you have a reaction to a breach, God help
you. There's nobody coming. You can't get budget. You can't get
help. So, I would urge you guys, I've talked to Kay Granger
about doing some sort of cutout where you say, this percent of
your budget can be spent on a breach response. I would
encourage you guys to think of a way in law to accommodate
that.
If you look at the United States, all of us in the security
business would like to say it's good. But I remember there was
a comedian that says you go to a college and them bragging
about their smarts is like going to an ER and everybody
bragging about their health. The United States is not secure.
We suck at security. There's a new breach every 37 seconds. I
went to a meeting one time with the STRATCOM chief, and they
had all the chiefs of industry lined up at one end, and the
rest of us with little companies lined around the outside, and
basically said, we spend more on R&D every day than you guys in
revenue every year. We got it covered. Well, they don't.
So, what I would urge you guys to think through is, how can
you help the threat hunters do better? Then part of the thing
that you guys could do with the CISA meetings is ask the simple
question like a 4-year-old, if we do this, are we done? Are we
finished yet? So, when they finish the program, can you truly
say, every threat we have is fixed?
You know, if somebody decides they are going to roll up and
sink an aircraft carrier, we're going to unleash holy hell on
them. They don't think twice, they won't do it. But in cyber,
sure. Take down this, take down that, steal these secrets,
bankrupt the only supplier outside of China that can do a
thing. They do it with impunity. So, we need to get to the
point in cyber where people are scared to hit the enter button,
and they are not scared.
So, I would suggest that, you know, I'm not here because
I'm part of these programs. I'm here because I see how suck we
are at security as a Nation and as a world. The offenders have
asymmetry to their huge advantage. One guy in a room doing an
all-nighter come up with zero day that ain't nobody going to
see. I mean, I named my company Intrusion after intrusion
detection systems. My joke was all IDS systems are this helpful
system that hands you a Polaroid of the fist that just broke
your nose. I don't need that. Can you just give me a system
that stops the fist?
So, I think if we ask the questions better. We ought to be
asking, if I do this, am I done? Is my COM system undownable?
One big thing that I think we need to do in law and policy that
you guys could help a lot with is it's--I'm sorry, I'm Texan,
so, I don't know about PCness, but, you know, back when the
cowboys and the Indians were fighting, the Indians didn't make
guns, they didn't make bullets, and the outcome was certain.
They were screwed. You can't fight if you don't make the stuff.
Right now, there's no computer in any office here that wasn't
assembled in China. Everything they wanted on it was on it when
they shipped it.
So, when you start talking about being secure, gee,
sanitation starts early, you know, and we need to have a
cleaner environment to build things on. So, we don't make
routers in America, we don't make servers, we don't make
computers. We need to re-onshore some stuff.
I think there's room. If you read my testimony, I talked
about doing a cyber Manhattan Project and I think we should.
There's some of us here at the table, and we could name others
that should be on the group. It's not just a contractor loop.
There's some genius-level folks around the community that know
what to do, but they haven't been tasked to fix it. So, I'd
encourage you guys to stir that up a lot. So anyway, for the
non-ad hoc stuff, feel free to read what we wrote. Thanks for
letting us be here.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Head follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joe Head
Good morning, and thank you Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member
Swalwell, and distinguished Members of the subcommittee. My name is Joe
Head. I am the cofounder and chief technology officer of Intrusion--
proudly headquartered in Plano, Texas.
It is both a privilege and an honor for me to be here today,
sharing my technical expertise and insights, which I have accumulated
over four decades of immersion in the cutting-edge realms of the
cybersecurity industry. I wholeheartedly commend the dedicated
individuals on this subcommittee and their staff for their tireless
efforts. They understand the need to enhance the Federal Government's
cybersecurity capabilities but are also channeling their energies
toward advancing the mission of agencies like CISA, with a strong focus
on developing next-generation software and technologies that are
critical in the forthcoming cyber conflicts.
I began designing and providing secure networks and other security
solutions for the U.S. Government when Ronald Reagan was President. We
built equipment for the hotline from the White House to the Kremlin
during his second term. I co-founded my company Intrusion in 1983, just
3 years out of college and we've been a public company since the '90's.
I've had more fun designing and securing things than you should get
paid for. My goal today is to help the committee spur innovation in
security. The United States is not secure. There are some secure
networks, but very, very few. Complacency with the state of our
security is a serious risk. A relaxed defender is the most naive one.
Cyber offense is winning everywhere. A great challenge of our time is
to make defenders better able to defend. I have an old friend who liked
to say that he'd rather be lucky than smart. A network or system not
breached is not a matter of the defender being lucky or smart, it is
sadly that an attacker just isn't interested enough to focus on
breaching it.
As you read my opening remarks, keep in mind that an outline of the
Manhattan Project was not put in the Congressional Record before Los
Alamos was built. Our Government needs people with technical depth and
a winning mindset. My job is not to inform our enemies what we plan to
do to win the cyber war but to methodically ensure we take this domain.
We do know what to do. There are core experts both in Government and
industry that understand what winning would require and how to get
there. This path also includes how not to get there by spending
billions unwisely.
Today I too often see security plans and programs looking a lot
like children's soccer--a bunch of kids clustered around the ball. In
cyber, the kids are always automating the hottest buzzwords without a
grand plan to produce an absolute win. The challenge is to wisely
architect a plan, put the right people in charge of defining the
requirements, manage a design production, and reliably deploy a cyber
get-well plan.
We must have a get-well plan in cyber which gets silently built and
deployed, representing a master stroke in reversing the reality of our
current predicament. Adversaries all over the world are killing it in
cyber with massive asymmetry, winning and penetrating millions of
systems that we need to be trustworthy. Many are capable hackers
working inside adversary cyber operations or just as individuals on
their own.
It was in the 1990's while identifying a threat at an automotive
manufacturer that I realized we needed a better way to find the needle
in the haystack. I built a database to understand what the internet
looks like, who owns what, which areas were unsafe to visit. This
analytic engine has evolved into a mainstay of defense-in-depth
cybersecurity. By the early 2000's we built a tool to inspect and audit
internet travels. Today, we know what traffic is coming and going from
monitored systems, but more importantly how to stop threats from
impacting operations.
Now is a critical time for the U.S. Government, U.S. critical
infrastructure, and critical parts of U.S. industry. If the world was
awesome at cybersecurity, there wouldn't be a breach every 37 seconds.
The more you know, the worse it looks. Is it hopeless? No. Is there
reason to believe that the USG will naturally solve the problem? No.
But the entirety of the Nation faces continuous and advancing attacks
precisely because of U.S. commercial and Governmental successes, so the
USG must strategically cultivate protections.
As a student of history, we have seen dramatic examples of
innovation in the face of new threats. There were dramatic examples in
WW2 when foreign threats and war drove U.S. innovation to new heights.
Sadly, few programs in the cyber field are constructed to be game-
changers. Mostly they scale up and automate a few elements of a good
security approach but are not master strokes of a comprehensive
solution. In other words, when the projects are done you won't be truly
secure. Well-automated partial solutions don't make you secure, they
just delay risk and make companies poorer from the expenses. While we
must improve our baseline defensive posture to exponentially increase
the cost of attack, profit-motivated hackers, criminals, and
adversaries have already doubled-down on their attack investments with
extensive resourcing.
We already know that signature-based defenses fall in the face of
zero-days and basic offensive threats. Most defenses ignore attacks via
trusted sources like supply chains and security tools. The adversary is
operating faster than the decision cycle of defenders, hidden in the
vast noise of network traffic. Similarly, most budget requests and
coding projects are to scale up defenses that cannot see novel
compromises that have never been seen before, much less stop these
threats completely. We have the capability now to tell if the crown
jewels leave on a path headed for the shadows. With the advent of
machine learning, network tools have identified and blocked
untrustworthy sites, automatically guiding both people and devices to
avoid the untamed internet, or offering them a picture of the monster
rather than letting them directly reach out and touch it. But the
unknowns must also be stopped, which requires knowing what good looks
like.
Enemies are already exacting heavy costs on the United States with
cyber. Threats have been quietly planted into our infrastructure.
Today--our country is still too reliant on foreign factories and
vulnerable supply chains. The United States does not make the
computers, routers, switches, process controllers, dock cranes, pumps
for gasoline, car parts, cameras, medicines, chemicals, and many other
electronic things. But in cyber, it is much worse if your adversary
made all the computers used in critical infrastructure or weapons
systems. If your enemy left a back door or a designed-in a kill
switch--they might use it. True security requires covering the supply
chain threat as well as all other classes of threats like hackers and
the insider threat.
solutions
Why was I interested in testifying on this topic today? I believe
that there is a chance that the United States can re-achieve the needed
sense of urgency these threats require. Investments in critical
infrastructure, strengthening supply chains, and reshoring critical
manufacturing are all necessary investments for our security. We must
continue to be proactive in our approach to cybersecurity.
The allocation of over $400 million in funding for the transition
from Einstein to CADS is a significant level of funding. It is
imperative, however, that the CADS program design and implementation
are meticulously executed to deliver not only enterprise-wide system
monitoring and control but also the seamless handling of vast volumes
of data and information. Intelligent and actionable outputs must be
quickly and proficiently delivered to a broad audience. History has
shown that well-intentioned technological advancements can be hindered
by overly complex and convoluted designs, drowning users in a sea of
tools and unnecessary complexity. We must keep in mind that offensive
cyber operations can be cheap and flexible. Just like water can find
any hole in a ship, building, or computer system and cause massive
damage--a cyber attacker needs only to be creative enough to find or
create one hole to get in and defeat you with cyber. We must remove
those attacks from the shadows of the internet, cut through that
barrage of noise, and enable network defenders and analysts to discover
the anomalies in the trusted high ground, where the maturing U.S. cyber
workforce can collaborate to investigate without having resources
overwhelmed. We can start by identifying what good looks like. How
should safe software and devices behave? Knowing these profiles drives
proficient identification of threats.
Concurrently, we must remain vigilant against the pitfalls of
comprehensive coverage leading to comprehensive failure. Adversaries
will monitor our progress and respond. In the realms of design,
application, and deployment, we must consistently ask ourselves how to
intelligently and efficiently innovate new capabilities and approaches
into a far more effective solution. This ensures that our legacy
solutions, designed to address legacy problems on a massive scale, are
agile enough to perform effectively in real-world scenarios.
To achieve success, systems like CADS must work quickly, easily,
and reliably. That is difficult. Solutions need to respond immediately
to a threat, preventing outbound communications and impact to system
operations. The response should be simple and as automated as
possible--and not labor-intensive--overwhelming our already-taxed
defenders. Plans need to account for integration and sustainment at the
outset. And be agile enough to know that new things will need to be
included over time. Our systems need to be real-time, 24/7 without a
nagging string of alerts. A system that is both powered by quality and
comprehensive data.
Beyond the outside threats, the CADS system should support zero-
trust principles to mitigate and uncover compromises of accounts and
systems. Digitally this means understanding the following about a
system and its users:

Who are the users?

How do they behave?

What is their reputation?

Who have they been associating with?

What does normal activity look like for mission need?

What are the indicators of malicious intent?

What are common traits of targets for a particular attack?

How can targets reduce their exposure before being targeted?
Moreover, it's essential to examine how a relatively modest
investment in pioneering technologies and capabilities could
potentially revolutionize our cybersecurity approach. By allocating
funding to these ``moonshot'' endeavors, even in the order of a few
million dollars, we may uncover the next major breakthrough in cyber
defense, at a cost that pales in comparison to the budget required for
comprehensive systems like CADS.
We strongly recommend these flagship programs and agencies
acknowledge that without specific and targeted funding for strategic
research and development, we run the risk of neglecting the cyber
defenses necessary for the latter half of the 21st Century. DOD does
this with DARPA and other programs. That's one model, but any
substantial investment in major cyber defense programs, without
accompanying funding for innovative and transformative technologies,
could render these programs vulnerable. Much like the Maginot Line, an
unforeseen breach in an inadequately defended area could undermine the
entire defense system, rendering it futile and ineffective.
As I conclude my opening remarks, I would like to emphasize to the
committee that while the introduction of the CADS system seems to
represent a significant stride in the right direction, we must not let
complacency take root. We should actively seek ways to complement the
capabilities of CADS with innovative functions and useable systems that
align with our overarching mission of fortifying the U.S. cyber defense
posture. By doing so, we can ensure that our Nation remains at the
forefront of cybersecurity, prepared to confront the evolving
challenges of the digital age.
Just like the Manhattan Project would not have worked without a
core team of geniuses backed up with a massive support and
implementation program--now is as good a time as any to take charge.
Congress can wisely pass laws and fund efforts that guide the course of
this cyber conflict. We don't need to wait for our communications,
power, logistics, and critical infrastructure to be taken offline in
the lead-up to a conflict.
Spending tens of billions on the latest partial buzzwords isn't a
winning strategy, let's implement a winning cyber strategy on a tight
time line at an achievable budget. This path doesn't stop the kids'
soccer teams from doing what kids do with massive pieces of Federal
budgets, so let's carve out 5 percent for a cyber Manhattan Project
that surprises the world with a defensive cyber solution that came out
of nowhere and reversed the asymmetry of this conflict which we are
losing. Winning is better.
Thank you again Mr. Chairman and Mr. Ranking Member for inviting me
into this subcommittee's discussion today. I would be happy to answer
your questions.

Chairman Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Head. Mr. Sheldon, I now
recognize you for 5 minutes to summarize your opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF ROB SHELDON, SENIOR DIRECTOR, CROWDSTRIKE

Mr. Sheldon. Chairman Garbarino, Congressman Menendez,
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify today. Government functions are predicated on operable
information technology systems. Because these functions
underpin national security and other key services, Federal
cybersecurity is a topic of paramount importance.
CrowdStrike is a U.S. cybersecurity company with employees
in the United States and abroad. We are a provider of endpoint
security technologies, cyber threat intelligence, and
cybersecurity services to CISA and a host of other Federal
agencies. We are proud to be an alliance member of CISA's Joint
Cyber Defense Collaborative, JCDC. We also have unique
perspectives from being a leading commercial provider serving
major technology companies, 15 of the top 20 largest U.S.
banks, and thousands of small and medium-sized businesses.
Over the past several decades, the Federal IT landscape has
changed drastically. Beyond desktops and servers, we must now
defend cloud environments, mobile devices, internet of things
devices, and even specialized operation technologies. In
parallel, the volume and severity of cyber threats to Federal
systems is increasing.
Over the past few years, adversaries like China and Russia
have successfully breached the U.S. Government on multiple
occasions. In July, Chinese threat actors once again exploited
authentication flaws in a major software vendor's email and
office productivity platform, this time resulting in threat
actors' unauthorized access to the email of two Cabinet
Secretaries.
The Federal Government approach to cybersecurity is now
evolving. An initial major cybersecurity program launched in
2008, the National Cybersecurity Protection System, NCPS, and
its EINSTEIN capability focused on perimeter defense. But this
strategy has fallen out of favor as most enterprises no longer
even have a perimeter to defend. A complementary program,
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation, or CDM, was created in
2012. This program offered a flexible portfolio of technologies
to defend Federal networks. While CDM had a slow start, it has
accelerated meaningfully over the past year, thanks in part to
the addition of key endpoint detection and response, or DAR,
efforts.
This year, CISA officials announced the creation of two
associated programs, the Joint Collaborative Environment, JCE,
and the Cyber Analytics and Data System, CADS. CADS, in
particular, will be central for supporting a variety of new
data-intensive operational requirements. Among other things,
this includes implementation of the Cybersecurity Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Law, CIRCIA, passed last
year.
Beyond programs, Federal cyber policy has changed in recent
years to better address threats. Congress provided CISA the
authority to threat hunt across Government networks in the
fiscal year 2021 National Defense Authorization Act. The White
House issued Executive Order 14028 in May 2021. This initiated
key efforts for endpoint security, log retention, cloud
adoption, and incident response standardization. In 2022, the
Office of Management and Budget, pursuant to Executive Order
14028, issued a Federal Zero Trust Strategy that clarifies and
aligns Government efforts on implementing zero trust
principles. This year, the Office of the National Cyber
Director issued a new National Cybersecurity Strategy and an
associated implementation plan that provides a roadmap and
dates for several important cybersecurity initiatives.
I'd like to offer a few recommendations for Federal
cybersecurity going forward. New programs such as CADS must be
designed to enable flexibility and be built for scale. The
expanded use of cloud workloads, growing log retention needs,
and the use of artificial intelligence, or AI, each entail
extensive data processing requirements. As noted above, the
recent addition of EDR capabilities has strengthened CDM, but
when the time comes to modernize that program itself,
stakeholders should consider clear terms for long-term cost-
sharing and additional shared services approaches. The Federal
Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, FISMA, is of a
similar vintage as CDM and could benefit from reform. A bill
that aligns disparate Federal IT policies accrued over the past
10 years would improve cybersecurity outcomes.
Looking ahead there are a number of emerging technologies
that would further strengthen the Federal cybersecurity
posture. These include Extended Detection and Response, or XDR,
which enables integrated EDR like visibility and control to
cybersecurity products beyond the endpoint, identity threat
detection and response, which supports zero trust adoption
objectives, and expanded use of AI, which can enhance a broader
range of cybersecurity solutions, and managed security
services, which can enable high-fidelity commercial support to
distributed Federal security operations. Each of these is
described in more detail in my written statement. Thank you
again for the opportunity to testify today, and I look forward
to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Sheldon follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Sheldon
September 19, 2023
Chairman Garbarino, Congressman Menendez, Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today.
Materially all Federal Government functions are predicated on operable
information technology (IT) systems. Given that these functions include
the provision of key services that underpin national security and our
way of life, Federal cybersecurity is a topic of paramount importance.
CrowdStrike is a U.S. cybersecurity company, with employees across
the country and globally. We bring a unique perspective on Federal
cybersecurity issues. We are a provider of endpoint security
technologies, cyber threat intelligence, and cybersecurity services to
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and other
Federal agencies. We are proud to be an original plank holder of CISA's
Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC). We also have unique
perspectives from being a leading commercial provider serving major
technology companies, 15 of the top 20 largest U.S. banks, and
thousands of small and medium-sized businesses.
Over the past two decades, the Federal IT enterprise has swelled in
size and scope. No longer basic networks of desktops and servers,
Federal IT today includes cloud workloads, mobile devices, internet of
things (IoT) devices--and even specialized operational technology (OT).
In parallel, the volume and severity of cyber threats to Federal
systems has increased. Nation-state threat actors regularly seek--and
too often, succeed--in breaching Federal enterprises. Over the past few
years, major incidents have enabled adversaries like China and Russia
to collect sensitive intelligence. In July, Chinese threat actors once
again exploited authentication flaws in a major Federal vendor's office
productivity and email platform--this time resulting in threat actors'
unauthorized access to the email of two Cabinet Secretaries.\1\ Under
slightly different geopolitical conditions or adversarial objectives,
these incidents could have enabled scaled destructive attacks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ See Nakashima, Ellen. Menn, Joseph. Harris, Shane. Chinese
hackers breach email of Commerce Secretary Raimondo and State
Department officials. The Washington Post, July 14, 2023. https://
www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2023/07/12/microsoft-hack-
china/; and Results of Major Technical Investigations for Storm-0558
Key Acquisition, Microsoft, September 6, 2023. https://
msrc.microsoft.com/blog/2023/09/results-of-major-technical-
investigations-for-storm-0558-key-acquisition/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The evolution in the IT environment and worsening of the threat
landscape mean it's important to regularly review and assess the
efficacy of Federal cybersecurity measures--which include policies,
programs, and strategies.
a brief background on cisa's primary federal cybersecurity programs \2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ For brevity, I have not described broader Federal cybersecurity
initiatives like Trusted Internet Connection program (2007), the
Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (2009), FedRAMP (2011),
the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (2014), or the
Federal Information Technology Acquisition Reform Act (2014), but I
would like to acknowledge their contributions to the Federal
cybersecurity infrastructure that exists today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By the early 2000's, Federal IT infrastructure had grown
significantly. Cybersecurity protections were still fairly organic,
with different agencies adopting different approaches, dedicating
disparate resources, and achieving uneven outcomes. A significant
uptick in cyber attacks targeting national laboratories, major defense
industrial base entities, and the Federal Government agencies
themselves highlighted the need for greater investment and more
standardization.
National Cybersecurity Protection System (NCPS).\3\ Established in
2008, NCPS's goal was to protect Federal networks through a suite of
perimeter defense technologies called ``EINSTEIN,'' as well as an
associated analytic capability. Leveraging intrusion detection and
later intrusion prevention capabilities, EINSTEIN would attempt to
defeat threats prior to threat actors accessing sensitive systems, like
endpoints, or sensitive data. While the program clearly improved
Federal cybersecurity posture from the status quo ante, and the
associated analytic capabilities supported broader initiatives,
EINSTEIN itself was not ultimately well-suited to meet the full scope
of cyber threats to the ``.gov.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ See National Cybersecurity Protection System, CISA. https://
www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/programs/national-cybersecurity-
protection-system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Perimeter defenses are only one small part of cybersecurity. Two
concepts help explain why. The first is the assumption of breach. Elite
defenders have come to assume that threat actors can--and indeed,
already have--breached perimeter defenses. Whether through a supply
chain attack, malicious or unwitting insider, compromised identity, or
any number of other methods, attacks often sidestep perimeter security
measures and other defensive controls. Within this worldview, defenders
must operate accordingly.\4\ The second concept is defense in depth.
This practice essentially layers defensive technologies to provide
defenders multiple opportunities to detect and respond to threats. If a
threat actor is able to breach the perimeter, defenses at the network,
endpoint, and identity layers provide additional chances to stop them
before they can achieve their objectives.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ This assumption leads to the imperative to hunt, described
below.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
However useful EINSTEIN was at inception or at its peak efficacy,
its value has eroded over time. Mobile devices, remote work, cloud
applications, and other changes in the IT landscape have dissolved the
perimeter, even as the increased use of encryption has complicated
detection of malicious traffic at the perimeter layer. Further, threat
actors have become more adept in recent years at targeting endpoints,
users, and identities directly. As a result, the security community--
including Government agencies and the White House \5\--have embraced
concepts like Zero Trust, which essentially disavows the defensibility
of the perimeter. While it's reasonable to maintain perimeter defenses
as part of a layered security architecture for the ``.gov,'' it's also
reasonable to consider EINSTEIN a legacy technology and to focus
investments elsewhere.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ See Executive Order 14028, Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity, The White House. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-improving-the-
nations-cybersecurity/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Continuing Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM). By 2012, DHS had
established a complementary, broader program called CDM. Rather than
applying a uniform suite of protections across the ``.gov,'' CDM would
offer a flexible portfolio of technologies to defend Federal networks.
The program would deliver new capabilities in four phases: Asset
Management; Identity and Access Management; Network Security
Management; and Data Protection Management.\6\ A unifying requirement
for tools acquired under the program is the ability to offer visibility
through an integrated agency-level dashboard, as well as an aggregated
Federal-level dashboard.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ See CDM Program Overview, CISA. https://www.cisa.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/
2020%252009%252003_CDM%2520Program%2520Overview_Fact%2520Sheet.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite modest progress in early years, CISA officials report
rapidly-accelerating progress over the past few years. According to a
recent CISA blog, ``CDM is no longer a static effort to standardize
agency capabilities and collect cybersecurity information, but rather
the U.S. government's cornerstone for proactive, coordinated, and agile
cyber defense of the Federal enterprise.''\7\ The post further credits
Executive Order 14028 with strengthening the program's operational
visibility, which highlights the addition of the Endpoint Detection and
Response (EDR) program to CDM (explained in more detail, below).
Further progress is possible with the extension of EDR to cloud
workloads and mobile devices.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ See Evolving CDM to Transform Government Cybersecurity
Operations and Enable CISA's Approach to Interactive Cyber Defense,
CISA. July 23, 2023. https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/evolving-
cdm-transform-government-cybersecurity-operations-and-enable-cisas-
approach-interactive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
recent policy developments
While the current major Federal cybersecurity programs administered
by CISA are now 10-15 years old, Federal IT policy has accelerated.
Stakeholders have made significant progress in the past few years, best
illustrated by three key developments.
Threat-Hunting Authorities. A central insight from the influential,
bipartisan Cyberspace Solarium Commission Report of March 2020 was
recommendation 1.4, which highlighted the need for CISA to perform
continuous threat hunting across the ``.gov.''\8\ Pub. L. 116-283, the
fiscal year 2021 National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) Section 1705
granted CISA this authority, which positions the agency to act as the
operational defender of the Federal Government.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ See Cyberspace Solarium Commission Report, March 2020. https://
www.solarium.gov/report, p. 41.
\9\ See NDAA Enacts 25 Recommendations from the Bipartisan
Cyberspace Solarium Commission, Sen. Angus King, January 2, 2021.
https://www.king.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/ndaa-enacts-25-
recommendations-from-the-bipartisan-cyberspace-solarium-commission; and
The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2021, https://
www.Congress.gov/116/bills/hr6395/BILLS-116hr6395enr.pdf, p. 695.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Executive Order (E.O. 14028). The May 2021 Executive Order on
Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity advanced a suite of measures to
further bolster security of the ``.gov.'' Key among them were
requirements to:

Deploy Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) capabilities,
which among other things serve as the foundational enterprise
cybersecurity technology for threat hunting;

Implement Zero Trust Architectures, as well as generally
accelerate cloud and Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) utilization;

Standardize incident response practices; and

Maintain more robust and consistent logging, which supports
investigations and remediations.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ See Executive Order on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity,
The White House, May 12, 2021. https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-improving-the-
nations-cybersecurity/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Federal Zero Trust Strategy. In January 2022, fulfilling a
requirement from E.O. 14028, the White House Office of Management and
Budget (OMB) issued a strategy for implementing Zero Trust across the
``.gov.'' The memorandum identified specific outcomes and objectives
that agencies must achieve over the coming years. This strategy serves
a key roadmap that aligns industry and agency efforts over what will be
a complex, multi-year process.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ See Memorandum 22-09, Moving the U.S. Government Toward Zero
Trust Cybersecurity Principles, Executive Office of the President,
January 26, 2022. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/
01/M-22-09.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
forthcoming programmatic developments
Budget request documents released over the past year foreshadow
perhaps the most significant shift in the Federal cybersecurity program
space since the advent of CDM. Specifically, CISA is in the midst of
creating two new, closely-linked programs which will absorb elements of
NCPS.\12\ First, according to these documents, CISA will create a
program called the Joint Collaborative Environment (JCE). At a high-
level, JCE would split the NCPS program into two components. The first
is EINSTEIN capabilities (i.e., perimeter defense), which would be
maintained as legacy technology under JCE.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ This narrative draws on program descriptions within CISA
Budget Overview for Fiscal Year 2024 Congressional Justification.
https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2023-03/
CYBERSECURITY%20AND%20INFRASTRUCTURE%20SECURITY%20AGENCY.pdf. See also
CISA Strategic Plan fiscal year 2024-2026. https://www.cisa.gov/sites/
default/files/2023-08/FY2024-2026_Cybersecurity_Strategic_Plan.pdf. For
consistency, I have focused on characterizations from the President's
Budget Request rather than from more recent but yet-to-be-finalized
House and Senate Appropriations documents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The second component of JCE is much broader--and is itself a
meaningful new program--called Cyber Analytics and Data System (CADS).
A summary document for the fiscal year 2024 President's Budget Request
describes CADS as ``a system of systems[] that will provide a robust
and scalable analytic environment capable of integrating mission
visibility data sets and providing visualization tools and advanced
analytic capabilities to CISA's cyber operators.''\13\ CADS would
absorb the remaining analytic capabilities from the NCPS program, serve
as the hub for Cyber Incident Reporting for the Critical Infrastructure
Act of 2022 (CIRCIA) analytics, and support a number of other data-
intensive operational activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See Department of Homeland Security Fiscal Year 2024 Budget in
Brief. https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2023_03/
DHS%20FY%202024%20BUDGET%20IN%20- BRIEF%20%28BIB%29_Remediated.pdf, p.
4.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
next steps in federal cybersecurity
A core principle in cybersecurity is that the defender must have
visibility into security-relevant events of the systems they defend.
Today, this includes the endpoint, cloud, and identity planes in
addition to the traditional network. Although stakeholders have made
significant progress on Federal cybersecurity over the past few years
in enhancing this visibility and control, several points stand out as
next steps to further strengthen the security posture of the ``.gov.''
JCE and CADS implementation. Clearly, the JCE and CADS efforts
described above will require a significant investment of time and
resources. Federal cybersecurity programs historically have a long
``shelf-life,'' and strengths and weaknesses can both compound over
time. This underscores two key, future-oriented considerations:

It's important to design these programs to enable
flexibility. Changes in the IT or threat environment over time
may precipitate the need to reallocate resources between
program areas or initiatives.

CADS in particular should be built for scale. The processing
of data for cybersecurity purposes increased exponentially
during the transition from the legacy antivirus age to the
current EDR age. This trend could continue for some time,
particularly as cloud workloads swell, log retention
expectations increase, and adversaries and defenders alike seek
to leverage Artificial Intelligence (AI). CISA must build CADS
data processing capabilities that can perhaps double (or more)
year over year for the foreseeable future.
CDM modernization and sustainment. With the realignment in NCPS
described above, CDM will in a sense become the ``mature'' Government
cybersecurity program. This raises the question: at what point might
CDM itself need to be modernized? From an operational standpoint, the
EDR program has clearly breathed new life into CDM, so perhaps this is
a question that can be resolved in the future. Nevertheless, when the
time comes, stakeholders should consider two questions:

While some EDR technologies were available through CDM prior
to E.O. 14028, it ultimately required a mandate from the White
House to deploy this essential technology across the ``.gov.''
Cybersecurity professionals within CISA understood the
importance of EDR, and it was clear that EDR would support
CISA's hunting mandate. But CDM still works on the model of a
catalog. In the future, is there scope for CISA to more
proactively enforce the use of CDM technologies to fulfill its
mission?

Although, as noted above, EINSTEIN's operational
capabilities have aged poorly, the NCPS program's architecture
has aged like a fine wine. Specifically, it worked on a shared
services model, meaning agencies got the benefit of EINSTEIN
protections without complex budgeting or cost-sharing
processes. With respect to the CDM program and associated
funding, Federal CISOs still sometimes hesitate to acquire new
technologies, given a real or perceived uncertainty about cost-
sharing with CISA over time. In the future, is there scope to
adapt CDM, or elements thereof (e.g., EDR), to operate more
directly as a shared service, where CISA funds the program for
users directly?
Emerging cybersecurity capabilities. The cybersecurity industry is
evolving at an uncharacteristically rapid rate. So over the next few
years, the conversation within the Federal cybersecurity community will
shift to new priorities. A few emerging areas to monitor, and further
integrate into Federal defenses as appropriate, include:

Extended Detection and Response (XDR). Mature security
programs within the private sector are already augmenting EDR
to attain detection and response capabilities at other layers
of the enterprise security stack. XDR enables visibility and
control over network and identity (described below) data; the
aggregation of logs; and the integration of threat intelligence
within a unified workflow.

Identity Threat Detection and Response. As security
practitioners increasingly confront risks from IT ecosystem
monoculture specifically, and identity-based attacks generally,
there's greater interest in defending enterprises at the
identity layer. This emphasis comports nicely with broader
Federal Zero Trust adoption efforts.

Artificial Intelligence (AI). While the application of AI to
cybersecurity is not new, it is advancing. Although already
resident within leading endpoint security tools, multiple other
cybersecurity technologies will integrate AI and new AI-based
capabilities will emerge over the coming years. This will drive
speed, efficiency, and even make some tools more accessible
through the integration of a natural language interface.\14\ To
the extent possible, Federal cybersecurity executives should
view this opportunity holistically, consult broadly with
industry and academia, and engage in long-term planning.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See, for example, Charlotte AI: Accelerate Cybersecurity with
Generative AI Workflows CrowdStrike. https://www.crowdstrike.com/
products/charlotte-ai/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Managed Security Services. Enterprises--even very large
ones--increasingly leverage commercial managed security
solutions. Defenders should be prepared to respond to and
remediate cyber threats 24x7x365, and not all entities are able
to build programs that can match the agility of dedicated
commercial offerings. On the other hand, internal IT and
security staff, by virtue of their trust and familiarity with
the organization's mission space and constraints, are uniquely
positioned to develop processes, address risks, and otherwise
strengthen security maturity. So unburdening these internal
operators from tactical demands on their time pays enormous
dividends. This opportunity clearly applies in aspects of the
Federal IT ecosystem.
Thank you again for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.

Chairman Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Sheldon. Members will be
recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning. An additional round of questioning may be called
after all Members have been recognized. I really do appreciate
the participation, though, of my colleagues for being here
today. This is a dense topic, but it is a very important one.
So, I do appreciate you all being here, especially considering
CISA right now is under attack from some of our colleagues,
ranging from proposed defunding of salaries to up to a 25
percent cut of their budget, something that I think after
today's testimony from our witnesses, people will understand
how important CISA is and that the focus needs to be on
defense, especially when it comes to cybersecurity.
So, I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of opening
questions. Mr. Gumbel, for a long time, agencies have been
required to maintain asset inventories. The base layer of CDM
was meant to help this. You can't defend what you can't see.
But even with a requirement in FISMA and tools in CDM meant to
help identify and manage assets, agencies consistently struggle
to accurately and continuously maintain asset inventories. CISA
even put out a binding operational directive at the beginning
of this fiscal year, again directing agencies to better manage
their assets. What more can the CDM program do to help agencies
get this right?
Mr. Gumbel. Sure. Mr. Chairman, thank you for this
question. I think there's a lot that they can do to help get
this right. I think some of our recommendations are we need to
create a more transparent and collaborative technology
assessment process. We also need to, and I think we all can be
aware of this, that the procurement process within Federal
Government is not the easiest to get through, and it also
excludes some of the newer technology, cloud-based
technologies, and it's more leaning toward and geared toward
legacy technologies. So, I think improvements there within
procurement can absolutely help out.
There's also a lot that can be learned from the private
sector. The private sector has done incredible advancements
around cloud-based technologies, around end-to-end solutions
that offer full visibility into unmanaged devices. I submitted
in my written testimony a bar chart that showed the explosion
of unmanaged devices. Those devices, meaning the ones that you
can't see traditionally, IP cameras, HVAC systems, building
management systems, and printers, those things need to be
looked at when we are looking at securing the American public.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you very much. I have heard from
many companies that some of our best technologies are being
kept out because of the procurement process right now.
So, something we should work on. Mr. Zakowicz, NCPS has
traditionally structured as a true shared service with CISA
providing and covering the cost of operation. Whereas CISA
provides funding and tools for CDM for the first 2 years, with
agencies expected to carry on funding after that. Are there
changes that would help improve agency adoption of CDM tools?
What role does centralized funding play in that?
Mr. Zakowicz. Thank you for the question. As I mentioned in
my opening remarks, the funding associated with progress on CDM
is not just in the hands of CISA. It's also in the hands of the
agencies who have their own mission priorities and focus that
they need to balance against the priorities that CISA provides
and their own security. I think that one case study under the
CDM program that we've seen under the shared services model is
that unlike the 2-year funding model that you referenced, that
shared services model does provide those services in perpetuity
to those smaller agencies and organizations as long as they're
using that standardized set of capabilities that are provided
to those agencies.
That model is not going to work for the largest, most
complex federated agencies out there. They are going to have
their unique requirements that won't necessarily allow them to
take on a shared services approach. But there are a lot of
agencies that currently don't qualify for the shared services
program that could take advantage of those and that would allow
centralized funding. It would allow reduction in total
operating costs due to the purchasing power of that shared
services platform, and could ultimately provide some additional
benefit.
Chairman Garbarino. Are there risks introduced by moving
toward a true shared services model that increases
interdependencies and thus increases the potential for
cascading vulnerabilities across agencies?
Mr. Zakowicz. So, I think the risks associated with moving
to a shared services model generally, you know, come from an
agency perspective around the lack of control in the solution,
which can be a risk and a benefit depending on what your IT
resources look like. The current shared service model under CDM
provides multiple options of any given tool or capability, at
least two, so that agencies can pick which one is best suited
to their needs. Then it also provides additional watch
capabilities so that there's a central organization within CISA
keeping an eye on what alerts, what monitoring activities are
occurring under those tools, and provides a, you know, checks-
and-balances process to then notify those agencies when issues
are identified.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you. Mr. Head, as the head of
your company, both CDM and NCPS--he made me do that, by the
way--both CDM and NCPS are critical parts of Federal civilian
cyber defense. It seems to me that these two programs, which
ultimately are about visibility and continuous monitoring,
should work better together. How should CISA be thinking about
getting these programs to work better together?
Mr. Head. I think if we start with the basics of the roles
when we consider the options, you know, what data do I need to
see what I need to see? One of the panel members makes a
product that says here's your inventory all that stuff on your
network. I think we also need to look at role. One of the
things I like to look at is, you know, is your printer a bank
teller? Is your printer an engineer? If not, why is it
accessing customer records? So, when you start looking at
things that shouldn't happen the way they are happening, you've
got to answer the question, if I have a tool and I choose to
make it proactive and to block and, I mean, do we want to spend
our whole time analyzing or reporting on how we got eaten? Or
do we want to flip the tables and say, no, we stopped this cold
and they won't come after us again?
I think a piece of that is you got to do to them what they
just did to you. So, you know, we need to have some law changes
in terms of punitive damages as well as unleash the military
guys to have fun. So, whatever they do to us, we need to do
them 10 times until they quit. This is terrible.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you very much. I now recognize
Ranking Member Menendez for 5 minutes for any questions he may
have.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. Government funding is
set to expire in just 11 days, creating a dangerous risk of a
Government shutdown. Even in a best-case scenario where we keep
the Government open, we will have a continuing resolution with
no sign of a bipartisan full year appropriations bill in sight.
This question is for all of you. What do you see as the main
impacts a Government shutdown could have on the ability of CISA
to defend networks? We will start with you, Mr. Gumbel.
Mr. Gumbel. I think the shutdown will obviously cause
delays and some cyber projects will come to a halt. The longer
we delay, the longer the adversaries will have the chance to
get in front of us. So, delays are just terrible for this
Nation and it is going to cause some major impact.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you.
Mr. Zakowicz. Thanks. So, having done this for 4 years,
I've lived through a couple of, you know, Government shutdowns
and the impacts, I think really day-to-day operationally are
ones of continuity and ones of resource availability. So, what
are we able to do, what are we able to make progress on?
Ultimately, what tradeoffs are each one of those agencies
making as they're, you know, facing the questions of what, you
know, resources are they going to have left, how are they going
to keep the doors open? That does have an impact, not just on,
you know, that shutdown in the moment, but also continuity,
planning, and forward progress in some of these initiatives.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you. Mr. Head.
Mr. Head. As I mentioned before, the big programs under a
CR continue at the previous funding levels, or 80 percent. The
thing that just hits you the hardest is the new initiatives
just get stopped completely and we need a lot of innovation in
the cybers. So, I think you all need a way to fund during a CR,
especially new programs and reactive breach responses. That's
sadly lacking across the table and it is sort-of disheartening
to the guys that are burning 20-hour days to do the work across
all the agencies.
Mr. Menendez. Just to quickly follow up on that, you
mentioned the new initiatives. New initiatives are to match the
evolving threat environment, correct?
Mr. Head. Correct.
Mr. Menendez. So when we are not implementing that, we are
not only not keeping up, but we are falling behind in a
relatively quick fashion.
Mr. Head. Yes.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you. Mr. Sheldon.
Mr. Head. You can't start a new effort under a CR, but you
can continue an old one. This is all new. It's new every day
with a new breach, new zero day, new attack.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. Mr. Sheldon.
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you. You don't get to have good
cybersecurity outcomes if you don't have continuity in your
cybersecurity programs. The absence of funding could disrupt
that.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you. Mr. Gumbel, just to come back to
you to sort-of follow up on the point Mr. Head just made. How
would a year-long continuing resolution that locks in last
year's budget impact the ability of CISA to innovate to match
the current threat environment?
Mr. Gumbel. I'm sorry. Could you repeat that?
Mr. Menendez. Sure. How would a year-long continuing
resolution that locks in last year's budget impact the ability
of CISA to innovate to match the current threat environment?
Mr. Gumbel. My view is that we need to obviously match what
CISA is doing in order to progress some of the changes in the
systems that we're looking to put forth. So, I think it is a
big concern.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you. The current CDM program monitors
traditional IT assets across Federal agencies. However, the
attack surface is growing to include internet of things,
devices, and threats to operational technology. As CDM
continues to modernize, including all assets will be an
important part of the program's maturation. Mr. Gumbel, can you
elaborate on why you think including internet of things and
operational technology assets in the CDM program is so
important?
Mr. Gumbel. The reason why it's so important is that only
10 percent of networks have managed devices on them. The other
90 percent are unmanaged devices. As you mentioned, Mr.
Chairman, you can't protect what you can't see. All of these
other devices are out there and they are invisible unless
there's modern technology, there's cloud-based technologies,
and there's ways in which you can view these assets. Without
being able to view these assets, these are vectors for the
adversaries to be able to get in and to be able to compromise
our environments.
Mr. Menendez. Great.
Mr. Gumbel. So, it's a real big threat.
Mr. Menendez. A quick follow-up to that you mentioned you
can't protect what you can't see. How should CISA go about
expanding its visibility into those devices?
Mr. Gumbel. I think how they go about it is to allow modern
companies to be able to bid when there's new contracts that
come out. I think they have to evolve from legacy companies
that have on premise solutions, allow cloud-based technologies
to come in and provide a holistic view. I think the other thing
that they can do is start looking at commonality between
different leadership groups within organizations. Right now,
you have some groups that you have just visibility into OT or
IT. You have some that are focused just on IOT. There needs to
be a conversion to leadership across all Federal agencies so
that there's a holistic view of what's being managed and what's
being unmanaged.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. Probably all of us on this
subcommittee have had local governments in our district hit by
ransomware attacks and other cyber incidents that have denied
constituents access to vital Government services. One way to
help State and local governments is to provide them expanded
access to CDM services. We will ask you to keep this brief
because I am over. Mr. Zakowicz and Mr. Sheldon, how should
CISA enable expanded CDM shared services to State and local
governments?
Mr. Zakowicz. I think they've got a good blueprint to
follow in the shared services capability they've already
offered to the Federal entities. As you can imagine, the cyber
maturity of agencies across our FCEB can, in a lot of ways,
mirror the relative maturity of State and local critical
infrastructure stakeholders where some are very well-resourced
and others are not. So, I think there's a lot of learnings from
that rollout of shared services that could be directly applied
to State, local, Tribal, territorial, and critical
infrastructure.
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you. There are some lessons for sure
that State and local entities can take from Federal Government
programs like CDM. There are also, frankly, some lessons that
the Federal Government can take from State and local entities
that kind of more organically operate on shared services models
in some instances.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you.
Chairman Garbarino. I now recognize the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Gimenez, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Head, I was
listening to your testimony, and it struck me, were you saying
basically that the United States' cybersecurity efforts are
mainly, if not exclusively, defensive in nature?
Mr. Head. I would say that we are reactive defensive in
that we are not taking actions to stop it before it happens.
You know, and I think, there's, obviously, there's a difference
between the offensive side and the defensive side. So, the
military guys have offensive capabilities that they hold in
reserve and that'll work independent. But my comment was more
on the side of don't just wait until something happens and
develop a process to know about it and report it sooner. Work
on the technologies that stop the attack in the first place.
Mr. Gimenez. But I think you also said that our
cybersecurity threats, they kind-of operate with impunity. They
know that nothing's ever going to happen to them.
Mr. Head. Correct.
Mr. Gimenez. Which means that they are not afraid of any
offensive capability that their target may possess.
Mr. Head. That's correct.
Mr. Gimenez. Is that because is it illegal for us or a
company to conduct offensive----
Mr. Head. I think there's----
Mr. Gimenez [continuing]. Or retaliatory operations against
somebody who just attacked their network, et cetera, or what is
that?
Mr. Head. I think there's many levels to that. I've been
asked several times about, should we take off the gloves and
let people that are hit, hit back? I'm not a big fan of that
approach because you could end up starting a nuclear war just
by, you know, doing something crazy. So, I don't think we want
to go vigilante, but I do think we need better clarity.
When I first started looking at this a decade ago, we had a
guy that had a bunch of documents stolen, and he put scripts in
his documents so that when they got to wherever they were going
to, they would call him and let him know where they ended up.
They arrested him for operating shell scripts on a computer
without permission. That's crazy. So, being able to trace. We
need to clarify----
Mr. Gimenez. Was that illegal?
Mr. Head. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. It was illegal.
Mr. Head. He didn't have permission from the guy that
attacked him to run scripts on the attacker's computer. So, he
included executable files in what was stolen, and he was
arrested for that. So, there's a little bit of crack-smoking
that goes on in the legal world that we need to fix.
Mr. Gimenez. All right. So, somebody attacked him.
Mr. Head. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. And he put something in there to make sure
that he could find out who it was that attacked him?
Mr. Head. Correct. They arrested him.
Mr. Gimenez. Then the person that attacked him said, hey,
you couldn't do that to me even though I attacked you first,
and therefore, the guy that was attacked was the one ultimately
jailed?
Mr. Head. Yes.
Mr. Gimenez. That sounds logical.
Mr. Head. You don't have to look far for comedy in the
cyber space. But I'm just saying, you know, you guys are really
good about--a lot of us that have been in the defensive world
forever we try to figure out how to operate within the laws and
make it better. The reason I'm here is it suddenly dawned on
me, a year or so, just change the law. Let's get rid of the
crazy. It helps.
Mr. Gimenez. I guess that is what I was trying to get to,
that there may be laws that are actually hindering our ability
to defend ourselves and maybe, look, I have no problem hitting
back every once in a while, OK?
Mr. Head. Absolutely.
Mr. Gimenez. All right. Because then you should have as an
attacker, you need to be fearful of what could happen to you,
depending on who you attacked. I mean, can you imagine if we
had after Pearl Harbor, we just said, well, I guess we will
just wait for the next attack, OK. We are not going to take any
offensive capabilities. Or in Europe, well, you know, we are
just going to stay here in England, and we were not going to do
D-Day because, you know, we are just going to defend ourselves.
I don't think you could win too many wars that way. So, I find
that very interesting.
I don't know who can answer this, but artificial
intelligence. If somebody can put out a crystal, you know, get
a crystal ball and say, OK, what will artificial intelligence
do in this realm, offensively and defensively? What do you all
see?
Mr. Sheldon. I could take a stab at that. Thank you, sir.
So, artificial intelligence has made a lot of news recently
because there's greater access to some consumer products that
make LLMs, especially large language models, available for
experimentation. But really, artificial intelligence and
cybersecurity is not all that new.
My company, for example, has had artificial intelligence
and machine learning embedded in it at scale, deployed out
across tens of millions of endpoints for the better part of 10
years. That really drives some of our ability to identify and
stop even very novel threats, attacks that haven't been seen
before. So, there's a lot of ways in which defenders already
are using AI and that is poised to continue as AI gets
integrated into other product areas. So, it is a very exciting
time from the standpoint of what the defenders are able to do.
On the other hand, it's also the case that adversaries and
different threat actors are experimenting with large language
models and other forms of AI. It's something that us in the
defense community need to look out for. It may be the case that
there's some more developments in that over the next coming
months because there are broader access to some of these tools
now than there have been over some time. So, it's something
that merits watching.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. I guess my time is up. I yield
back.
Chairman Garbarino. The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Carter, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you all for
being here. In 2021, President Biden issued Executive Order
14028, which imposed a host of new mandates on agencies to
strengthen the Federal Government's cybersecurity. One positive
result of this order was a deployment of endpoint detection and
response technologies across Federal agencies as a part of the
CDM program. With that Executive Order now already 2 years old,
the technological environment continues to evolve with advances
that constantly test our defenses. For all of the witnesses, as
we seek to constantly evolve the CDM program to stay ahead of
our adversaries, what technologies and cyber defense practices
do you think are most urgently needed to be deployed at Federal
agencies based on today's ever-moving threat?
Mr. Gumbel. Thank you, Congressman. For Armis, we view the
only way for pure protection across all agencies is ubiquity
and that view to have 100 percent visibility into all assets.
Whether those assets be IT OT, IOT, or IOMT, it is critical
that you have visibility into the unmanaged devices within an
environment in order to provide that holistic view. Otherwise,
you're at risk of adversaries getting one step ahead of the
game and being able to infiltrate a network.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Zakowicz. I agree with the answer. I would say at least
with my experience on the CDM program, that yes, historically
the focus has been on IT-managed assets. They have done some
work associated with operational technology, mobile assets,
cloud assets, and I think that needs to be prioritized and
accelerated to be able to get that complete view that my
colleague's referencing.
Mr. Head. I think one aspect that is worth saying is when
you look at endpoint protection, there's some really good
stuff. We use theirs and love it. But what you want to do is
instrument a network in such a way that how do you know when
you've been blindsided. So, I think, you know, if you look at
IOT devices, there's not going to be endpoint software, you
know, on a watch, or on a firmware device, or a lot of IOT
things, door alarms, so on. So, you're going to have to have
network-based things that look to see if those are acting in
ways they shouldn't.
So, you want a layered defense. People talk about that all
the time, but when it comes to implementing it, we do sort-of
light beer when you're ready for full-bodied. So, we need to
really look at a more defense-in-depth with a lot more
visibility.
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you. I'd say there's still some progress
that can be made within the EDR program itself by way of
deploying it out to cloud environments, mobile devices, and the
like, just to make sure that you have the same level of
visibility control on those types of assets. Then beyond that,
really thinking about a concept that the industry calls
extended detection and response, which is the same idea of
bringing that visibility and control out to other parts of the
network security stack. So, making sure that you can get
integrated workflows with data not just from the endpoint but
also from the network, or from the perimeter, or being able to
integrate logs, being able to integrate threat intelligence and
similar things then giving people more coherent set of a
control plain for being able to do the work that they do from a
defensive standpoint.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Sheldon, in your earlier testimony you
discussed the need for CISA's proposed cyber analytics and data
systems to be built to scale. I agree on the need to ensure
that CADS has the capacity to process significant increases in
data we can expect CISA to receive in the upcoming years. How
can CISA ensure that it deploys the new program in a way that
is flexible enough to handle future demands?
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you, Congressman. This, I think, is
probably one of the more interesting questions that CISA has to
grapple with today. I think an interesting stress test for
whatever plans they've developed for the CADS program is to
think about, you know, would this work if we needed to--
whatever our sort-of best guess is, or our assumption about how
much data we need to be able to process in that environment,
would it be able to handle twice that, and then would it be
able to handle twice that again? Doing some of those sort-of
stress tests would, I think, position them well to understand
whether they're developing architectures that can scale to the
level that they will need to if they are doing more types of
data-intensive programs across the Federal Government.
For our case, we have 2 trillion events per day or more
that we stream up to our cloud. So that's the type of big data
that----
Mr. Carter. I got 3 seconds. Let me just cut you off a
second. I want to ask Mr. Gumbel, given where we are and the
threat as they evolve, and the pace at which technology is
moving, if you had a silver bullet that you can use with this
committee or with Federal Government, what would that be to
make sure that we are staying abreast and ahead of the bad
actors?
Mr. Gumbel. I want to repeat this again, but I do believe
the silver bullet is to have end-to-end security for visibility
for all of your assets. That's the only way to get full
visibility and protection across your enterprise. To take a
step further, is once you can identify those assets, understand
where those vulnerabilities lie, and then take action upon
those vulnerabilities to protect your environment holistically.
Mr. Carter. How complex is it to do that and how long does
it take?
Mr. Gumbel. It is not that complex at all. We have
organizations that, at scale, have rolled out tens of millions
of endpoints in weeks. This is something that we can partner
with the Federal Government to achieve.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Garbarino. The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5 minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Gumbel, I would like
to pick up right where we left off there. You have given us
some very useful information today about our general status at
this point that we have done a lot of work on endpoint
detection, but as the attack surface continues to grow, so do
our defenses and our preparation need to evolve. I am
interested in what capabilities we need to be integrating into
CADS to improve analytics and increase visibility, as you have
been testifying about. Specifically, do we need to pay
particular attention to the concept of encrypted communication?
Are we capturing that now? Is there anything we need to be
doing in that space?
Mr. Gumbel. Sure. So, that was a lot to unpack. But I
believe that, Congresswoman, the thing that we still need to do
once you have the holistic view of an entire environment, you
have to look at other vectors too. You bring up encryption,
encryption is definitely of utmost importance and making sure
that the encryption standards that the Federal Government holds
across all agencies are kept up to date.
You also have to make sure that you're looking at legacy
providers and technologies that have been built 10, 20 years
ago. Are they really up-to-date? Are they really current today
if they are not modern in their approach? Because the
adversaries are going to come forth with something new and they
are going to bypass and get past those networks that are being
defended today by legacy contracts. So, I think all of that
needs to be taken into consideration.
Ms. Lee. OK. Mr. Zakowicz, you indicated earlier on the
subject of hunt and incident response through CDM that you
thought we might need to look at changes in Congressional
authority in order to be really utilizing that as part of our
approach. Would you tell us a little bit more about that?
Mr. Zakowicz. Sure. Thank you. So, there were two
authorities granted within the Executive Order that I think
were directly relevant to the CDM program's ability to gain
insight and access into agency network environments like they
hadn't been able to before. The first was associated with
endpoint detection and response, or EDR, hunt and response
activities. It's being done through an initiative granting
threat hunters access to agency EDR tooling through what's
called persistent access or pack capabilities. So, that's given
them an opportunity to be able to look in those agency
environments real time, directly using tools like CrowdStrike
and others to understand what's happening in that space.
Then the second is access to what's called object-level
data. So, within the agencies, the detailed information on
every endpoint that's being collected and rolled up and
aggregated into this CDM dashboard having direct access to that
object-level data allows them to within minutes search across
the Federal enterprise for the presence of, let's say, zero-day
vulnerability or known exploitative vulnerability. Identify the
potentially vulnerable assets within an agency environment
across the FCEB, and then use EDR in partnership with the
agency to go further, interrogate that asset and understand
what the risk profile really looks like. I think CISA's seen
some success with that combination of capabilities with even
recent breaches, being able to identify in minutes what may
have taken hours or days or longer through data calls.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Head, I would like to hear from you on what
capabilities you think CISA should be including in the CADS
program to help improve analytics and visibility.
Mr. Head. If you look at the detail that I've seen, you
know, publicly, they had things like DNS and signatures in
there, but they didn't have flow. I think it is really
important to be able to see flow in terms of oversight
guidance. There's also the notion of how do you know who
somebody is? So, on a network, a lot of the privacy concerns
have led manufacturers into anonymizing the Mac addresses so
that you don't know what the device is anymore. So certainly on
Federal Government agency networks, you need to know what
things are and they shouldn't be able to do anonymization and
hide their activities.
The other piece I would also mention is you get into the
details of things like you ask about encryption. The purpose of
encryption is to keep somebody from stealing your stuff. But if
you're in the business of stealing stuff, encryption is hiding
what you're stealing. So, the answer isn't to give everybody
the keys, the answer is encompass in your logging what file
moved from his machine to my machine. You shouldn't have your
audit system be more prone to invasion and privacy concerns
than your original network was. So, we can do things like MD5,
all of the files as they flow, and say this file was the
unreleased this and you sent it to him, why? So, I think it's
possible to build an audit system without breaking the world,
but it doesn't do just to start let's opine about things that
are impossible. Let's write down methodically things that are
easy and very effective.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Head. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you. The gentlelady yields back.
I think since everyone is here, I am going to start my second
round of questions. I want to start with Mr. Zakowicz. Amidst
an increasingly complex threat landscape, technology
innovations of the last decade and recommendations for
improvements from the GAO and industry stakeholders, the CDM
program must evolve to keep pace with the threat and improve
Federal cyber defense. Do you envision any gaps in authorities
needed to allow CISA to continue to strengthen the Federal
Government's information infrastructure?
Mr. Zakowicz. Thank you for the question. I think we've
already covered a couple of specific authorities that I think
would be beneficial to be codified in order for CISA to
continue the mission that they have. I think we've also touched
a little bit on I think there was reference in one of the
opening statements to CISA's authority to actually conduct
testing and verification in agency environments, to run, you
know, penetration testing or network testing activities within
the individual agency environments. While I'd say personally, I
think that, you know, with the responsibility resting with the
agencies themselves, that's something that would need careful
consideration. I do think continuing to take a look at how
actively they are able to engage with agency networks, agency
environments, would be worthwhile to understand if that gives
them the authorities they need.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you very much for that answer.
EDR has been rolled out through the CDM program after it was
acquired in the May 2021 Cyber EO. A few years ago, CISA was
given an authority to proactively hunt for threats on agency
networks. Mr. Sheldon, in your testimony you discussed the
opportunities for EDR to inform CISA's threat hunting
capabilities. How can CISA better leverage EDR data to improve
threat hunt efforts?
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, I think CISA is
really far ahead of where they were a couple of years ago by
virtue of the authorities that I mentioned that were given to
them in Section 1705 of the fiscal year 2021 NDAA and then by
virtue of having this now-very powerful EDR capability deployed
out across many, many Federal agencies. I think the core task
now is to ensure that, is it the case that every endpoint that
can be protected with that type of capability is. It may be
possible for them to think about extending it more over cloud
environments and mobile devices, as I mentioned before. Then to
think through the next set of problems, which is again,
thinking about bringing that same type of control to other
parts of the network and then really creating a unified
workflow for their analysts to be able to do something
productive with that very quickly when there's a threat.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you very much. Mr. Head,
following up on your response to Ms. Lee before, how can AI be
more incorporated into these programs, particularly, as CISA
looks to evolve NCPS?
Mr. Head. I think in lots of ways. Whenever you're drowning
in a sea of big data, like you mentioned, trillions, all of us
deal with, you know, tens of trillions of events, you know, on
a periodic basis and just slugging through all that with humans
just doesn't scale well. So, we all see that as our salvation
for doing a thorough job across broad spectrum of assets that
need protecting.
I think zooming up a little bit, there's also big data that
needs to come to bear outside the--remember the old game where
you had to draw lines, three rows of three dots, and you drew
your lines? I think a lot of times we are focusing in the box
instead of outside. So inside, we are not spending much time to
do surveys of what isn't covered and in that you can drive a
sinking country through. So, I think we need to kind-of look at
what are we missing as a paid research project for somebody.
Chairman Garbarino. I am not sure how often we think
outside the box when it comes to the Government. I only have a
little time left. But I said at the beginning of this hearing,
we are doing this to talk about the two programs, NCPS and CDM.
And we are going to have Government witnesses, one from CISA,
someone from somewhere else. This is for all of you and feel
free to jump in. What should we be asking them at the next
hearing when we have them in front of us specifically about
these programs? We can start with Mr. Gumbel, and we can move
down the aisle if you want.
Mr. Gumbel. I think one of the biggest questions, Mr.
Chairman, is ask them have they looked at modern technologies
or are they only focusing on the contracts that they have with
legacy providers that have built technologies 20 years ago?
Those technologies that are either on premise, they're not
cloud first, there are older ways in their thinking in the way
that they protect networks and connect infrastructures. So, I'd
say that would be the first thing that I would ask.
Chairman Garbarino. Mr. Zakowicz.
Mr. Zakowicz. Thank you. So, I would suggest focusing on,
you know, across our national security, our economic security,
where are the threats? Because I think they certainly exist
within the Federal Executive branch, but they also exist
outside of the Federal Executive branch. I think as CISA looks
at applying their resources, their time, their focus, you know,
is it internal to Federal? Is it external to State, local,
Tribal, critical infrastructure? Where do we get the most
benefit in our improving our security's posture?
Chairman Garbarino. Thanks. Mr. Head.
Mr. Head. I'd ask about how will they map what they're
doing to the threat landscape? So, how are you going to stop
these things with what you're doing? That gets down to the next
level into what are you logging? What are you keeping? What can
you see? What can you not see? When do you plan on doing that?
You know, I've joked that, you know, there used to be a cartoon
with the cat and the mouse, and the mouse would run through the
garden hose and there'd be a big lump that was mouse size
running through the hose. We don't see our secrets leaving out
our ethernet cables like watermelons flowing. So, I think just
the simple visibility of have they stolen us blind? Do we have
any national secrets left? You know, the cables don't get hot
and glow and melt, you know, as they're stealing our stuff. So,
I'd look at CISA's programs and say, what are you doing that'll
let us see an OPM breach instantly instead of finding it a year
later? I found that one myself, you know, looking at data. So,
the question is, how is what you're doing going to help that?
Chairman Garbarino. Mr. Sheldon.
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you. I think it's worth asking CISA if
they've seen incidents or other issues on Federal networks that
would be protected by technologies that exist within the CDM
portfolio and the agency in question hadn't used those
technologies than to just try and interrogate where was the
disconnect? So, I think some of us have spoken about this
today. It may be the case that there's an opportunity to
clarify some of the longer-term funding for some of the CDM
projects and to make that more consistent and then to really
shift that program so it's operating more on that shared
service type of basis that you had with NCPS and EINSTEIN. That
may resolve some of the issues. There could be others, but it'd
be interesting to hear about it.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you very much. I now recognize
Mr. Menendez for 5 minutes for any questions he may have.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. Thanks to progress made
by the Biden administration and support from Congress, CDM has
made important strides in recent years and has helped CISA more
quickly respond to cyber incidents. Mr. Sheldon and Mr. Gumbel,
are there recent examples you are aware of where CDM has helped
CISA with incident response or the mitigation of
vulnerabilities? What aspects of CDM have been most helpful
with strengthening Federal cybersecurity? We will start with
you, Mr. Gumbel.
Mr. Gumbel. I'd actually really like to take this one for
the record and get back to you with a thorough answer because
I'm currently not aware of anything that's been that beneficial
that I could speak to.
Mr. Menendez. I respect that.
Mr. Gumbel. OK.
[The information follows:]

In response to Ranking Member Menendez's question about examples of
where the CDM program has been most beneficial and helped response and
mitigation of cyber incidents, we submit the following:
CDM has brought value to small and micro agencies and driven the
implementation of new technologies into Federal IT programs. Agencies
are better equipped to manage privileged accounts because of the
identity efforts leading to more resilient and secure critical citizen
services. EDR deployments likewise have been largely successful.
However, our overall assessment of the core CDM efforts is not
positive. Many of the original goals of CDM have been achieved and much
of the deployment is secondary rather than integrated to agency
operations.
The CDM program however relies on a legacy model and approach, and
it is our hope that a more open, full-industry approach can help CISA
achieve its original CDM mission of: Reducing agency threat surface,
increasing visibility into the Federal cybersecurity posture, improving
Federal cybersecurity response capabilities, and Streamlining Federal
Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) reporting.

Mr. Menendez. Mr. Sheldon.
Mr. Sheldon. I'll just say briefly that it's sometimes the
case that, you know, even we as vendors don't get perfect
visibility on how, you know, how particular investigations have
unfolded. There may be some good reasons for that from an
operational security standpoint, just, you know, people in CISA
who are working on different projects, issues, responding to
incidents, they'll be in touch from time to time.
The part about this that I do think is helpful and is
clarifying is reporting that we will ultimately get from the
CSRB, the Cyber Safety Review Board, and they've announced an
investigation recently where they were going to look at the
July breach of the Microsoft 365 platform that led to the
ability of Chinese threat actors to read the email of two
Cabinet Secretaries. It'll be interesting to get ultimately a
reconciled view from different vendors, from Government
agencies that have responded, and from other people out in the
security research community about what precisely happened.
That's a very useful thing for people to know so that we can
learn and integrate lessons as appropriate.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate it. I just want to give you both
a chance on the second part. What aspects of CDM have been most
helpful with strengthening Federal cybersecurity? If you'd like
to respond.
Mr. Sheldon. I'm sorry, could you say that again?
Mr. Menendez. Sure. What aspects of CDM have been most
helpful with strengthening Federal cybersecurity?
Mr. Sheldon. I think we've all mentioned EDR and
highlighted that. So, at the risk of beating a dead horse,
obviously it's a powerful capability. I think the design of CDM
was to make available a portfolio of technologies so that if
particular Government agencies had very specific needs, there
might be something there that would be able to meet that need.
So, it may well differ from agency to agency about what, on top
of something like EDR, drives the most value.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate it. One challenge for Federal
agencies is that many rely on outdated technology that is
harder to secure. In recent years, Congress has tried to
address this challenge by funding the Technology Modernization
Fund, which supports efforts to update agency technology. This
year, the Appropriations Committee has advanced legislation
that would eliminate funding for the program. Mr. Gumbel, why
is funding for the Technology Modernization Fund important for
strengthening Federal cybersecurity?
Mr. Gumbel. I think it's very important to be able to fund
those projects so it enhances and continues the progress of
securing the Nation. Without this continuous funding, there
might not be the opportunity to look at modern technologies in
ways that could protect the Federal Government. Any type of
funding slowdown will halt any progress and the adversaries
have the opportunity to just speed up time and be able to come
after any of the exposures or links into networks that aren't
protected.
Mr. Menendez. You said any slowdown, correct?
Mr. Gumbel. Any slowdown.
Mr. Menendez. Yes. Following up on that, what kind of
investment should be prioritized when looking to upgrade
Federal agencies technology? Do you have any specific examples
of more investments?
Mr. Gumbel. Yes, I think the biggest message is don't
always look at Government examples to upgrade your technology,
look to private sector. Private sector has done in a lot of
areas, has done very well in keeping their technologies modern.
There's a lot of great use cases that the private sector is
using to protect their products, to protect their customers,
and to protect their IP. I think the Federal Government can
learn a lot from that.
Mr. Menendez. Within private sector, are there any
industries that you feel are leading or ahead of the curve that
we should potentially pay extra care to?
Mr. Gumbel. Sure, sure. I think, you know, manufacturing is
one, the financial services is another. Some industries that
have a lot of operational technology machinery, oil, and gas, I
think those are areas to look at as well.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
yield back.
Chairman Garbarino. The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Ezell, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Guys, about 40-plus
years ago, I went to work at the police department in my
hometown. What I remember the chief and the administrators at
the time talking about was bad communication. Mr. Head, when
you were talking there a few minutes ago, it just reminded me
of my early life in police service. People don't normally want
to call the police unless they got a problem or something's
going on. We show up, we respond. When you talked about the
aircraft carrier come under attack and what we would do in
response to that. I would like to know, and each of you jump in
there, what we can do as a Congress to better hold some of
these folks accountable for not getting the communication to
the proper place so that we can say, why is this happening? Why
can we not do something about it? Who can we hold accountable
for these things? Anybody?
Mr. Gumbel. Sure. I'll start off. I believe that there's an
opportunity for Congress to look at some of these contracts to
bridge some of the gaps of disparity. I will point to something
for an example, B.O.D. 23-01 requires agencies to report on all
assets connected to their networks. But however, CDM, this
program explicitly excludes IOT, OT, and other managed
technology. So, you have two different programs with two
different views. This is just an example of areas or contracts
that have this disparity. I think Congress can really help
bridge the gap to make sure that everything's on the same
playing field.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you. Mr. Head, could you talk just a
little bit more about some of your concerns that you were
speaking about in your opening statement?
Mr. Head. Sure. Reflecting on what you just asked about,
one thing I've tried to understand a little bit is when someone
reports a breach, FAA for a long time--I'm a pilot just for
fun--and for a while there, if you had a near-miss, you report
the near-miss and you're excused from losing your license over
your participation in that. In the cyber space, it is not
usually apparent when you report a thing whether they're going
to get you for allowing it to happen or give you a Ferrari for
finding it and stopping it. So, we haven't really got the risk/
reward down for how do you elicit insightful cooperation and
insightful response within and without the organizations? I
think there's a large jurisdictional--I can't say that--contest
between who's supposed to help you.
Mr. Ezell. Yes.
Mr. Head. So that would certainly be helpful.
Mr. Ezell. It is kind-of like in police world, if you have
a problem and you don't know who to call, what do you do,
you're stuck. So, I think that, you know, we as committee
Members and you as very concerned folks, we have got to do a
better job on our end. We have got to be able to have some very
frank conversations because this is not going to stop. There
are these bad actors in the world and they want our stuff. Like
you were saying, you know, what have we got left that they
don't have? So anyway, I want to thank you all for being here
today. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Garbarino. The gentleman yields back. I now
recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for her second
round of questions.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Head, I would like to
come back to you. You mentioned something in your opening
statement and in your written testimony that you refer to as
our Cyber Manhattan Project. Would you please share with us a
little bit more about your vision there and how you think that
would look?
Mr. Head. Sure. That was the hardest part about writing it
because when they started the real Manhattan Project, they
didn't put it on public record and put it on C-Span, hey, we're
just looking to build a bomb and nuke you. You know, shoot
these guys because they are our lead scientists. So, I think
what we should do is think about some percentage of our budget.
In Texas, I think it was Lady Bird Johnson forever ago that put
in the thing for 2 percent of all highway funds will be spent
on plants and trees and beautification. We spend a lot of
money. I describe it in the testimony that a lot of the cyber
efforts remind me of your kids playing 5-year-old soccer. They
are all just huddled around the ball chasing the latest
buzzwords. At the end of the day, they are not a team and they
didn't accomplish anything. That's kind-of prefaced by the we
suck at cyber as a country.
Although there's some really good folks in the industry and
I think all of us put together in a quiet time would say, let's
just fix it. Like the two buzzards' patience, hell, let's kill
something. You know, so I think there's room in the oversight
process to say to DISA, to DARPA, to somebody, gee, you're in
charge of making this suck less every month.
You know, and then there's been some rapid progress made in
a lot of fronts, particularly after go back to World War II.
But I think, you know, the measure of pissed-offness ought to
be higher than it is for us getting attacked every day and
doing nothing.
So, I think I would challenge that back to you guys. This
is like I told today coming and testifying with you guys,
nothing against it, but on my list of top 10 things to do, it's
3,742nd.
But I think now the time is right for doing something and I
think that the brains are right for doing something. So, I'd
just love to see let's do something that's not ordinary. At the
end of the day, we can say, that was bad, we fixed it.
Ms. Lee. On that point, you also just referenced the
concept of risk/reward.
Mr. Head. Yes.
Ms. Lee. Who is working with us? What are they reporting?
When and how are they reporting it? I know I previously worked
at an agency that implemented a bug bounty program----
Mr. Head. Right.
Ms. Lee [continuing]. To that end, so that in hopes that
some of the good guys might help us identify issues that we had
prior to the bad guys finding them. What are your thoughts on
that type of solution or any other ideas you have to help us
properly incentivize risk/reward?
Mr. Head. Plenty. I would start, though, with removing the
stupid. So, I was looking at one a few years ago that Congress
funded and the Pentagon implemented, and it was basically free
service for defense contractors. So, you could basically rent
this dog that will come in and bite you and your children. So,
anything they find, you're on the hook for paying the full cost
of remediation, which could bankrupt you.
So, the rightful answer would be don't ask, don't invite,
don't participate, because you're renting a dog that could hurt
you. Does that make sense?
Ms. Lee. It does.
Mr. Head. Because we're going against formidable
adversaries and most people don't have the staff to play that
game. Like I say, comedy abounds when you look at the rules
that we put in place. But I think a reason to pass through all
of those to say let's remove the worst first.
Ms. Lee. All right. Mr. Sheldon, and I will ask each of you
this preparing to come here today and the things that you think
we need to have top of mind and we need to be working on, is
there anything you haven't had the chance to tell us about
today that you think we should know?
Mr. Sheldon. Thank you for the opportunity. Really, just to
drive more focus in the Federal space. So many of the attacks
that we see, they don't involve malware, they don't involve
classic indicators of compromise that we can block through
existing solutions. It is really a compromised credential or
something to that effect that might cause the breach.
So, there are some solutions in place and some
architectures that try to address that. Zero trust is one of
them. That's something that I would encourage all of us as a
community to think more about. How do we promote the adoption
of that type of solution in the Federal space?
Ms. Lee. Mr. Head.
Mr. Head. I think I've talked too much and told you most of
my ideas, so.
Ms. Lee. Pass.
Mr. Head. Thank you.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Zakowicz.
Mr. Zakowicz. Thank you. I was going to echo my colleague
from CrowdStrike, and I'm impressed we went this long before
saying zero trust for the hearing. But I think identity is an
area we haven't spent much time talking about in this forum but
is critically important to understand who is actually on the
network.
What are they doing? How do we make sure that people only
have access to the things they need to get their job done?
Ms. Lee. Fundamentally zero trust type of thinking?
Mr. Zakowicz. Correct, yes. One of the fundamental pillars
of zero trust is identity, and I think that is one that needs
the most focus first.
Ms. Lee. Access control.
Mr. Zakowicz. Yes.
Ms. Lee. OK. Mr. Gumbel, what about you?
Mr. Gumbel. Yes. I'd say last because I've said a lot
today, but I think ensure that procurements and programs are
aligned to stated administrative, Executive Orders, and agency
BODs. I think that's super important.
Ms. Lee. All right. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Garbarino. Thank you very much. I really want to
thank the valuable testimony from our witnesses today. Mr.
Head, I am glad that the 3,741 other things on your list
weren't available to you today. I want to thank the Members for
their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for all of you, and we would ask the witnesses to
respond in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the
hearing record will be held open for 10 days. Without
objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:25 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
