- AN OUTAGE STRIKES: ASSESSING THE GLOB- AL IMPACT OF CROWDSTRIKE'S FAULTY SOFTWARE UPDATE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

AN OUTAGE STRIKES: ASSESSING THE GLOBAL
IMPACT OF CROWDSTRIKE'S FAULTY  SOFT-
WARE UPDATE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION
__________

SEPTEMBER 24, 2024
__________

Serial No. 118-81
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

60-030 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2025

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Eric Swalwell, California
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           J. Luis Correa, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
August Pfluger, Texas                Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Nick LaLota, New York                Robert Garcia, California
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Timothy M. Kennedy, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              LaMonica McIver, New Jersey
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     LaMonica McIver, New Jersey
officio)                           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Eric Swalwell, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Mark E. Green, MD, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security..............................................     6
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witness

Mr. Adam Meyers, Senior Vice President, Counter Adversary
Operations, Crowdstrike:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green, MD for Adam Meyers........    37
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Adam Meyers......    38

AN OUTAGE STRIKES: ASSESSING THE GLOB-
AL  IMPACT  OF  CROWDSTRIKE'S  FAULTY
SOFTWARE UPDATE

----------

Wednesday, September 24, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:29 p.m. in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Andrew R.
Garbarino (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Garbarino, Gimenez, Ezell, Lee,
Luttrell, Green (ex officio), Carter, Swalwell, and Menendez.
Also present: Representatives Gonzales and Timmons.
Mr. Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the global IT
outage that occurred on July 19 as a result of a faulty
software update released by CrowdStrike. Members will seek to
gain detailed insights into how the faulty software update was
developed, deployed, and what errors lead to the wide-spread
global disruption. We will discuss the extent of this outage
and how it impacted many key sectors of the economy.
We will also examine how malicious cyber actors have
leveraged the global IT outage to conduct malicious activity,
including phishing attempts.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement. Just over
2 months ago many essential functions came to a grinding halt.
Hospitals saw disruptions in their medical systems, thousands
of flights were grounded or canceled world-wide, banks
experienced down time and transaction processing, and U.S.
Federal Government agencies were temporarily unable to assess
certain data.
Shortly after detection we learned that this global IT
outage, regarded as the largest in history, was not due to a
malicious cyber attack but instead a faulty software update
pushed out by CrowdStrike.
According to a company statement, a sensor configuration
update triggered a logic error, leading to system crashes and
an inability to properly reboot and ultimately the blue screen
of death appearing on impacted systems world-wide.
CrowdStrike software updates are essential for addressing
vulnerabilities, enhancing threat detection, and ensuring that
cybersecurity infrastructure of its customers remains robust as
a cyber threat landscape rapidly evolves. Most importantly,
given CrowdStrike's value as a resource across the greater
cyber ecosystem, these updates are meant to build customer
confidence and trust.
We are here today to get answers for our constituents, what
went wrong, what was required in response and what we have
learned for the future of our Nation's cybersecurity posture.
The sheer scale of this error was alarming.
If a routine update could cause this level of disruption,
just imagine what a skilled, determined nation-state actor
could do. We cannot lose sight of how this incident factors
into the broader threat environment. Without question, our
adversaries have assessed our response, recovery, and true
level of resilience. However, our enemies are not just nation-
states with advanced cyber capabilities. They include a range
of malicious cyber actors who often thrive in the uncertainty
and confusion that arrives during large-scale IT outages.
For example, CISA issued a public statement noting that it
had observed threat actors taking advantage of this incident
for phishing and other malicious activity. So it is clear that
this outage created an advantageous environment ripe for
exploitation by malicious cyber actors.
We are joined today by Mr. Adam Meyers who serves as a
senior vice president for Counter Adversary Operations at
CrowdStrike. Mr. Meyers, I look forward to hearing from your
testimony about how a faulty software update was pushed out
globally, what CrowdStrike has learned from this event to
prevent future outages and how CrowdStrike is working to
rebuild trust.
I would also like to discuss the impact this global outage
has had on our Nation's various critical infrastructure
sectors, what CrowdStrike--what support CrowdStrike has
provided to those who were disrupted, and how the company has
addressed certain malicious cyber actors who have attempted to
take advantage of the global outage. Mr. Meyers, thank you for
being here with us today. I look forward to a productive
discussion.
[The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]

Statement of Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino

September 24, 2024

Just over 2 months ago, many essential functions came to a grinding
halt. Hospitals saw disruptions in their medical systems, thousands of
flights were grounded or canceled world-wide, banks experienced down
time in transaction processing, and U.S. Federal Government agencies
were temporarily unable to access certain data.
Shortly after detection, we learned that this global IT outage--
regarded as the largest in history--was not due to a malicious cyber
attack but instead a faulty software update pushed out by CrowdStrike.
According to a company statement, a sensor configuration update
triggered a logic error, leading to system crashes, an inability to
properly reboot, and ultimately the ``blue screen of death'' appearing
on impacted systems world-wide.
CrowdStrike's software updates are essential for addressing
vulnerabilities, enhancing threat detection, and ensuring that the
cybersecurity infrastructure of its customers remains robust as the
cyber threat landscape rapidly evolves.
Most importantly, given CrowdStrike's value as a resource across
the greater cyber ecosystem, these updates are meant to build customer
confidence and trust.
We are here today to get answers for our constituents: what went
wrong, what was required in response, and what we have learned for the
future of our Nation's cybersecurity posture.
The sheer scale of this error was alarming. If a routine update
could cause this level of disruption, just imagine what a skilled and
determined nation-state actor could do.
We cannot lose sight of how this incident factors into the broader
threat environment. Without question, our adversaries have assessed our
response, recovery, and true level of resilience.
However, our enemies are not just nation-states with advanced cyber
capabilities. They include a range of malicious cyber actors who often
thrive in the uncertainty and confusion that arise during large-scale
IT outages. For example, CISA issued a public statement noting that it
had ``observed threat actors taking advantage of this incident for
phishing and other malicious activity.''
So, it is clear that this outage created an advantageous
environment ripe for exploitation by malicious cyber actors.
We are joined today by Mr. Adam Meyers, who serves as the senior
vice president of counter adversary operations at CrowdStrike.
Mr. Meyers, I look forward to hearing your testimony about how a
faulty software update was pushed out globally, what CrowdStrike has
learned from this event to prevent future outages, and how CrowdStrike
is working to rebuild trust.
I would also like to discuss the impact this global outage has had
on our Nation's various critical infrastructure sectors, what support
CrowdStrike has provided to those who were disrupted, and how the
company has addressed certain malicious cyber actors who have attempted
to take advantage of the global outage.
Mr. Meyers, thank you for being here with us today. I look forward
to a productive discussion.

Mr. Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Swalwell for his opening
statement.
Mr. Swalwell. I thank the Chairman. I thank you for
convening us here today. Bottom line is, you know, we need
CrowdStrike to be effective and successful because its
effectiveness and its success is the success of the companies
that it protects. So I appreciate CrowdStrike also being a part
of this hearing on the global IT outage that occurred over the
summer.
While we're not here today to malign CrowdStrike and I
don't think you're going see that, you're going to see an
obligation to get to the bottom of the circumstances and
failures that enabled one content update to crash the operating
system of 8.5 million devices world-wide. The impacts were as
diverse as CrowdStrike's customer base: flights were grounded,
surgeries were canceled, 9-1-1 systems were disrupted, and
stores had to close. Parametric, an insurance company,
estimated that 25 percent of fortune 500 companies were
affected and that the incident cost $5.4 billion in losses.
Last year, for the third year in the row, CrowdStrike
ranked No. 1 for endpoint security market share, with 17.7
percent of the market and $8.6 billion endpoint security
dollars in that market. With a marketshare that size,
CrowdStrike must ensure its product adequately balances the
need for access in an operating system, against the risks that
that access poses. It must consider the lessons learned from
this incident as we move forward. With the exceptional level of
access that CrowdStrike has within a customer's operating
system, CrowdStrike has an obligation to employ rigorous
quality assurance process for any updates it releases, even if
it is P-Code. We are here to determine if any of these things
happened before the July 19 outage.
I appreciate CrowdStrike's commitment to ensuring its
customers are protected against the most novel threats, but
speed cannot come at the cost of operability. At the end of day
even the best security product on the market won't do any good
if it bricks a customer's operating system. This is not the
first time this has happened to a company. It is going to
happen; it will happen again.
In 2007, a different security firm released a faulty update
that resulted in the dreaded blue screen of death. In the
aftermath the company undertook a thorough review of what went
wrong and ultimately implemented a series of changes to both
its product, architecture, and the processes it uses to roll
out updates. That's the process we want it see happen here.
Notably, it developed a mechanism to automatically roll
back an operating system to a working state when an error is
detected, began releasing updates incrementally, and removed
code from the operating system kernel. As we discuss the July
19 outage, I will be interested in whether CrowdStrike
considered the 2007 incident as it defined its own processes
for testing and releasing updates or defining the level of
kernel access it needs it operate. For the record, this is not
the first time this Congress that we have had to ask a
technology company why it failed to integrate lessons from an
incident at a competitor company into its own security
practices.
Earlier this year the committee held a hearing on
Cybersafety Review Board report that found that a 2023
compromise of Microsoft Exchange on-line could have been
prevented had it adopted the security controls its competitors
implemented following similar incidents that occurred nearly 15
years prior.
We get better when companies cooperate. Because Microsoft
came to that hearing and worked with us and CISA and because
CrowdStrike is here today and is working with us and CISA, we
will get better. One of our goals is to ensure that we stop
relearning yesterday's lessons so we can more proactively
defend against the threats that we will face in the future.
Toward that end, I was pleased that earlier this month
Microsoft unveiled and convened the Windows Endpoint Security
Ecosystem Summit which brought together a diverse group of
security firms that discuss issues that range from safe
deployment practices, to providing additional security
capabilities outside of kernel mode.
Today, I hope to get a better understanding of the
tradeoffs between kernel access and risks to the operating
system and learn how we can better manage risks. I'm also
pleased that last week I had the opportunity to speak with
CrowdStrike CEO George Kurtz. He assured me of the company's
commitment to making sure nothing like the July 19 incident
happens again and shared updates on the actions CrowdStrike has
already taken to address some of the key deficiencies that had
contributed to it.
Again, Mr. Chairman, I appreciate you holding this hearing
and I look forward to seeing what constructive lessons we can
learn.
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Swalwell follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Eric Swalwell

September 24, 2025

I would like to thank Chairman Garbarino for holding today's
hearing on the global IT outage that occurred over the summer because
of a faulty update by CrowdStrike.
While we are not here today to malign CrowdStrike, we have an
obligation to get to the bottom of the circumstances and failures that
enabled one content update to crash the operating system of 8.5 million
devices world-wide.
The impacts were as diverse as CrowdStrike's customer base: flights
were grounded, surgeries were canceled, 9-1-1 dispatch systems were
disrupted, and stores had to close.
Parametrix, an insurance company, estimated that 25 percent of
Fortune 500 companies were affected and that the incident caused $5.4
billion in losses.
Last year, for the third year in a row, CrowdStrike ranked No. 1
for Endpoint Security market share, with 17.7 percent of the $8.6
billion Endpoint Security Market.
With a market share that size, CrowdStrike must ensure that its
product adequately balances the need for access in an operating system
against the risks that access poses, and it must consider the lessons
learned from similarly-situated security firms as it does so.
And with the exceptional level of access it has within a customer's
operating system, CrowdStrike has an obligation to employ rigorous
quality assurance processes for any updates it releases--even if it is
P-code. Neither of those things seemed to happen before the July 19
outage.
I appreciate CrowdStrike's commitment to ensuring its customers are
protected against the most novel threats, but speed cannot come at the
cost of operability.
At the end of the day, even the best security product on the market
won't do any good if it bricks a customer's operating system.
In 2007, a different security firm--Symantec--released a faulty
update that also resulted in the dreaded ``Blue Screen of Death.''
In the aftermath, the company undertook a thorough review of what
went wrong, and ultimately implemented a series of changes to both its
product architecture and the processes it uses to roll out updates.
Notably, it developed a mechanism to automatically roll back an
operating system to a working state when an error is detected, began
releasing updates incrementally, and removed code from the operating
system kernel.
As we discuss the July 19 outage today, I will be interested in
whether CrowdStrike considered the 2007 Symantec incident as it defined
its own processes for testing and releasing updates or defining the
level of kernel access it needs to operate.
For the record, this is not the first time this Congress that we
have had to ask a technology company why it failed to integrate lessons
learned from an incident at a competitor company into its own security
practices.
Earlier this year, the committee held a hearing on a Cyber Safety
Review Board report that found that a 2023 compromise of Microsoft
Exchange Online mailboxes could have been prevented had it adopted the
security controls its competitors implemented following similar
incidents that occurred nearly 15 years prior.
One of our goals today is to ensure that we stop re-learning
yesterday's lessons so we can more proactively defend against the
threats we will face in the future.
Toward that end, I was pleased that earlier this month Microsoft
convened the Windows Endpoint Security Ecosystem Summit, which brought
together a diverse group of security firms to discuss issues ranging
from Safe Deployment Practices to providing additional security
capabilities outside of kernel mode.
Today, I hope to get a better understanding of the tradeoffs
between kernel access and risks to the operating system and learn how
we can better manage any risks.
I was also pleased to have the opportunity to speak with
CrowdStrike's CEO George Kurtz last week.
He assured me of the company's commitment to making sure nothing
like the July 19 outage ever happens again, and he shared updates on
the actions CrowdStrike has already taken to address some of the key
deficiencies that contributed to it.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ranking Member Swalwell.
I now recognize the Chairman of the full committee, a
gentleman from Tennessee, Dr. Mark Green, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman Garbarino and Ranking Member
Swalwell for your leadership on advancing our Nation's
cybersecurity and holding this very important hearing.
On July 19, Americans woke up to a shock: their flight
home, grounded; their scheduled medical procedure, canceled;
their call to 9-1-1 wouldn't go through. The list goes on.
Everywhere Americans turned basic societal functions were
unavailable. As Americans looked across our borders they saw
other countries, including our allies Australia and the United
Kingdom, affected too.
A global IT outage that impacts every sector of the economy
is a catastrophe that we would expect to see in a movie. It's
something that we would expect to be carefully executed by
malicious and sophisticated nation-state actors.
To add insult to injury, the largest IT outage in history
was due to a mistake. In this case, CrowdStrike's content
validator used for its Falcon Sensor did not catch a bug in a
channel file.
It also appears that the update may not have been
appropriately tested before being pushed out to the most
sensitive part of the computer's operating system. This caused
about 8.5 million devices to crash.
Mistakes happen; however, we cannot allow a mistake of this
magnitude to happen again. As the July 19 outage has
demonstrated yet again our networks are increasingly
interconnected. While we know that the nation-state actors and
criminals try to exploit our networks we would not expect
companies to defend themselves from these targeted attacks.
However, as I emphasized with the president of Microsoft in
June, we do expect companies to implement the strongest
cybersecurity practices. Our Nation's security depends on a
strong public-private partnership for protecting our networks.
Ensuring our partnership is strong is important because our
adversaries always watch how we respond to these type of
incidents, just like the July 19 outage. You can bet they are
watching us right now.
The good news is that since this was not due to a cyber
attack, we can learn from the incident. Today's hearing is both
timely in one way and overdue in another. Timely because we now
have 2 months of information to understand exactly what
happened and I'm hopeful this will make for a very productive
hearing. It's overdue because we had hoped to give Americans
the answers they deserve much sooner, given the extent of this
outage.
Although I'd hoped to hear from CrowdStrike's CEO directly,
I'm grateful for Mr. Meyers' presence. I'm confident he will
deliver the answers we need. Thank you, Mr. Meyers, for taking
the time to walk us through the course of events leading up to
July 19 and the steps CrowdStrike has taken since.
In August, CISA director Jen Easterly described this
incident as, ``a useful exercise, a dress rehearsal for what
China may want to do with us.'' We look forward to working with
you to make sure we never make it to opening night.
I yield back my time, Chairman Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. The Chairman yields back.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

September 24, 2024

Thank you, Chairman Garbarino and Ranking Member Swalwell, for
holding today's hearing on July's CrowdStrike incident, where an error
in a content update resulted in an estimated 8.5 million Windows
devices crashing.
While this incident was not the result of a malicious cyber attack,
it highlighted the risks in our supply chain where a single error by
one technology provider can have wide-spread impacts across critical
infrastructure.
Today's hearing is an opportunity to hear directly from CrowdStrike
on what went wrong and what steps it is taking to ensure that such
mistakes do not happen again.
In an effort to secure technology from cyber attacks, we have
deployed technology like CrowdStrike's endpoint detection and response
software across Government and critical infrastructure networks.
This technology is critical to cyber defense but frequently
utilizes significant access to computer networks, creating a risk of
incidents like the one that took place in July.
Those companies that sell such technologies must implement best
practices to ensure that there are no errors that could disrupt the
functioning of critical networks.
This incident also highlighted a significant risk that the Homeland
Security Committee discussed at a hearing with Microsoft's President in
June--the inherent risks created by vendor concentration.
As we saw on July 19, CrowdStrike's technology underpins the
security of a vast array of companies and Government agencies, which
allowed an error in one company's technology to have such a significant
impact.
In order to reduce the risks of similar incidents going forward, we
must ensure we have adequate vendor diversity.
I look forward to working with my colleagues on this committee to
continue our efforts to better understand how vendor concentration
impacts risks to critical infrastructure and how the Federal Government
can ensure its technology acquisition policies do not exacerbate those
risks.
I appreciate that Microsoft hosted a summit with security vendors
earlier this month on how to improve resiliency and avoid similar
incidents in the future.
As we have all become more dependent on technology, the potential
for malicious or accidental incidents disrupting critical functions has
increased, and reducing that risk will require public-private
collaboration on developing best practices and standards.
I am glad that some of that work has begun and look forward to
hearing more from our witness today on how CrowdStrike plans to use its
experience from this incident to inform broader industry efforts.
As the lead agency for civilian cyber defense, CISA will have a
critical role to play in these discussions, and I hope our hearing
today will cover how CISA can leverage its expertise and partnerships
to better support a more secure and resilient technology ecosystem.
I thank you, Mr. Meyers, for appearing before the subcommittee
today and look forward to your testimony.

Mr. Garbarino. I am pleased to have Mr. Adam Meyers before
us today to discuss this very important topic. I ask that our
witness please rise and raise his right-hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. Garbarino. Let the record reflect that the witness has
answered in the affirmative. Thank you, please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witness. Mr.
Adam Meyers currently serves as the senior vice president of
counter adversary operations at CrowdStrike. In this role Mr.
Meyers leads the threat intelligence line of business for the
company. He is responsible for tracking criminal, state-
sponsored, and national cyber adversary groups around the
world.
He provides technical and strategic guidance for Fortune
100 organizations, Government agencies on how to stay protected
and prevent damage from sophisticated, instructive cyber threat
actors.
Prior to joining CrowdStrike, Mr. Meyers was a director of
cybersecurity intelligence at SRA International. During his
tenure he provided technical expertise and strategic guidance
for both the commercial sector customers, as well as civilian,
military, and intelligence customers. He conducted the
penetration test, vulnerability research in a brief
investigation across the globe, traveled extensively throughout
Africa and South and Central America supporting customers.
Mr. Meyers is a key technical lead supporting the U.S.
Department of State Cyber Threat Analysis Division, leading a
team of reverse engineers and instant response experts and
representing the division at intergovernmental meetings on
cyber threats. I thank the witness for being here today.
I now recognize Mr. Meyers for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ADAM MEYERS, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT,
COUNTER ADVERSARY OPERATIONS, CROWDSTRIKE

Mr. Meyers. Chairman Green, Chairman Garbarino, Ranking
Member Thompson, Ranking Member Swalwell, Members of the
subcommittee. Good afternoon and thank you for having me here
today. I'm Adam Meyers, senior vice president for counter
adversary operations at CrowdStrike.
At CrowdStrike our vision is to protect good people from
bad things. We've been very successful at doing that for more
than a decade. I'm proud to lead the threat intelligence side
of our business. I direct a team of cyber threat experts
tracking criminal, state-sponsored and cyber adversary groups
across the globe. Our goal is to produce actionable
intelligence to protect our customers.
Despite our strong track record, I'm here today in part
because just over 2 months ago on July 19, we let our customers
down. CrowdStrike was in the process of updating our customers
on a new threat or at least a content configuration update for
the Windows Sensor did not work as expected. This resulted in
Microsoft system crashes for a number of our users.
On behalf of everyone at CrowdStrike, I want to apologize.
We're deeply sorry. We are determined to prevent this from ever
happening again.
We appreciate the incredible round-the-clock efforts that
our customers and partners who are working alongside our teams
mobilized immediately to restore systems. We were able to bring
many customers back on-line within hours. I can assure you that
we continue to approach this with a great sense of urgency. I
want to underscore that this was not a cyber attack. The
incident was caused by a CrowdStrike rapid response content
update was focused on addressing new threats.
CrowdStrike began working with customers and partners to
bring systems on-line as quickly as possible, initially through
manual remediation. CrowdStrike then introduced automated
techniques to accelerate remediation. To further help customers
bring systems on-line as quickly as possible CrowdStrike also
put boots on the ground, to assist customers with recovery
efforts. We also provided regular updates to customers
throughout our response, these are available on our website and
have been shared with policy makers and our customers.
We've also taken numerous steps to make sure this can't
happen again. We are pleased to report that as of 29 July,
approximately 99 percent of Windows sensors were back on-line.
We have endeavored to be transparent about what happened
and are committed to learning from what took place. We have
undertaken a full review of our systems and are implementing
plans to bolster our content, update procedures so that we
emerge from this experience as a stronger company. I can assure
you that we will take the lessons learned from this incident
and use them to inform our work as we improve for the future.
Finally, as we have enhanced our own resiliency we remain
laser-focused against disruptive cyber attacks as we have for a
decade. While we have fixed the issue that led to this
incident, there are many other threats that remain on the
horizon. The threat environment is particularly challenging,
given global unrest and the upcoming election here in the
United States. We are focused on threats from nation-state
adversaries, issue-motivated hacktivists and sophisticated e-
crime adversaries motivated by profit. At CrowdStrike we are
particularly focused on threats from North Korea, Iran, China,
and Russia. Recent events have also highlighted the often
underappreciated supply chain security considerations.
Additionally, in the e-crime sphere ransomware means a
chronic problem targeting victim organizations across the
globe. We appreciate your leadership on these issues and I hope
we can discuss some of these arising threats with you today.
Like you, we recognize the importance of remaining
vigilant. I'm especially grateful to you and your staff for
being accessible over these past several weeks to receive
briefings and updates from our team and myself. I look forward
to our continued discussion here today.
Thank you and I welcome your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Meyers follows:]

Prepared Statement of Adam Meyers

September 24, 2024

Chairmen Green and Garbarino, Ranking Members Thompson and
Swalwell, Members of the subcommittee: Good afternoon and thank you for
having me here today. I am Adam Meyers, senior vice president for
counter adversary operations at CrowdStrike.
At CrowdStrike, our vision is to protect good people from bad
things, and we have been very successful at doing that for more than a
decade. I am proud to lead the threat intelligence side of our
business. In my role, I direct a geographically-dispersed team of cyber
threat experts tracking criminal, state-sponsored, and cyber adversary
groups across the globe. My team's goal is to produce actionable
intelligence and leverage it to protect our customers from malicious
cyber behavior and stop increasingly sophisticated adversaries.
Despite our strong track record in these areas, I am here today
because, just over 2 months ago, on July 19, we let our customers down.
As part of regular operations, CrowdStrike released a content
configuration update for the Windows sensor that resulted in system
crashes for many of our customers.
On behalf of everyone at CrowdStrike, I want to apologize. We are
deeply sorry this happened and are determined to prevent it from
happening again. We appreciate the incredible round-the-clock efforts
of our customers and partners who, working alongside our teams,
mobilized immediately to restore systems and bring many back on-line
within hours. I can assure you that we continue to approach this with a
great sense of urgency.
More broadly, I want to underscore that this was not a cyber attack
from foreign threat actors. The incident was caused by a CrowdStrike
rapid response content update. We have taken steps to help ensure that
this issue cannot recur, and we are pleased to report that, as of July
29, approximately 99 percent of Windows sensors were back on-line.
Since this happened, we have endeavored to be transparent and
committed to learning from what took place. We have undertaken a full
review of our systems and begun implementing plans to bolster our
content update procedures so that we emerge from this experience as a
stronger company. I can assure you that we will take the lessons
learned from this incident and use them to inform our work as we
improve for the future.
I look forward to our discussion today about what happened, our
subsequent diligent focus on restoring customer systems, and what we
have done to enhance our processes since.

crowdstrike and the falcon platform

CrowdStrike was built on the principle of applying the Observe,
Orient, Decide, Act (``OODA'') loop methodology, originally developed
for military combat operations. This approach emphasizes the critical
importance of speed in cybersecurity, where the ability to quickly
observe threats, orient to the changing landscape, decide on a course
of action, and execute that action faster than the adversary is
paramount.\1\ CrowdStrike leverages this methodology to protect 538
Fortune 1000 companies, 298 Fortune 500 firms, and 43 of 50 U.S. States
from sophisticated nation-state, hacktivist, and criminal threat
actors.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Falcon operates at global, cloud-scaled speeds to detect and
contain threats before adversaries can escalate their attacks,
effectively managing ``breakout time.''
\2\ As of April 30, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CrowdStrike has redefined security with the world's most advanced
cloud-native platform that protects and enables the people, processes,
and technologies that drive modern enterprise. CrowdStrike secures the
most critical areas of risk--endpoints and cloud workloads, identity,
and data--to keep customers ahead of today's adversaries and stop
breaches. We have done attribution on attackers hiding in the shadows;
we have disrupted ransomware attacks and high-risk intrusions at
thousands of companies; and we have identified and blocked nation-state
adversaries seeking to exfiltrate valuable intellectual property
globally.
In today's rapidly-evolving threat landscape, the need for dynamic
security measures is critical. Adversaries continue to employ
increasingly sophisticated techniques to target and infiltrate systems
at various stages. We have unfortunately seen a drastic rise in the
malicious technologies deployed by bad actors, and the complexity of
attacks continues to increase as a reaction to defenders' postures. My
particular work at CrowdStrike is focused on ensuring the smooth and
speedy integration of intelligence into our entire line-up of products
and services to help prevent and detect threats.
The concept of ``community immunity'' from the public health world
applies directly to cybersecurity. As more organizations join the
CrowdStrike network, the collective security of all customers improves.
Each customer--even each endpoint--contributes additional context and
visibility, making the system smarter and faster in detecting and
mitigating threats. This network effect means that every participant,
including those in especially targeted industries, enhances the
security of the entire CrowdStrike community, creating a powerful
defensive ecosystem that benefits all. As this network includes
trillions of events per day derived from the global footprint of
threats detected in technology, telecommunications, financial,
government, retail, manufacturing, health care, services, education,
media, and more, customers of all sizes benefit from sophisticated
protection. Simply put, a thwarted breach for one customer provides a
new line of defense for all customers.
Powered by the CrowdStrike Security Cloud, our Falcon Platform
leverages real-time indicators of attack, threat intelligence on
evolving adversary tradecraft, and enriched telemetry from across the
enterprise to deliver hyper-accurate detections, automated protection
and remediation, elite threat hunting, and prioritized observability of
vulnerabilities--all through a single, lightweight agent.

the july 19 incident: what happened?

CrowdStrike's Falcon platform is a cloud-native, AI-powered
platform that protects customers with a combination of cloud (the
CrowdStrike Security Cloud) and on-device security (the Falcon sensor).
The CrowdStrike Security Cloud regularly communicates with Falcon
sensors installed on customers' end points, such as laptops, desktops,
and servers. The Falcon sensor leverages AI, detection, and prevention
engines. The detection engine includes the ability to collect threat-
related data by following a predefined set of configurations. New
configurations are regularly sent to the sensor's detection engine to
help protect customers against emerging threats, such as malicious
code, ransomware, and data breaches. These threat detection
configurations are validated before being sent to the Falcon sensor.
Upon receiving new configurations, the Falcon sensor follows a
predefined set of rules to enhance detections.
On July 19, 2024, new threat detection configurations were
validated through regular validation procedures and sent to sensors
running on Microsoft Windows devices. However, the configurations were
not understood by the Falcon sensor's rules engine, leading affected
sensors to malfunction until the problematic configurations were
replaced.

why did it happen?

CrowdStrike maintains rigorous testing and validation throughout
its entire software development and configuration information creation
processes. As part of these testing and validation processes,
CrowdStrike's software code is certified by Microsoft through the
Windows Hardware Quality Labs (``WHQL'') program and tested through a
quality assurance process. Configurations read by the code are
validated to conform with the expected input specification. While code
is updated less frequently, new configurations are sent with rapid
occurrence to protect against threats as they evolve.
On July 19, 2024, using a longstanding, routine process, we updated
threat detection configuration information leveraged by the sensor,
without needing to update the sensor's code. As we describe in detail
in our Technical Root Cause Analysis, the July 19 incident stemmed from
a confluence of factors that ultimately resulted in the Falcon sensor
attempting to follow a threat detection configuration for which there
was no corresponding definition of what to do.
1. Validation.--Our validation and testing processes in use for the
past decade did not catch this unexpected discrepancy. These
validation checks missed this specific scenario, which had not
occurred before: a mismatch between input parameters and
predefined rules.
2. Testing.--During the development and testing phases, the
scenarios tested did not include cases where the final input
parameter contained a new configuration that needed a
corresponding rule.
3. Input.--The Falcon sensor's rules engine was designed to receive
a specific number of inputs and take corresponding actions
based upon configurations. Each input would lead to a specific
threat detection action defined by the rules. One of the
configurations sent on July 19, 2024, contained an extra input
for which there was no defined action. This mismatch led the
software to follow a configuration without knowing which rules
to follow, triggering a malfunction.

our support for customers in the wake of the incident

CrowdStrike began working with customers and partners to bring
systems on-line as quickly as possible, initially through manual
remediation. These efforts enabled the systems to come back on-line
within hours following the initial incident.
On July 22, 2024, CrowdStrike introduced automated techniques to
accelerate remediation.
To further help customers bring systems on-line as quickly as
possible, CrowdStrike deployed personnel and engaged with strategic
partner services teams to assist customers with recovery efforts. We
also worked to provide continuous and transparent updates to customers
throughout our response. As of July 29, virtually all of our customers'
systems were back up and running.

enhancements to help ensure this won't happen again

We have successfully deployed critical detection and preventions
over the past decade, validated and tested by our processes, to protect
organizations against millions of threats from sophisticated
adversaries without such an incident. Since July 19, 2024, we have
implemented multiple enhancements to our deployment processes to make
them more robust and help prevent recurrence of such an incident--
without compromising our ability to protect customers against rapidly-
evolving cyber threats.
1. Validation.--We have introduced new validation checks to help
ensure that the number of inputs expected by the sensor and its
predefined rules match the same number of threat detection
configurations provided. This is designed to prevent similar
mismatches from occurring in the future.
2. Testing.--We have enhanced existing testing procedures to cover
a broader array of scenarios. This includes testing all input
fields under various conditions to detect potential flaws
before rapidly-released threat detection configuration
information is sent to the sensor.
3. Customer Control.--We have provided customers with additional
controls over the deployment of configuration updates to their
systems.
4. Rollouts.--Our threat detection configuration information, known
as Rapid Response Content, is now released gradually across
increasing rings of deployment (See Appendix). This allows us
to monitor for issues in a controlled environment and
proactively roll back changes if problems are detected before
affecting a wider population.
5. Safeguards.--We have added additional run-time checks to the
system, designed to ensure that the data provided matches the
system's expectations before any processing occurs. We are also
working to further enhance our safeguards for validation and
quality assurance, including by implementing more granular
controls.
6. Third-Party Reviews.--We have engaged 2 independent third-party
software security vendors to conduct further Falcon sensor code
and end-to-end quality control and release processes reviews.

emerging threats to resiliency posed by adversaries

As we have enhanced our own resiliency, we remain steadfast in our
commitment to continuing to protect our customers against disruptive
cyber attacks as we have for a decade. In doing so, we must remain
vigilant against cyber threats on the horizon.
Advancements in threat detection, prevention, and response
capabilities have aided defenders in recent years, but adversaries have
responded by increasingly adopting and relying on techniques to evade
detection. This includes supply chain attacks, insider threats, and
identity-based attacks. Threat actors' speed also continues to
accelerate as adversaries compress the time between initial entry,
lateral movement, and ``actions of objective'' (like data exfiltration
or attack). At the same time, the rise of generative AI has the
potential to lower the barrier of entry for low-skilled adversaries,
making it easier to launch attacks that are more sophisticated and
state-of-the-art.
These threats include nation-state adversaries, issue-motivated
``hacktivists,'' and sophisticated eCrime actors motivated by profit.
China-nexus adversaries, for instance, have continued to operate at an
unmatched pace across the global landscape, leveraging stealth and
scale to collect targeted group surveillance data, strategic
intelligence and intellectual property. In other areas of the world,
conflict has continued to drive nation-state and hacktivist adversary
activity. In 2023, as the Russia-Ukraine war entered its second year,
Russia-nexus adversaries and activity clusters maintained high,
sustained levels of activity in support of Russian Intelligence Service
(``RIS'') intelligence collection, disruptive activity, and information
operations (IO) targeting Ukraine and NATO countries. Iran-nexus
adversaries and Middle East hacktivist adversaries were also observed
pivoting cyber operations in the latter half of last year in alignment
with kinetic operations stemming from the 2023 Israel-Hamas conflict.
And North Korean adversaries maintained a consistently high tempo
throughout 2023. Their activity continued to focus on financial gain
via cryptocurrency theft and intelligence collection from South Korean
and Western organizations, specifically in the academic, aerospace,
defense, government, manufacturing, media, and technology sectors. In
the eCrime sphere, ransomware remains a chronic problem targeting
victim organizations across the globe.

our on-going commitment to our partners and customers

Nothing is more important to CrowdStrike than the trust and
confidence that our customers and partners have put into our company
and its products as we continue our mission to stop breaches. We have
long focused on protecting the resiliency of critical organizations and
infrastructure against sophisticated adversaries. Going forward, we
will build upon our long-standing contributions to cybersecurity by
continuing to share our lessons learned on ecosystem resiliency.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.

APPENDIX

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Meyers.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. Initial round of questioning may be
called after all Members have been recognized. I now recognize
the Chairman of the full committee, the gentleman from
Tennessee, Dr. Green, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Green. First let me say, thank you for your statement.
There was a degree of humility there that is impressive and I
appreciate the transparency that we have seen. I think some of
the biggest lessons we learn are in times of adversity and you
guys have shown the right attitude so thank you.
In terms of the update, you know, people are really
important to me in the cybersecurity--the cybersecurity work
force is my No. 1 issue. I mean, I just pushed a bill yesterday
that will hopefully address the big shortage that we have
across the country. But who made the decision to launch the
update? Did AI do that or did an individual do that? Can you
tell me how that decision was made?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for your question and your comments.
AI was not responsible for the handy decision in that
process. It is part of a standard process. We released 10 to 12
of these updates, content updates every single day. So was part
of our standard operating procedure.
Mr. Green. These updates are automatic globally? They go
global all at once when you send an update out?
Mr. Meyers. The updates were distributed to all customers
in one session. We've since revised that.
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. Meyers. In the full testimony I've included a graphic
that depicts----
Mr. Green. OK.
Mr. Meyers [continuing]. What that now looks like and that
is no longer the case.
Mr. Green. OK. So we're not--so CrowdStrike is no longer
fielding your updates like that, simultaneous universally, if I
understood the answer to your question. OK, good.
Honestly that was probably my biggest question, Chairman
Garbarino, was to just see that that single fix was in. That's
huge. I think it would have prevented what happened from
happening. You take, like, how American Airlines I think their
router systems were different and it prevented part of their
systems from going down and some of their systems did. Whereas
other airlines, it went universal and they wound up with more
catastrophic outcome, but I'm glad to hear that you guys
decided to stair step that update implementation.
I don't really have any other questions, that was my
biggest concern so I yield.
Mr. Garbarino. The Chairman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Carter
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Ranking
Member. Thank you to our witness for joining us today.
Cybersecurity protection means securing a network overall
for better security and resilience. Despite our annual
investment of over $60 billion in cybersecurity, we continue to
face significant shortages of trained personnel. This reality
underscores a critical point, none of our protective measures
be they standards, technologies, or regulations can succeed
without a well-trained work force. Addressing on-going and
emerging cyber challenges is critical to our Nation's security.
Today's discussion is important and thank you for being here.
One contributing fact to the wide-spread impact of the
incident that brings us here was the inability of customers to
control when they received this kind of update. If customers
have the ability to schedule the receipt of updates, is it
possible that fewer devices would have--it's possible that
fewer devices would have been in fact impacted. I'm pleased
that CrowdStrike has addressed this issue and given customers
greater control over when they receive content updates. Can you
elaborate on what kind of options customers now have with
regards to receiving these updates? How are you ensuring that
customers understand the ability to control content update?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Moving forward and what we've implemented is a system of
concentric rings think of it. The initial internal release
process will be the first step in releasing new content
updates. From there, customers can select to be part of the
early adopter program where they can choose to receive content
updates as quickly as we can make them available. From there,
there's another factor that they can select which would be
general availability which would come after early adopter. Then
from there they can select to wait some period of time before
those updates get pushed out or choose not to receive them as
well.
Mr. Carter. Is there a preferred process which if any is
safer, more efficient, would grant the greatest amount of
honorable protection to the consumer?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman.
I think the early adopter is appropriated for systems for
testing purposes. In other words, if an organization would like
to receive those content updates in a timely manner and make
sure that there is no outcome or unexpected behavior and then
from there the general availability. For mission-critical
systems or things that they would prefer to wait even longer
for, they can choose to do that. But that comes of course with
the risk that they are not getting the most up-to-date threat
intelligence information provided to their system.
Mr. Carter. Is there a capacity to overrule those options
and to automatically push forward an update because of the
sensitivity of the risk?
Mr. Meyers. From the CrowdStrike side?
Mr. Carter. Yes.
Mr. Meyers. No, sir.
Mr. Carter. OK. Given the revelations that we've had, is
there a mechanism for there to be a greater amount of
cooperation between CrowdStrike, Microsoft, and the other good
actors as opposed to the bad actors who seem to have a leg up
in being nefarious, are there mechanisms that you guys have in
place that you're coordinating and working more closely in sync
to prevent these type of issues the future?
Mr. Meyers. That's a great question, Congressman. Yes,
we've--in fact, on the weekend of July 19 we began working very
closely with Microsoft in order to ensure that our mutual
customers had the benefit of us working together. Then
subsequent to that just last week there was a meeting in
Microsoft that was I think already mentioned where CrowdStrike
and others participated in a sit-down with Microsoft to plan
for future improvements and to ensure continued resiliency by
CrowdStrike, Microsoft, and other companies as well.
Mr. Carter. Last, before my time runs out, is there a
mechanism for the community to be made more aware in a kind-of
a laymen's sense of what can citizens do to better protect
themselves and to be aware? We know there are all kinds of
phishing scams, all kinds of stuff out there. What could a
general consumer and what might we be dong as a committee help
educate the general public?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. Awareness is a key factor as you
point out. During this incident we were able to push out threat
intelligence on our blogs in order to advise general consumers
of threat actors that were trying to take advantage of these
situations. In general I think better awareness of these
threats is absolutely critical and something that I would be
happy to in continue to work with you and your staff on to come
up with strategies to help educate the public about some of
these threats.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. My time has expired. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Ezell,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
The global outage we experienced in July 19, 2024 impacted
millions of people and has estimated it cost billions of
dollars. This disruption impacted a wide range of services,
including airlines, hospitals, emergency service, call centers,
and more impacting our Nation and the global economy.
While I appreciate how quickly CrowdStrike identified and
deployed a fix to the problem, it turned out that the solution
was a minimal reboot process. With workers in rural areas like
many communities in Mississippi this means it could have taken
them days to find the right IT person to get to the scene and
get the computers up and running.
Mr. Meyers, why was that the only solution is a manual fix?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for your question, Congressman.
Initially there was a manual hands-on process that was
required, which we mobilized our entire team to support. We
activated our partners, we worked around the clock. I offered
myself to drive 10 hours to visit a customer to help them get
some of their systems back on-line. Within the next day or so,
we were able to identify some automated systems that would
enable us to facilitate the recovery at a much faster pace and
that was where the bulk of that recovery occurred. We saw a
massive uptick in systems coming back on-line once we deployed
the automated process.
Mr. Ezell. What steps are you taking to protect your
systems from difficult recovery process if something like this
happens again?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman.
We as--in the testimony, I referred to this earlier,
provided a new system to ensure that the content updates have
an opt-in and kind-of the ability to choose when you receive
those updates. Prior to this our sensor packages, all of our
source code had those established best practices already in
place. Now we're applying this as well to the content updates.
Mr. Ezell. I represent south Mississippi. Can you please
describe the support CrowdStrike offered or provided to rural
communities such as in my district?
Mr. Meyers. I will need to get back to you with some
details of that, sir.
Mr. Ezell. OK. A recent article stated and I quote,
``Engineers and threat hunters were given just 2 months for
work that would have normally taken a year.'' Additionally, the
article noted that CrowdStrike confirmed its use of and again I
quote, ``existing engineers, instead of hiring a new team of
cloud threat hunters.'' Pearl River Community College and many
others in my district offer an excellent cybersecurity
technology program for our next generation of students to help
fill this unsettling skills gap. Do you make these staffing
decisions because of lack of adequate job force in the
industry?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, sir. We have a robust internship
program. We bring some of the most--a lot of our talent from
these internal and external internship programs and recruit
from all over the country and all over the world in order to
fill positions.
Mr. Ezell. What steps are you taking to better support your
staff and ensure that they have the right tools and skills to
succeed?
Mr. Meyers. That's a good question, sir. We have extensive
internal training programs. We also send our team to various
trainings across the globe, different industry trainings at
conferences and other programs where they can learn new skills
and continue to develop their existing schools. Then we also
have some of our own researchers analysis conduct trainings at
those same events to help train individuals that are not yet in
the work force or working at other companies in order to learn
some of the critical skills that are needed to identify and to
track advanced threat actors.
Mr. Ezell. Mr. Meyers, we know that there are many single
points of failure in our cyber ecosystem, these can be
exploited either through a mistake or an attack and cause an
impact similar to what we saw from the CrowdStrike incident.
Additionally, when products are modified or updated, another
single point of failure is created. What do you suggest this
committee focus on to mitigate single points of failure and
improve the stability of these symptoms?
Mr. Meyers. That's a tough question. I think there's a lot
that needs to be done in order to identify and mitigate simple
points of failure. We have been acting at CrowdStrike in terms
of identifying vulnerable systems across the globe doing
research to try to determine where vulnerabilities may exist
and come up with mitigating strategies for that. It's a
continuing effort, it's something that takes everybody, it's a
team sport and we all need to work together for that.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the Ranking, the gentleman from California,
Mr. Swalwell, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Meyers, CrowdStrike released its content
configuration update into the kernel, which is the core part of
the operating system where an error will crash the entire
system rather than just one single application. Some
competitors of yours have claimed that this kind of kernel
access is dangerous and that a better practice is to deploy
such updates directly to the user mode where the impacts would
only affect an application. Can you explain just for folks who
may not understand the kernel in this dialog why CrowdStrike
issues updates to the kernel? How it balances the benefits of
kernel access to the risk that it creates? Is CrowdStrike
planning to make any changes to how it uses kernel access to
reduce the risk crashing entire systems?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman.
The Windows kernel is--and all operating systems have a
kernel--this is the central kind-of most part of the operating
system, in many cases you'll hear it referred to as ring zero.
The kernel is responsible for interfacing with all of the
hardware associated with that operating system or that
computer. CrowdStrike is one of the many vendors out there that
uses the Windows kernel architecture, which is an open kernel
architecture. This is a decision that was made by Microsoft to
enable Microsoft operating system to support a vast array of
different types of hardware and different systems.
The kernel is responsible for the key area awaking, ensure
that you have performance where you can have visibility into
everything happening on that operating system, where you can
provide enforcement. In other words, threat prevention. As well
to ensure anti-tampering, which is a key concern from a
cybersecurity perspective. Anti-tampering is concerning because
when a threat actor gains access to a system they would seek to
disable security tools. In order to identify that that's
happening, kernel visibility is required to see when that's
occurring.
The kernel driver is a key component of every security
product that I can think of, whether they would say that they
do most of their work in the kernel or not, varies from vendor
to vendor, but to try to secure the operating system the
without kernel access would be very difficult.
Mr. Swalwell. The Cyber Safety Review Board has
demonstrated that if you conduct a meaningful review of cyber
incidents, including the most Microsoft review, which has
proven helpful to this committee's oversight of recent
incidents involving Microsoft. Some cybersecurity exerts have
called for the CSRB to conduct a review of this incident. Do
you believe they should? Second if they do, will you fully
cooperate with that review?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, sir. We would fully cooperate with
everything we've been working with CISA, the various ISAT
communities and many of your staffs directly since the 19 July
incident in order to ensure that we have provided transparency
and visibility into everything that's occurring.
Mr. Swalwell. Shifting toward your mission of protecting
your customers and we have seen over the years that our
adversaries, particularly around even years in the fall like to
weaponize their own capabilities to attack democracy. Can you
just give us a picture of the threat environment right now, as
far as what you're seeing from our adversaries, any new, unique
lines of attack, any particular countries that you see
escalating their attacks as we head to November 5?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman.
Our adversaries watch these elections very closely. We've
already seen in this election process that Iran has played a
role in targeting campaigns. We continue to see China and
others as well.
With regard to what activity we've seen thus far, espionage
continues to be the primary motivator for countries like China
and Russia. We have seen certainly in the past that these
adversaries have stolen sensitive information and leaked them.
We also see a rich array of disinformation and misinformation
occurring as result of foreign adversaries using social
networks and things of that nature to drive narratives that are
supportive of their agendas.
Mr. Swalwell. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I new recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5
minutes for questions.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Meyers, your root cause analysis attributed this global
IT outage to a failure in your validator tool. However, it
seems like another important contributing factor here was
closely related to how you released the software update. So I'd
like to go back to the topic of a phased rollout approach. I
believe you were describing this change when you used the
phrase concentric circles. Starting here, was this update
pushed out in a phased way?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for the question, Congresswoman.
To be--first, let me state that the configuration update
that occurred, the content update was not code. This was threat
information that was being provided to the sensor. The code is
pushed out and that is the sensor itself--had been pushed out
using a phased deployment methodology where the code would go
through extensive quality assurance and quality checks. It
would then be deployed internally in what we would call
dogfooding. Then from there, it would be rolled out to
customers who could select N plus--n-1, n-2, meaning they could
wait some set period of time before they would actually roll
out the new sensor. This sensor was rolled out in February
2024. The content updates are not code. They had not previously
been treated as code because they were strictly configuration
information.
What we have undertaken since the July 19 incident, what I
referred to earlier in the testimony, is it that we are now
treating the content updates as code, which is something that I
don't believe to be an industry standard at this time. By us
treating that as code it is now going through that process of
again, the internal testing, dogfooding before it goes to early
adopters, general availability and the n minus x strategy.
Ms. Lee. Thank you for that distinction.
Would you agree that in this case while it may have been
content update, clearly the failure to have it implemented or
take effect in a phased approach ended up being catastrophic.
Mr. Meyers. We've moved to a phased approach as a result of
the incidents of July 19 and we have put a lot of time and
effort into making sure that that phased approach will ensure
customers have the ability to choose when and how they receive
those updates.
Ms. Lee. Going back to the Ranking Member, in his comments
you two were discussing the fact that CrowdStrike has really
extraordinary access into the kernel of the operating system.
You all were taking a bit about the risk versus efficiency of
having this kind of access and making updates within the
kernel. Share with me your thoughts on whether this incident
could have been averted or future incidents could be averted by
using the user space for this kind of update.
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for the question.
The kernel, as I said, provides the visibility, the
enforcement mechanism, the telemetry and visibility--as well as
the anti-tamper. So I would suggest that while things can be
conducted in user mode from a security perspective, kernel
visibility is certainly critical to ensuring that a threat
actor does not insert themselves into the kernel themselves and
disable or remove the security products and features.
Ms. Lee. So is it your assessment then that it's not
possible really and in realistic terms to do it outside of the
kernel?
Mr. Meyers. With the current kernel architecture, this is
the most effective way to get the visibility and to prevent an
adversary from tampering with security tools.
Ms. Lee. So it is the most effective way, but it is not the
only way possible.
Mr. Meyers. The--it is certainly the industry standard to
use the kernel for visibility enforcement and anti-tamper and
to ensure that you can stop a threat.
Ms. Lee. So you've testified thus far that you've made
modifications to the phased rollout approach and also the
predeployment testing. What other modifications has CrowdStrike
made or changes to your internal practices to avert future
similar incidents?
Mr. Meyers. Sorry, I pushed the wrong button.
That is the primary changes that we've made. We've come up
with an entire new mechanism by which we distribute the content
updates. Again, making sure that customers have in their
control the ability to select when they receive those updates
is what will prevent that from happening.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzales
and the gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons are
permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions of the
witnesses.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Luttrell, for
5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Good morning--good afternoon, Mr. Meyers. Can you explain
to me kind-of on a more granular level internal when internal
testing, you said that there was a human element involved in
this. I'm curious because you guys used the OODA loop method
inside your company, correct? Big fan of it by the way, so
great job. I'm just curious if we are doing internal testing in
a way that most certainly would prevent this from happening and
the human element is involved and it is not artificial
intelligence that is pushing out this information. Can you walk
me through that, please?
Mr. Meyers. Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman, for the
question.
The process for testing the content updates was reliant on
validators.
Mr. Luttrell. How many? How many?
Mr. Meyers. I have to get back to you on the exact number.
But we tested each of the channels so each of the different
rules that were inside that content file were tested
individually. Those validators insured that the rules conformed
and were compliant with the very structure CrowdStrike had
built for those content updates.
Mr. Luttrell. They test individually. There is something
said about not testing them collectively. It seems like a very
large--you guys touch a lot of things. You touch a lot of
infrastructure in the United States, something that we count on
you for, which you've been doing a great job.
You mentioned North Korea, China, and Iran. Our outside
actors are trying to get us every day. We shot ourselves in the
foot inside the house so I'm curious if we are testing these
things individually, is there a point at which we test them
collectively, before we push it out.
Mr. Meyers. Yes, that's--thank you, sir. That's where we
are now. So the new methodology is to test all of the content
updates internally before they are to the early adopters.
Mr. Luttrell. So that's where the fault was, internal. We
were testing the coding individually instead of collectively
and one of them was off.
Mr. Meyers. The testing process looked at each
configuration and made sure that it conformed with the
standard. It is now being tested internally before it's rolled
out to customers and then the customers have control over
when--what systems get those updates.
Mr. Luttrell. Yes, sir. I'm still trying to figure out
exactly how this thing got launched with it not being absolute.
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. The rules, the validator itself was
in place for over a decade and we were released 10 to 12 of
these updates every single day since we started using the
configuration updates. That was tested against the standard to
make sure that the configuration conformed with the standard
are that CrowdStrike had a written for those configuration
updates.
Mr. Luttrell. This happened to test positive and sent it
out. I think I'm trying to find out did it test positive and we
launched it or did it fail and we launched it accidently?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. Yes, it tested as clean or good and
that's why it was allowed to roll out.
Mr. Luttrell. So as we unpack this, where exactly did it
fail? This may be a complicated question to answer in a minute
and 18 seconds.
Mr. Meyers. I'll give it a try.
Mr. Luttrell. All right.
Mr. Meyers. So content file triggered an issue within the
kernel sensor. So that when the sensor process, the
configuration it is almost like if you think about a chess
board trying to move a chess piece to someplace where there is
no square, that's effectively what happened inside the sensor.
So when it tried to process the rule, it was not able to do
what the rule was asking it to do, which triggered the issue
within the sensor.
Mr. Luttrell. Should we have known that? Should CrowdStrike
would know that about the kernel, correct or this was something
that we weren't aware of?
Mr. Meyers. This was kind-of a perfect storm of issues that
resulted in the sensor failure.
Mr. Luttrell. OK. I'm going to need about 20 more seconds,
Mr. Chairman. Are you good with that?
So knowing what we know now, what is the response mechanism
in place, worst-case scenario this happens again for all the
users?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. So this would trigger--this would be
detected within CrowdStrike before it ever made it----
Mr. Luttrell. Because now we're doing it to code?
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
We are very lucky we were joined by our friend from New
Jersey, Mr. Menendez.
Mr. Swalwell. Very busy.
Mr. Garbarino. Five minutes of questions, Mr. Menendez.
Mr. Menendez. Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member, I don't often
get to say what a privilege it is to serve not just with folks
on this committee, but the two incredible leaders by the Chair
and Ranking Member. I'm just so thankful for their friendship
and stewardship of this subcommittee.
As we discuss today the global IT outage triggered by
faulty CrowdStrike sensor update, disrupted critical services
across various sectors. In my district passengers at New York
Liberty International experienced delays and cancelations, some
New Jersey hospitals had to delay or cancel procedures and some
9-1-1 dispatch centers were even rendered inoperable,
jeopardizing public safety. This incident wasn't only a
significant disruption but also preventable event that could
and should have been avoided with basic quality assurance
practices.
Our Government services rely and our constituents deserve
the highest level of security and reliability. CrowdStrike must
implement robust measures to prevent future incidences and
ensure that their technology truly protects and serves our
communities effectively.
A cybersecurity risk can continue to evolve. It is crucial
that companies not only provide robust security solutions but
also empower their customers to control and tailor their
defenses in a way that best suits their needs. The root cause
analysis also mentions increased customer control over rapid
response content deployments. How does providing customers with
control over rapid response content deployments improve overall
security?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for the questions, Congressman.
Let me first start by saying again we apologize, we are
deeply sorry for the impact for the folks at the airport and in
the hospitals. We have a long legacy of stopping threats and
that is our primary objective as a company.
In terms of how these controls will enable customers or
constituents to have more control over what happens on their
systems, it effectively gives them the ability to select which
systems they can themselves test on and let's say that's the
early adopters, they can select any number of systems that they
would like to enroll in that early adopter program in order to
receive those content updates before any of the other systems
in their environment.
Then from there, they can have the rest of their systems on
general availability. If there are systems that are
particularly sensitive and they want to withhold even for a few
more iterations, they can do that. So this gives them complete
control over where updates go and when they get them.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you for that. I just want to make sure
this all works right and there is the benefit of your
customers, our constituents and so we're just trying to make
sure we all get on the same page.
What type of support does CrowdStrike provide as the
customer is making these individualized decisions to make sure
that having a bespoke approach to adopting the sort-of new
technologies, et cetera, that we believe that they are getting
the full suite of options that they need for their particular
industry, right? Because, you know, cybersecurity is obviously
a quickly-evolving field and so we want to make sure that there
are no gaps, right, for a particular customer or industry, now
that they have a little bit more control over what they bring
on-line on their systems.
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman.
CrowdStrike I would say in my experience has been a
customer-focused organization from the very beginning. Thirteen
years ago when we launched the company in the wake of what was
called the Operation Aurora where security tools of the day
failed to detect Chinese adversaries who were conducting
espionage operations against Western businesses. From the
moment we launched the company we've been very focused on
ensuring that we hear our customers and that we are here to
support our customers, now we are a part of their mission
whatever that may be.
We continuously hear from our customers through customer
advisory boards. We are constantly engaging with customers. On
the 19th of July we started round-the-clock phone calls talking
to every customer that we could get ahold of in order to hear
what was going on and them how we can help. We've also been
briefing ISATs and Government agencies, whether it be CISA or
others and working with Congressional staff in order to ensure
that everybody's questions are answered. We do this throughout
the year, not just in the wake of that incident.
So it's really, as I said earlier, a team sport. We need to
work together with our customers, with the Government and with
everybody involved to ensure that we are all marching in the
right direction.
Mr. Menendez. Yes, I appreciate that. Hopefully we will do
a second round. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentleman from Florida, Mr. Giminez,
for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I was gone for a little while so maybe you have answered
this but did you say that CrowdStrike issues hundreds of
updates daily?
Mr. Meyers. Congressman, I had said that the 10 to 12 times
per day we have issued content updates which contain the latest
threat intelligence information to instrument our sensor, our
tool, to understand what new threats are evolving. The threat
landscape changes sometimes minute by minute. So in order to
keep ahead of those threats to allow the CrowdStrike platform
to detect and prevent those threats, it needs routine updates.
Mr. Gimenez. So 10, 12 times a day CrowdStrike will update
its systems to react to a new threat that you've seen. Is that
accurate?
Mr. Meyers. That's accurate. I would say that it updates
the configuration information, not the system itself.
Mr. Gimenez. The events of July 19, was that the system
upgrade or what was that? It was something different than this
10 to 12 per day thing or what was it? Tell me what that was.
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman. It is--that was a
configuration update.
Mr. Gimenez. How often do you do that?
Mr. Meyers. As I said, 10 to 12 times a day, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. So 10 to 12 times a day you got have these
updates. You've done them every day, so you've done thousands
of these updates. What made this one different? Do you run
system tests on each 10 to 12 times a day you run a system test
to make sure that this thing is not going to do more harm than
good, I assume, right?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, sir. We--I will answer that question
first, what caused this update is that the configuration update
had a mismatch in fields that resulted in one of the fields not
being linked to a rule. So you may have stepped out earlier,
but I had said it was kind-of like on a chess board if the
chess piece moved to a square that wasn't present then that
would be an example of effectively what happened there. That--
--
Mr. Gimenez. So since you have gone through I don't want to
go through it again. So do you this 10 to 12 times a day,
you've done this thousands of times. This one moved the chess
piece outside the board. Therefore, the computers didn't now
how to figure wait a minute, that's outside the game.
Therefore, I'm going to crash, all right. That's never happened
before? You've never moved a piece outside the board?
Mr. Meyers. This is the first time that this issue has
manifested, to my knowledge.
Mr. Gimenez. Have you tried to move the piece outside the
board, and was it caught some time before?
Mr. Meyers. The validators that the configuration
information went through was meant to ensure that it didn't
move outside of the board.
Mr. Gimenez. So was the process--were your internal
processes followed and then you just saw this is a problem with
your internal process that you have to fix or was it somebody
went outside of your processes?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, that's a great question. It was not
a lack of following the process. This was a issue with the
content validator. We've subsequently ensured that there's now
additional steps in place so that this cannot happen again.
Mr. Gimenez. So it's your process, in your process.
All right. I'm going to switch gears and go to AI because I
only have about a minute. AI, do you consider AI a threat to
for cybersecurity?
Mr. Meyers. That's a great question. AI I think can be----
Mr. Gimenez. I just ask great questions. I appreciate that.
Mr. Meyers. It could be a threat or it could be a benefit.
It could be used to facilitate and to ensure that cyber
defenders have more tools at their disposal that they could
leverage AI to more quickly process information and analyze it.
Mr. Gimenez. So before I go, I only have 30 seconds I have
to make a statement, so the nation that leads in AI would be
better protected against a nation that's somewhat behind? The
better your AI is, the better you're going to be at protecting
yourself. The better you are at AI, I guess the better you are
going to be at attacking your adversary. Is that correct?
Mr. Meyers. I agree with your statement, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. I have 8 seconds and hopefully you
will have a second round. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. I recognize myself for 5 minutes.
I want to get into it.
You called it the perfect storm happened, you know, fail
safes failed, but can you talk about what was the perfect storm
and why it will never happen again. You know, a lot of perfect
storms and hundred-year floods are all happening now every
other year.
I want to make sure that you all know what happened, can
explain it, and then how you're making sure it's not going to
happen again. We're dancing around it. I just--you know, let's
get into the--let's get technical.
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Chairman. The content validator was
looking at the content channel file, which had 21 fields in it.
The content validator allowed those 21 fields to go out to the
sensor fleet. The sensor was looking for a configuration rule
that was not present. When it attempted to use that rule,
that's where the sensor failed. So there was a--that's what
caused the blue screen.
So that was detailed in RCA, and I don't want to--I don't
know if I can explain it in the 3 minutes that are left here,
but effectively, because the perfect storm was the content
validator allowed the content configuration to go out to the
sensor, and the sensor was not able to find the rule that it
was looking for causing the issue.
Mr. Garbarino. So you fixed it. It can't happen again.
Mr. Meyers. It's a combination of process and the
methodology at which we're now deploying those configurations.
The configuration now is being treated as code whereas before
it was treated purely as configuration information, so we're
providing a lot more oversight and visibility into what that is
and how it goes out to the system.
Mr. Garbarino. How it goes out you all changed, but as the
Chairman asked before, it's not all going out at once to
everyone, so even if this does happen again, you've fixed it
where it won't--it won't affect everyone all at once.
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Garbarino. Another problem with fixing what happened,
there was a--people had to be on-site, correct? You had to go
to the different computers and reboot them individually. That's
how you--that's how we got everything back up and running,
correct?
Mr. Meyers. Initially, the systems would need to be
rebooted, the file deleted, and then the system allowed to boot
from there. Subsequent to that, we came up with a USB boot disk
that could be plugged in and the system could be rebooted and
that would automate the removal of the file, and then finally
we were able to deploy an automated solution which allowed us
to do this without manual intervention.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. So there was reporting about
CrowdStrike's faulty software update is largely focused on
commercial operations, like emergency services, flights. But
there was also big impact on Federal agencies, such as CFCC,
Social Security, CBP, and even CISA. Although networks are
becoming increasingly interconnected, Government networks
should be isolated from commercial ones.
Why were Federal agencies impacted by this outage? Does
your process for pushing out updates include--are there
different updates to test for commercial versus Government
business when you're dealing with your clients, or is it all
the same? Is it one computer is it just one computer here?
Mr. Meyers. The updates went to Microsoft Windows operating
system sensors that CrowdStrike had deployed, so that would
have impacted any system that was running Microsoft operating
system with that particular version of CrowdStrike Falcon that
was on-line during the time period that the channel file was
distributed.
Mr. Garbarino. As long as Microsoft was on that computer
using that system, whether it was Government or commercial
didn't matter. It was affected.
Mr. Meyers. As long as the CrowdStrike sensor was running
on the Microsoft operating system on the systems at that time,
yes.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. Wonderful. What--what did--you know
what? I'm going to come back for my second round, because this
is a much longer question than I have my time left for, so I'm
going to yield back and then I'm going to recognize the
gentleman from Texas, Mr. Gonzalez, for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Meyers, for testifying before our committee. I tell you what, I
was very not surprised, but disappointed to see how everything
went down, but that's kind-of the way it works in this space. I
was grateful on how quickly CrowdStrike responded when they did
find an error. I'll tell you what, I mean, I'm in Government.
I don't hear people--I don't see people that fess up and
said hey, we made a mistake, work to fix it, and then as you're
doing that send a report out so other people don't fall in that
same mistake. Usually it's try to cover it up and move on to
the next thing, so I was grateful to the fact on how hard you
all worked to get things back up.
I'm interested and I was grateful for the call that we got
on literally days after it occurred. Clearly, you know your
stuff inside and out. I'm interested in how do we make sure,
you know, if this happens again that we're in a spot where we
can fix it, right? I'd argue that CrowdStrike is probably one
of the better organizations that are out there, so what if it's
a different vendor that maybe doesn't have the same resources,
the same integrity, and whatnot?
So I'm looking at it through the lens of, you know, speed
is the name of the game in this industry, and a lot of times
you want to get ahead of the problem before--as it's evolving.
Your technical report, how--let's dive into that a little bit.
I mean, how has that been received in the industry? How has
that been received in Government? Have you had any
conversations with CISA or others on the technical piece to
what went wrong and how do we fix it?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for the question, sir. The--let me
start by saying that we were immediately in contact with CISA
and many of your staffs to talk about this issue when it
happened. Once we had gotten most of the recovery under way, we
issued a preliminary incident report, which is available on the
website, which was effectively put out to ensure that everybody
understood what we knew at that point in time.
We then gathered as many of our engineers as we needed to
in order to start work on the comprehensive root cause
analysis. We brought in external parties as well, and then we
produced that root cause analysis as soon as it was available,
which was, I believe, the first week in August or so. The dates
are a little bit fuzzy at this point. But we had the RCA out.
The response that I've heard from most of the folks that
I've spoken to have been that they appreciate the level of
depth that that report went into, and I think more importantly,
that the plan that we put in place to prevent this from
happening in the future is something that everybody
acknowledged to me was going to enable our customers to have
more control.
Mr. Gonzalez. One of the concerns I have is every company
does it a little bit different. Like, there is no standardized
process to it. That's just a little troublesome, because, you
know, when everyone's doing it differently, you're relying on
well, we've never had this problem before.
We're about to have a lot of problems that we've never had
before and I want us to get ahead of it. I just don't want this
to be a flash in the pan where, like, hey, you're in the flash
today, someone else is in the flash tomorrow. Like, we're all
in this thing together, and so I'm really focused on solutions,
getting ahead of it.
Like I said, you know, 8 million people may have gotten
impacted, but how fast you turned that around I thought was--I
was grateful for that, but what happens when next time it isn't
that fast? So my question is on--I'm trying to figure out what
role Government plays in this.
So my question is I've introduced this piece of legislation
that's called the National Digital Reserve Corps which would
recruit cybersecurity professionals to help during major
incidences that occur. Based on your experience with large-
scale cyber incidents, do you think having a reserve of
cybersecurity experts on stand-by would improve our response-
and-recovery efforts?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for the question, Congressman, and I
think that first I would say transparency is the answer to your
initial question. It is important for CrowdStrike and for
others to be transparent when these things occur, because every
system is different, every product is different, they all have
different components.
So they can't all be uniformly thought of so fixing one
problem on one product isn't necessarily directly applicable to
other products. That said, transparency is absolutely critical,
and why we endeavored to be so transparent when this occurred.
As far as having additional reserve forces on stand-by, I
think in a situation where there is a cyber threat, and again,
this was not an attack--cyber attack, I think that is certainly
beneficial. There's never a situation where less skilled
operators is going to be better.
Mr. Gonzalez. I'm out of time. I appreciate you coming to
testify before the committee, and once again, being transparent
throughout this process, the good, the bad, and the ugly. With
that I yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Garbarino. Gentleman yields back. I now recognize the
gentleman from South Carolina, Mr. Timmons, for 5 minutes of
questions.
Mr. Timmons. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate you
letting me waive on this committee. I appreciate that your
testimony regarding the changes that have been made to make
sure this cannot happen again. For better or worse, the No. 1
reason it probably won't happen again is damages. I mean, it
insures an estimated in excess of $5 billion in damages to your
customers. I'm sure that there's going to be lawsuits and
settlements for days.
Can we talk about making the victims whole? I mean, you
know, whether it's airlines, other critical infrastructure,
what steps is CrowdStrike taking to, I guess, make it right?
Other than making sure it doesn't happen again, which is
fantastic and your response has been very admirable, but how do
we make sure that any other--any future incident is held
accountable as it relates to making the victims of the breach
whole? Wasn't it breach? Making victims of the incident whole.
How does that work?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you for that question, Congressman. We've
been working with our customers to ensure that they are up and
running. We've identified that as of 29 July, 99 percent of the
sensors were back up and running and we're working with our
customers to ensure that we are able to help them through any
issues that they are dealing with and continuing to support
them in any way that they need.
Mr. Timmons. I mean, tens of thousands, hundreds of
thousands of people missed flights. Businesses were inoperable
for days or weeks. I mean, again, this isn't necessarily about
CrowdStrike. This is about future cybersecurity incidents and
creating a system through which people can be made whole. So in
addition to getting people back up and running when their
systems were down, I mean, you all have insurance policies.
There's a wide variety of evil mechanisms that will create
accountability. Are you able to speak to any of that, or is
that something that your lawyers will probably tell you to not
talk about?
Mr. Meyers. Congressman, I know people who are impacted by
this as well, and as I said earlier, we're deeply sorry for
what happened. We are working with customers to ensure that
they have everything that they need to get back on-line. Most
of them are on back on-line and ensured that they have what
they need to feel comfortable that they're working with
CrowdStrike. We're continuing to rebuild that trust. Trust
takes years to make and seconds to break, and we understand
that we broke that trust and that we need to work to earn it
back.
Mr. Timmons. Do you think your customers care that this was
an innocuous fat finger as opposed to an actual breach? I mean,
there's still damages associated with both, so I mean, again,
going forward, the global economy needs to have consequences
for all types of cybersecurity shortcomings, so I mean, do you
distinguish between a breach and this faulty update?
Mr. Meyers. Yes. I would say that there is a difference
between a breach and when----
Mr. Timmons. One that I can tell my constituents that
missed flights and were stuck in airports for weeks that
they'll care about? Probably not. Again, you don't want to talk
about the damages and making victims whole, but I think that's
an important part of this. You're taking additional steps,
which are very important to make sure that it doesn't happen
again, but at the end of the day, part of this is making it
right with the people that missed flights, that weren't able to
engage in commerce, and that's part of the conversation that we
need to be having, because that is the deterrent threat to the
future and future incidents will occur.
The reason that businesses that have major cybersecurity
breaches end up settling for hundreds of millions and billions
of dollars in certain circumstances is because that is how they
are made whole. Again, this was a fat finger, so it's not the
same as a breach. I get what you're saying. But the damages are
still the same in many respects. So we're going to, I'm sure,
hear more about the manner in which the--your customers and
their customers were made whole as a result of this incident,
and I think that that's an important part of the story, because
ultimately, that's the accountability that our system provides
to make sure it doesn't happen again, the deterrent threat.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. Gentleman yields back. Thank you for joining
us today. We're going to start our second round of questioning.
I'm going to start by first recognizing the gentleman from
Florida, Mr. Gimenez, for 5 minutes of questions if he has
them.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I want to kind-of
continue on what I ended up with, which was with AI and the
problems that AI--does AI pose a threat right now and what do
you see as the threat from AI in the future? If you can
elaborate on that.
Mr. Meyers. Absolutely. Thank you, Congressman. The threats
from AI that I see today are primarily--and what we've seen
adversaries using various AI for, whether it be large language
models or stable diffusion or different algorithms that can be
used to generate new content has been primarily around
disinformation, misinformation, and enabling faster research.
In other words, threat actors have used artificial intelligence
OOMs to automate writing scripts while--that they can use
during an intrusion or during a ransomware operation.
Mr. Gimenez. If I can interrupt, will that mature into AI
writing code that will be malicious in nature?
Mr. Meyers. We've--I've personally done some research in
that area, and I think right now it's not there. You still need
to be very familiar with the tool chain and you need to be able
to actually compile the code and debug it and understand where
there's issues, but every day this technology gets better and
it's something that we need to keep a close eye on to ensure
that we understand how threat actors may use it as well as good
actors.
Mr. Gimenez. Yes. I mean, AI scares me and that's why we
have to be on top. Because the only defense against AI in the
future, I mean, if it gets totally mature and it just starts
writing code, and you have to have AI on your side that writes
the counter code just as fast as it's getting this code. So
you're going to have this--you're going to have millions of
attacks per day and you have to defend against millions of
attacks per day because these things will just generate attack
after attack after attack. Now, then you put that with quantum
computing, now you really got a problem.
So where is your company on that? I mean, you're a leader
in cybersecurity. I'm concerned about the fact that something--
a program that was supposed to protect systems against cyber
attacks actually kind-of destroyed the system they were trying
to protect. Didn't destroy it, but certainly disrupted it. All
right? So in the future, I can see this as being a tremendous
problem and a tremendous risk. It may be that the future says
that we're going to have to--we can't be so connected anymore
because of the vulnerabilities involved. Can you foresee such a
future?
Mr. Meyers. I don't foresee a future where things get--need
to be disconnected necessarily, but I think that we need to be
very careful and thoughtful as we roll out artificial
intelligence solutions. Happy to work with your staff and
yourself to spend more time on that issue if you'd like.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, I don't think it would be in your best
interest for us to disconnect. All right? But I'm not sure that
it wouldn't be in our best interest sometime in the future for
security reasons to disconnect somewhat, that somehow, no
matter what comes in, that the system won't be disrupted. Yes,
that's a hiccup or I just got punched in the face, but I'm not
going to get knocked out. All right?
That's the problem that we have. My fear is that an
adversary, before they launch something, won't try to knock us
out, and I think we're vulnerable to that right now, that we
can get knocked out. Our electrical systems can get knocked
out, transportation systems can get knocked out all at the same
time causing massive disruptions. I don't think anybody can
tell me no, that's not possible. It is possible, right?
Mr. Meyers. What I would suggest, sir, is that I think in
the future we can see that organizations will have their own AI
workloads. They'll be deploying artificial intelligence to
solve customer challenges, business challenges, and it won't be
a handful of AIs that are being used across the globe. I think
we'll see very localized artificial intelligence workloads, and
this is something that we need to be thinking about, how do we
secure those AI workloads into the future, because adversaries
can leverage that AI workload. They can poison the data that
goes into AI training. So there's a whole new wave of horizon
threats that pertain to AI and something that I think is a very
critical thing for us to be talking about.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. Gentleman yields back. I recognize the
gentleman from Texas for a second 5 minutes, Mr. Gonzalez.
Mr. Gonzalez. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you again for
allowing me to speak today. Mr. Meyers, I just would highlight
there are very few people in Congress that really understand
this issue, and this is one of the committees--I mean, you have
a Chairman, you have Members on this committee that are--that
want to find solutions, that want to get ahead, as Mr. Gimenez
just mentioned.
You know, the future is already here, and I worry what role
Government is going to play. I would just once again highlight
to you, like, this isn't just a one-off. The more that your
team and your--you all can be working with our staff as we
build out a meaningful responses either through the
appropriations process or through legislation, I think it's
very critical, because I do worry that we'll get it wrong,
right? Or we'll be delayed in it or it will have meaningful
intentions, but have second- and third-order impacts that may
make it more difficult for you whether it's a self-inflicted
kind of incident or whether it's an intrusion. So I just would
highlight, you know, once again, thank you for coming and
testifying but, you know, let's work toward fixing this long-
term on other issues that happen.
The other--so the question I have for you is from an
industry standpoint, is it more impactful that Government get
out of your way? I'm trying to frame it the right way, you
know, without putting you on the spot, because I want to get as
real an answer as possible. Maybe I'll frame it this way. In
your dealing with CISA as you went through this intrusion, or
as you went through this incident, I'm sure you probably dealt
with them far more than you had in the past. What was a
takeaway that, you know, that you think that we can improve on
from a Government response, Government interacting with
industry on dealing with a real-world situation to get things
back on track? What was one of your takeaways that maybe this
committee could work on?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you, Congressman. First let me say it's
an honor to be here. Thank you for having me. We work with CISA
on a daily basis. We've been a--we're a plain cooler at JCDC
and have been working hand-in-hand across the U.S. Government
as well as other family governments every single day, and the
way that we succeed in my mind is through public and private
partnership. We need to all be able to share and work off the
same sheet of music.
We track over 250 threat actors today that are coming from
places like Iran, Russia, North Korea, but other countries that
haven't made it into the press so to speak, and a whole bevy of
threat actors that are engaged in ransomware and data extortion
operations as well as hactivists who are looking to conduct
hack-and-leak operations.
So I guess the one takeaway I would say is that in this
situation, our job was to inform the Government and inform your
staff about what was going on within CrowdStrike being
transparent so that they could know that this, No. 1, wasn't a
cyber attack, and No. 2, what the impact was what we're doing
to remediate that.
I think in the situation where there is a cyber incident,
then the responsibilities change and it becomes us supporting
the Government, helping to understand who these threat actors
are, what they're after, and how to stop them. So it depends on
the situation, but I would reiterate that private-public
partnership is absolutely essential, because this is a team
sport and we all are on the same team.
Mr. Gonzalez. Appreciate the response. I would just close
with this. This is the committee you want to work with, because
guess what? There is where legislation is going to come out of
that's either going to make your job easier or harder, right?
The intentions are going to be there. Best intentions for
our country and our allies to defend against these adversaries,
some of which you mentioned that are trying to kill us every
single day, so that's what we're up against and we need
partners, and I want to make sure from a legislative standpoint
we're getting it right. We're committed on our side, but we
need partners, right? Not everybody up here has the same level
of expertise.
You try--I mean, I read that--I read the outage report
right before I went to bed for a reason, right? I mean, it's
very technical, right? So once again, thank you for coming and
testifying. You're a brave man. Please continue to work with
the committee as we find solutions. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. Gentleman yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes of questions. Mr. Meyers, other
cybersecurity providers, competitors of yours have said that
the access to the kernel, so much, how many updates you're
pushing out daily is--goes against industry standards and is
not safe. What would you say in response to that?
Mr. Meyers. I'm not aware of any industry standards that
govern how or what to do with regards to any one operating
system or best practice with that regard. I can tell you that
when we launched CrowdStrike 13 years ago, we did so with the
mission to stop bad things from happening to good people, and
we've worked tirelessly in the last 13 years to ensure that our
products, our services, and our intelligence information is the
best possible product that our customers can consume.
I would say that we got it wrong in this case and we are
running from what happened and we've implemented changes to
ensure that that doesn't happen again.
Mr. Garbarino. I understand that, and would you think now,
because I believe you testified before you do maybe a dozen a
day updates, because that's what you do. You find the threat
and you update the system to protect against that threat. You
think it's--you will still continue to do 12 a day, or as many
as needed, or will this--will you be more--I don't even know if
conservative is the right word, but more conservative in your
approach on how many updates you will have daily?
Mr. Meyers. We will continue to update our product with
threat information as frequently as we need to in order to stay
ahead of the threats that we're facing.
Mr. Garbarino. In your belief, that is access to the kernel
as much as you have it and updates as much as you have it as
needed for cyber--for your clients' cybersecurity?
Mr. Meyers. I think as we said earlier, speed does matter
in this domain in order to stay ahead of these threat actors,
and the visibility that we get through the kernel, the
performance that you gain through using the kernel, the ability
to stop bad things, the enforcement mechanism that's provided
through that kernel, and the anti-tamper to stop a threat
actor----
One of the threat actors that we track very closely is a
group called Scattered Spider who has been using techniques to
elevate their privilege into the kernel in order to disable
security tools on a regular basis. In order to stop that from
happening, we will continue to leverage the architecture of the
operating systems that we're on in the most effective way that
we can to stop those threats.
Mr. Garbarino. Is it just unlucky that this update was for
a Microsoft operating system? Could this have happened to any--
pretty much any other operating system, right? It could have
been on the update. It was just an unlucky coincidence that it
was Microsoft?
Mr. Meyers. I would say that a lot of businesses rely on
Microsoft for their operating systems, and I think that's where
the number of impacted systems from this update came from.
Mr. Garbarino. But, I mean, the problem was with the
update. It wasn't with Microsoft system. It was with the update
was faulty.
Mr. Meyers. This was a CrowdStrike issue.
Mr. Garbarino. Are you developing any--I want to make sure
I got this in. Are you developing any agentless technologies to
scan for infrastructure remotely which could avoid this type of
outage in the future?
Mr. Meyers. I'm sorry, can you repeat that?
Mr. Garbarino. Are you developing any--are you developing
agentless technologies to scan infrastructure remotely which
could avoid this type of outage in the future?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. We have a number of platforms that
we provide to our customers, including attack surface
management tools which can scan without an agent or a sensor in
place, but in order to detect and to prevent threats, you need
to have that enforcement mechanism in place on the operating
system in order to stop that from occurring.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. This last thing, because I'm going to
yield back in a second and let Mr. Swalwell go. Is there now
something in place, because what happened--someone didn't catch
it. There was an additional parameter in the channel file
before it was--went through content interpreter or the
validator. Is there now a process--is there something new in
place to prevent that from happening again?
Mr. Meyers. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. Thank you. Gentleman from California is
recognized for his second round of questions, 5 minutes.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. I wanted to follow up on the line
of questioning that Ms. Lee and I were kind-of going back and
forth with with regard to the kernel. Part of the discussion at
the Microsoft Endpoint Security Summit involved reducing
reliance on the kernel. My understanding is that Microsoft
agreed at the summit to make additional capabilities available
at the user level. Do you know the time line for that process
and do you have a sense of how Microsoft and security vendors
will engage to reduce the kernel and more additional activity,
you know, to the user space? How would you reduce risk to the
kernel and move it to the user space I guess is the question?
Mr. Meyers. Thank you. The--I don't have that time line
available. Happy to follow up with you on that. What I will say
is that things can crash in user space too, and so this is not
unique to the kernel space.
Mr. Swalwell. Trade one set of risks for another, right?
Mr. Meyers. There's definitely things that can break in
user space as well as in the kernel space, yes, sir.
Mr. Swalwell. The relevant update in this incident only
affected, as you've pointed, out Window systems, but my
understanding is that Apple's restrictions on kernel access
might have prevented a similar incident from taking place on
Mac systems.
Do you view Apple's restrictions on kernel access to be
beneficial or do they negatively impact the effectiveness of
security software like yours?
Mr. Meyers. We have security products that work on Windows
systems, Apple systems, and Linux systems as well. We leverage
all of the features of those various operating systems. They
have pros and cons for each and we leverage everything in order
to have the most effective security solution for those
platforms.
The Windows architecture is an open architecture as I
mentioned earlier. Apple has a tighter supply chain, and with
Linux you have to precompile the kernel for every possible
configuration of hardware that you would want to support, so
there's different features of each kernel.
Mr. Swalwell. Would you agree, though, that if something
crashes in the app space, it's limited in its effect to the
app, whereas if something crashes with the kernel and
Microsoft, it could crash the whole system?
Mr. Meyers. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. I've got about 2\1/2\ minutes left. Is there
anything that we didn't cover that you think would be helpful
for us to understand? Anything that you want to just revisit
and further articulate?
Mr. Meyers. I think it's important to note that this is not
a cyber attack. This is something that happened within the
system during an update process which we've spent a
considerable amount of thought and effort to ensure that this
doesn't happen again.
My concern is, if I may, the cyber threat actors that we're
seeing across the globe, this is something that we need to be
paying close attention to. We're seeing the constant evolution
of those threat actors looking to subvert systems. They've
moved into the identity space stealing user names and passwords
and are leveraging identity access to move into new
environments and to conduct additional ransomware and data
extortion attacks, so this is an area that continued--would
like to continue working with the committee on and anything
that we can do to help.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Mr. Chairman, do you have anything you
wanted to ask?
Mr. Garbarino. No. I'm just saying--just speed, with the
cybersecurity--we don't work with speed here in Congress
unfortunately.
Mr. Swalwell. Speed, what's that? We don't recognize that.
I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. Gentleman yields back. I want to thank the
witness for his valuable testimony and the Members for their
questions. I think this was a very good hearing. The Members of
this subcommittee may have some additional questions for you
and we would ask that you respond to these in writing. Pursuant
to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will be held open
for 10 days. Without objection, the subcommittee stands
adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:04 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green, MD for Adam Meyers
Question 1a. According to an article in Semafor dated September 12,
almost 2 dozen former CrowdStrike employees claim that the company
prioritizes speed over quality.
Would CrowdStrike attribute the global IT outage to a lack of
quality control?
Answer. No. CrowdStrike maintains rigorous testing and validation
throughout its entire software development and configuration
information creation processes. As part of these testing and validation
processes, CrowdStrike's software code is certified by Microsoft
through the Windows Hardware Quality Labs (WHQL) program and tested
through a quality assurance process. Configurations read by the code
are validated to conform with the expected input specification. While
code is updated less frequently, new configurations are sent with rapid
occurrence to protect against threats as they evolve.
On July 19, 2024, using a long-standing, routine process, we
updated threat detection configuration information leveraged by the
sensor, without needing to update the sensor's code. These new threat
detection configurations were validated through regular validation
procedures as correct and sent to sensors running on Microsoft Windows
devices. As we describe in detail in our Technical Root Cause Analysis,
the July 19 incident stemmed from a confluence of factors that
ultimately resulted in the Falcon sensor attempting to follow a threat
detection configuration for which there was no corresponding definition
of what to do.
Question 1b. Does CrowdStrike believe that employees experience
``rushed deadlines, excessive workloads, and increasing technical
problems?'' Why or why not?
Answer. No. CrowdStrike's mission is to protect good people from
bad actors. Our employees are committed to this mission and work hard
to protect against rapidly emerging threats. CrowdStrike has grown its
headcount consistently year over year, including in research and
development. CrowdStrike has been recognized as one of the Fortune 100
Best Companies to Work For for the last 4 years.
Question 1c. How many complaints from employees has CrowdStrike
received about issues related to quality control in the last year?
Answer. CrowdStrike receives, evaluates, and incorporates a range
of feedback from its team. CrowdStrike is committed to ensuring the
resiliency of our products through rigorous testing and quality
control.
Question 1d. How does CrowdStrike handle internal feedback or
complaints from employees, particularly regarding those related to lack
of quality control?
Answer. As noted above, CrowdStrike receives, evaluates, and
incorporates a range of feedback from its team. We are committed to
safely and responsibly developing our products with the care they
require to be effective. While CrowdStrike is actively reviewing its
quality process, we have also engaged 2 independent third-party
software security vendors to conduct further review of the Falcon
sensor code for both security and quality assurance.
Question 2. How much does CrowdStrike rely on AI or automation to
update its products versus manual decision making? Please be specific
about where and how you use AI or automation in its software update
process.
Answer. The July 19 incident was not caused by AI.
Question 3a. CrowdStrike's Root Cause Analysis (RCA) states ``The
new IPC Template Type defined 21 input parameter fields but the
integration code that invoked the Content Interpreter with Channel File
291's Template Instances supplied only 20 input values to match
against. This parameter count mismatch evaded multiple layers of build
validation and testing. . . .''.
Please explain why no one caught the additional parameter in the
channel file before putting it through CrowdStrike's Content
Interpreter or Content Validator, which the RCA said resulted in a
mismatch.
Answer. As we describe in detail in our Technical Root Cause
Analysis, the July 19 incident stemmed from a confluence of factors
that ultimately resulted in the Falcon sensor attempting to follow a
threat detection configuration for which there was no corresponding
definition of what to do. (See answer 1.a for further details.)
Question 3b. Since the July 19 outage, has CrowdStrike created a
specific test for ``non-wildcard matching criteria in the 21st field,''
which the RCA said was lacking and contributed to the system crash?
Answer. CrowdStrike took the following mitigation actions, as
described in the Technical Root Cause Analysis: ``Bounds checking was
added to the Content Interpreter function that retrieves input strings
on July 25, 2024. An additional check that the size of the input array
matches the number of inputs expected by the Rapid Response Content was
added at the same time.
``These fixes are being backported to all Windows sensor versions
7.11 and above through a sensor software hotfix release. This release
will be generally available by August 9, 2024.
``The added bounds check prevents the Content Interpreter from
performing an out-of-bounds access of the input array and crashing the
system. The additional check adds an extra layer of runtime validation
that the size of the input array matches the number of inputs expected
by the Rapid Response Content'' (Pages 3-4).
These mitigations, referenced in the RCA, have been implemented.
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Adam Meyers
Question 1. Does CrowdStrike's framework for disaster recovery
plans align with industry standards, such as the National Institute for
Standards and Technology or the International Organization for
Standardization? If yes, how often does CrowdStrike audit its plans to
ensure they are ready and compliant?
Answer. CrowdStrike's security and recovery practices are designed
to align with widely-accepted industry standards and best practices,
including those outlined by the National Institute for Standards and
Technology and the International Organization for Standardization.
CrowdStrike reviews its business continuity controls and disaster
recovery plans at regular intervals.
Question 2a. Did CrowdStrike analyze the security impact of any
proposed changes prior to implementation in its FedRAMP environments,
consistent with documented NIST security controls? Please explain.
Question 2b. What steps will CrowdStrike take to ensure Federal
systems are not impacted if an outage of this scale happens again?
Answer. We value our Federal customers, and appreciate the
partnerships we have with them. The new controls we implemented
following 19 July account for customer needs across our entire user
base, including U.S. Federal agencies and those operating within
CrowdStrike FedRAMP environments. We have implemented a staged
deployment strategy for content updates, which will enhance resilience
across the full customer base. We also have engaged third-party vendors
to conduct further review of the situation, provided our customers more
control over the updates they receive, and prevented the creation of
the problematic type of file at issue here.
Question 3. CrowdStrike's Root Cause Analysis (RCA) of the July
19th outage notes that in February 2024, CrowdStrike released a new
sensor version that ``developed and tested according to our standard
Sensor Content development processes and was integrated into the sensor
to prepare for utilization in the field.''
Please expand upon this claim and explain why new testing processes
were not implemented for a new sensor version.
Answer. Sensor version 7.11 was subject to both routine and new
tests prior to being made generally available to customers on February
28, 2024.
Question 4a. How does CrowdStrike think this outage will impact the
cybersecurity industry more broadly?
Will cybersecurity vendors be more conservative in rolling out
updates?
Answer. We will continue to update our product as frequently as is
necessary to empower our customers to stay ahead of rapidly-evolving
threats. As noted above, customers also now have greater control over
updates, including timing.
Question 4b. How is CrowdStrike working with cybersecurity partners
to ensure changes to kernel access are implemented securely and
prioritize resilience?
Answer. Cybersecurity solutions designed to protect the Microsoft
Windows operating system require kernel access for performance, anti-
tampering, visibility, and enforcement. CrowdStrike participates in
official cybersecurity software initiatives, including those related to
the development of software for Microsoft Windows. Following the
incident, CrowdStrike engaged in a technical summit focused on sharing
best practices related to Microsoft Windows kernel-level software
development enhancements. CrowdStrike looks forward to the opportunity
to continue to work with ecosystem partners for safe, comprehensive,
performant, and reliable processing of security-related data.

[all]
