- EVALUATING FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY GOVERNANCE

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

EVALUATING FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY
GOVERNANCE

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

OCTOBER 25, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-36
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-341 PDF                 WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
officio)                           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Eric Swalwell, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     4
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5

Witnesses

Mr. Eric Goldstein, Executive Assistant Director, Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency, U.S. Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     8
Mr. Christopher J. DeRusha, Federal Chief Information Security
Officer, Office of Management and Budget; Deputy National Cyber
Director for Federal Cybersecurity, Office of the National
Cyber Director:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    15

Appendix

Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Eric Goldstein...    35
Questions From Ranking Member Eric Swalwell for Eric Goldstein...    35
Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Christopher J.
DeRusha........................................................    36
Questions From Ranking Member Eric Swalwell for Christopher J.
DeRusha........................................................    38

EVALUATING FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY
GOVERNANCE

----------

Wednesday, October 25, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:05 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Andrew R.
Garbarino (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Garbarino, Gimenez, Ezell, Lee,
Luttrell, Swalwell, Carter, and Menendez.
Mr. Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from
two Federal cyber leaders on the state of Federal cybersecurity
governance.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Thank you to our witnesses for being here to continue our
subcommittee's discussion on a very important topic, Federal
cybersecurity. Last month, we hosted industry leaders to give
their perspectives on the Cybersecurity Infrastructure Security
Agency's, or CISA's, Federal cybersecurity programs,
specifically the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation, CDM
program, and the National Cybersecurity Protection System, or
NCPS. I am eager to hear directly from CISA and the Office of
the National Cyber Director, ONCD, today on their views on
those programs and the state of Federal cybersecurity efforts
and governance more broadly.
As the operational lead for and administrator of Federal
cybersecurity requirements, CISA has a broad and important role
in ensuring the security of Federal networks. As I said in the
previous hearing, whether CISA acts as a service provider or an
adviser toward other agencies is a fundamental question, and
Congress and CISA must both be consistent in how they approach
it.
As one of the Executive branch's newest cyber roles, ONCD
is tasked with leading national cybersecurity policy and
strategy. ONCD's implementation of the National Cybersecurity
Strategy will be a key test of its role in Federal
cybersecurity governance.
In our last hearing, there were several common themes I
hope to further explore with Mr. Goldstein and Mr. DeRusha this
afternoon. We learned that CISA must modernize by considering
new technologies so programs like CDM evolve with the changing
threat landscape.
The Federal Government as a whole must adapt to defend
against elusive threat actor tactics, like new Living-Off-the-
Land techniques seen in the recent Volt Typhoon activity.
We also briefly dove into the breakdown of CISA's budget.
With almost one-third of its fiscal 2024 budget request
allocated to strengthening Federal cyber networks, it's
important to further discuss how CISA measures the success of
programs like CDM and reforms its legacy programs like
EINSTEIN.
Finally, I hope to discuss the administration's plans to
raise the level of Federal cybersecurity resilience across the
board with both our witnesses. Each relevant committee of
jurisdiction in Congress must understand ONCD and the Office of
Management and Budget's, or OMB's, plan to ensure the Federal
agency funding proposals are--that Federal agency funding
proposals are aligned with activities in the National
Cybersecurity Strategy.
Again, thank you to both our witnesses for being here. I
look forward to your testimony and discussing these questions
in greater depth.
[The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]

Statement of Chairman Andrew Garbarino

October 25, 2023

Thank you to our witnesses for being here to continue our
subcommittee's discussion on a very important topic: Federal
cybersecurity. Last month, we hosted industry leaders to give their
perspectives on the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's,
or CISA's, Federal cybersecurity programs, specifically the Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program and National Cybersecurity
Protection System (NCPS). I am eager to hear directly from CISA and the
Office of the National Cyber Director, or ONCD, today on their views on
those programs and the state of Federal cybersecurity efforts and
governance more broadly.
As the operational lead for and administrator of Federal
cybersecurity requirements, CISA has a broad and important role in
ensuring the security of Federal networks. As I said in the previous
hearing, whether CISA acts as a service provider or an advisor toward
other agencies is a fundamental question, and Congress and CISA must
both be consistent in how they approach it.
As one of the Executive branch's newest cyber roles, ONCD is tasked
with leading national cybersecurity policy and strategy. ONCD's
implementation of the National Cybersecurity Strategy will be a key
test of its role in Federal cybersecurity governance.
In our last hearing, there were several common themes I hope to
further explore with Mr. Goldstein and Mr. DeRusha this afternoon.
We learned that CISA must modernize by considering new technologies
so programs like CDM evolve with the changing threat landscape. The
Federal Government as a whole must adapt to defend against elusive
threat actor tactics, like new living-off-the-land techniques seen in
the recent Volt Typhoon activity.
We also briefly dove into the breakdown of CISA's budget. With
almost one-third of its fiscal year 2024 budget request allocated to
strengthening Federal networks, it's important to further discuss how
CISA measures the success of programs like CDM, and reforms its legacy
programs like EINSTEIN.
Finally, I hope to discuss the administration's plans to raise the
level of Federal cybersecurity resilience across the board with both
our witnesses. Each relevant committee of jurisdiction in Congress must
understand ONCD and the Office of Management and Budget's, or OMB's,
plan to ensure Federal agency funding proposals are aligned with
activities in the National Cybersecurity Strategy.
Again, thank you to our witnesses for being here. I look forward to
your testimony and to discussing these questions in greater depth.

Mr. Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, my
friend from California, the gentleman Mr. Swalwell for his
opening statement.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. I thank you the Chairman for holding
this important hearing and also keeping it. I told the
witnesses before the Chairman came no one would have blamed
him, considering the events of today, if he had just canceled
this, but out of respect to you and your already being here, he
wanted to make sure we got this done. I appreciate that.
Federal agency networks house our most important and
sensitive information, and it's no surprise that adversaries
like Russia, China, Iran, North Korea, and others are routinely
trying to access them. As global dynamics shift and technology
evolves, we must continuously work to stay ahead of our
adversaries.
The good news is we have made tremendous progress in recent
years. The Federal Government is now in the position to both
lead by example and transform how vendors and consumers
approach security. President Biden's Executive Order 14028
finally set the Federal Government on the path toward adopting
modern cybersecurity best practices, including the
implementation of Zero Trust architectures, improving software
supply chain security, and the deployment of Endpoint Detection
and Response technology.
By setting new security standards for the Federal
Government, we will drive security improvements throughout the
marketplace that mean better security for everyone. For its
part, Congress has empowered agencies across Government to
better execute their network security missions.
Nearly 3 years ago, Congress authorized the Office of the
National Cyber Director to develop and implement a National
Cyber Strategy and to ensure that agency budgets are consistent
with the goals of this strategy.
Additionally, Congress has expanded CISA's authorities
beyond issuing binding operational directives and emergency
directives, to include persistent hunting authorities.
With additional resources from Congress, CISA and Federal
agencies have moved the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation
Program forward, bringing to fruition long-standing goals of
increased visibility into agency networks, enabling better
detection and response to cyber incidents. I look forward today
to hearing more from our witnesses on how these investments and
initiatives have achieved tangible results.
The bad news is we cannot wait for another attack to spring
into action. Our adversaries are constantly evolving their
capabilities, and new technologies are posing both challenges
and opportunities.
Emerging technologies like AI and quantum computing will
continue to transform the cyber capabilities of our adversaries
and the ability to defend our networks. The on-going migration
to cloud computing has also shifted how we approach
cybersecurity. To combat these risks, we must continue to
modernize our networks and cyber defenses.
The National Cybersecurity Strategy and the subsequent
implementation plan lay out an impressive vision for how to
approach cybersecurity for the threats of tomorrow. Under
Director Easterly's leadership, CISA has continued to look
forward, including the proposed Cyber Analytics and Data System
to improve CISA's ability to process and analyze its vast
amount of cybersecurity data.
I hope to hear today more about CISA's plans for cyber data
analytics and continuous diagnostics and monitoring going
forward and how OMB and ONCD will help coordinate the
improvement of Federal network security across the Federal
Civilian Executive branch.
Finally, I want to emphasize the importance of continued
support for CISA and its mission. The programs we discuss today
are essential to our national security, and the progress we
have made by standing up and resourcing CISA have been the
result of bipartisan cooperation in this committee and
throughout the Congress.
Unfortunately, last month, half of the Republican
Conference, including the Chairman of our committee and the
newly-elected Speaker, voted to cut CISA's budget by 25
percent. Such a cut would devastate CISA's ability to operate
key programs, to detect and respond to cyber incidents across
the Federal Civilian Executive branch, leaving us more
vulnerable to espionage and destructive attacks from our
adversaries like Russia, China, Iran, and North Korea. At a
time when there are conflicts in multiple parts of the world, I
cannot comprehend how we would do anything to reduce our
ability to defend against cyber attacks.
Again, I appreciate my colleague, Chairman Garbarino, his
outspoken support for CISA, and I hope that today's hearing
will build awareness in Congress about the importance of
sustained investments in cybersecurity.
I thank the witnesses for being here and I yield back.
Thank you.
[The statement of Ranking Member Swalwell follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Eric Swalwell

October 25, 2023

Federal agency networks house our most sensitive information. It is
no surprise that our most formidable adversaries, like Russia, China,
and Iran, routinely try to gain access to them. As global dynamics
shift and technology evolves, we must continuously work to stay ahead
of our adversaries. The good news is we have made tremendous progress
in recent years. The Federal Government is now in a position to both
lead by example and transform how vendors and consumers approach
security.
President Biden's Executive Order 14028 finally set the Federal
Government on the path toward adopting modern cybersecurity best
practices, including the implementation of Zero Trust Architectures,
improving software supply chain security, and the deployment of
endpoint detection and response technology. By setting new security
standards for the Federal Government, we will drive security
improvements throughout the marketplace and that means better security
for everyone.
For its part, Congress has empowered agencies across Government to
better execute their network security missions. Nearly 3 years ago,
Congress authorized the Office of the National Cyber Director to
develop and implement a National Cyber Strategy and ensure agency
budgets are consistent with the goals of the Strategy.
Additionally, Congress has expanded CISA's authorities beyond
issuing Binding Operational Directives and Emergency Directives to
include persistent hunting authorities. With additional resources from
Congress, CISA and Federal agencies have moved the Continuous
Diagnostic and Mitigation program forward, bringing to fruition long-
standing goals of increased visibility into agency networks, enabling
better detection of and response to cyber incidents.
I look forward to hearing more from our witnesses on how these
investments and initiatives have achieved tangible results. The bad
news is we cannot wait for another crisis to spring into action.
Our adversaries are constantly evolving their capabilities, and new
technologies pose both challenges and opportunities. Emerging
technologies like AI and quantum computing will continue to transform
the cyber capabilities of our adversaries and the ability to defend our
networks. The on-going migration to cloud computing has also shifted
how we approach cybersecurity. To combat these risks, we must continue
to modernize our networks and cyber defenses.
President Biden's National Cybersecurity Strategy and the
subsequent implementation plan have laid out an impressive vision for
how to approach cybersecurity for the threats of tomorrow. Under
Director Easterly's leadership, CISA has continued to look forward,
including the proposed Cyber Analytics and Data System to improve
CISA's ability to process and analyze its vast amount of cybersecurity
data. I hope to hear more about CISA's plans for Cyber Data Analytics
and continuous diagnostics and monitoring going forward and how OMB and
ONCD will help coordinate the improvement of Federal network security
across the Federal Civilian Executive branch.
Finally, I want to emphasize the importance of continued support
for CISA and its mission. The programs we will discuss today are
essential to our national security, and the progress we have made by
standing up and resourcing CISA have been the result of bipartisan
cooperation in this committee and throughout Congress. Unfortunately,
last month, half of the House Republican Conference, including Chairman
Green and the new Speaker, voted to cut CISA's budget by 25 percent.
Such a draconian cut would devastate CISA's ability to operate key
programs to detect and respond to cyber incidents across the Federal
Civilian Executive branch, leaving us more vulnerable to espionage and
destructive attacks from our adversaries like Russia, China, and Iran.
At a time when there are conflicts in multiple parts of the world,
I cannot comprehend how anyone could think it is a good idea to reduce
our support for cyber defense. I appreciate Chairman Garbarino's
outspoken support for CISA and hope that this hearing today will help
build awareness in Congress about the importance of sustained
investments in cybersecurity.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ranking Member Swalwell. It was
the Chair of the full committee, not me.
Mr. Swalwell. Sorry. The Chairman of the full committee.
Yes. I wasn't clear.
Mr. Garbarino. But I think a majority of the conference did
vote to support CISA, and we're going to make sure our
colleagues continue to be educated on what a great agency CISA
is.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

October 25, 2023

At the start of last Congress, the SolarWinds Supply Chain
compromise laid bare unacceptable gaps in our approach to securing
Federal networks.
The capabilities of our adversaries and the technology we relied on
had evolved, but our approach to security had not. We failed to
appreciate the challenges associated with securing--and maintaining
visibility--in cloud environments; we did not have policies in place to
ensure the security of software that underpins our information systems;
and we tolerated a sluggish rate of maturation for our Federal network
security programs. The SolarWinds compromise jolted Congress and our
partners in the administration into action, and as a result we have
made historic progress modernizing the Federal Government's approach to
cybersecurity.
The ambitious goals President Biden set out in Executive Order
14028, Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity, and the National
Cybersecurity Strategy, coupled with a long-overdue injection of
resources and authorities from Congress, have put the Federal
Government's networks on a more secure path. But I am concerned that
the politicization of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency (CISA) by some of my colleagues could jeopardize the progress we
have made over the past 3\1/2\ years.
Last month, a concerning number of Republicans, including some on
this panel and the new Speaker, voted to cut CISA's funding by 25
percent. To further complicate matters, the Continuing Resolution--
which is sustaining existing Federal cybersecurity efforts--will expire
in less than 25 days. Right now, there is no clear path for providing
full-year funding. We already know that the world's most sophisticated
hackers are interested in and capable of compromising Federal networks,
and they won't take a break just because Republicans can't figure out
how to fund the Government.
Particularly in light of escalating global conflicts, we must
remain vigilant in our commitment to providing the funding necessary to
fully implement President Biden's Federal network security goals.
Beyond the issue of resources, I want to emphasize the importance of
clear, transparent, and deliberate communication with the private
sector as the administration executes the directives under the
Executive Order and the National Cyber Strategy.
By demanding better security practices from those who sell
information technology to the Government, the administration can drive
critical changes in the market that will benefit everyone--but only if
its private-sector partners understand and are prepared to meet these
new requirements.
This administration is advancing cyber policy at unprecedented
speed--and I support these efforts. But we must be careful not to
sacrifice sound policy for speed. Toward that end, I will be interested
in understanding how the administration has gathered feedback from its
private-sector partners to refine and adjust new security policies.
Finally, I look forward to learning how recent investments
modernizing Federal network security programs and expanding endpoint
detection tools are driving down risk and improving our ability to
rapidly detect malicious activity on Federal networks.

Mr. Garbarino. I am pleased to have two witnesses before us
today to discuss this very important topic. I ask that our
witnesses please rise and raise their right hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Mr. Garbarino. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative.
Thank you and please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Eric Goldstein serves as executive assistant director of
CISA's Cybersecurity Division. In this role, he leads CISA's
mission to strengthen Federal networks against cyber threats.
Prior to his time at CISA, Mr. Goldstein was the global head of
cybersecurity policy, strategy, and regulation at Goldman
Sachs. He also served at CISA's precursor agency, the National
Protection and Programs Directorate.
Chris DeRusha serves in a unique, dual-hatted role as
federal chief information security officer, or CISO, at OMB,
and is deputy national cyber director for federal cyber at
ONCD. DeRusha has experience managing cybersecurity programs in
both the public and private sectors, including as the chief
security officer for the State of Michigan, the lead of
vulnerability management at Ford Motor Company, and in multiple
roles at OMB and DHS.
Thank you both for being here today.
Mr. Goldstein, I now recognize you for 5 minutes to
summarize your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ERIC GOLDSTEIN, EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT DI-
RECTOR,  CYBERSECURITY  AND  INFRASTRUCTURE  SECU-
RITY  AGENCY, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Goldstein. Thank you. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking
Member Swalwell, Members of the subcommittee, it is a privilege
to rejoin you again to talk about the criticality of CISA's
Federal cybersecurity mission and the challenges that we face
going forward.
As the Ranking Member noted, every American depends every
day on services provided by 102 Federal civilian agencies. Our
adversaries recognize this criticality as well, attempting to
execute damaging intrusions against our Federal agencies every
single day.
In this environment, CISA serves a critical role as the
operational lead for Federal cybersecurity. It bears noting
that nearly 3 years ago we were collectively engaged in
responding to an intrusion campaign undertaken by Russian
intelligence targeting Federal agencies. On the back of that
intrusion campaign, we recognized collectively areas for
improvement in resources, authorities, centralization, and
accountability. We've made real progress over the past several
years in advancing both CISA's role and, in partnership with
entities like OMB and ONCD, raising the collective bar across
the Federal enterprise.
Now, CISA has three key roles as we execute our role as the
operational lead for Federal cybersecurity. First, we provide a
common baseline of security across those 102 Federal civilian
agencies. We issue directives that drive requirements and
prioritization to address the most urgent risk and, through our
CDM program, we provide a common baseline of visibility across
every agency.
Second, we use our increasing visibility to drive urgent
response to those vulnerabilities and threats that pose urgent
risk to agencies so that they can be addressed, ideally, before
harm occurs.
Third, we work with each individual agency to assess their
gaps and provide shared services and direct support as needed
to ensure that we are raising the baseline across every agency,
particularly those that might need the most help.
Now, with the support of Congress and this committee, we've
made some remarkable improvements over the past few years. A
few years ago, our visibility into risks facing the Federal
enterprise were limited. Today, we can see real-time data on
vulnerability, other exploitable conditions and threats across
millions of Federal IT assets across every Federal civilian
agency. As the Ranking Member noted, we can persistently hunt
for threats and vulnerabilities nearly automatically in real
time.
So that when there is a new, what we call a zero-day
vulnerability, we don't need to ask agencies to send us a
spreadsheet. We can look in the CDM system. We can undertake
persistent hunts, and we can figure out quickly what's going
on, and how do we need to drive change?
Now, core to this visibility is our CDM program, which has
become the default approach across the Federal enterprise to
get that centralized visibility into risks and drive urgent
change. As the CDM program has matured and grown, we need to
ensure a sustainable funding approach where this program can
maintain the gains that we've achieved while modernizing for
the future.
A few years ago, we didn't have the ability or the roadmap
to integrate disparate data from across Government and the
private sector. Today, we are urgently building the Cyber
Analytics and Data System, or CADS, which is a modern scaleable
environment where we can bring data from CDM, from threat
hunting, from the private sector, and use it to identify risks
that previously would have been invisible to us.
Finally, a few years ago most agencies were on their own in
providing these cybersecurity solutions that they need to
address threats. Today, we are deploying scaleable, cost-
effective shared services, such as our Protective Domain Name
System Resolver, which has blocked 330 million connections to
malicious domains, our vulnerability disclosure platform, that
has enabled remediation of over 1,500 vulnerabilities in
Federal websites, and we continue to expand our portfolio in
this area, including through our Attack Surface Management
program that's going to provide unprecedented visibility into
internet-exposed risks across the Federal enterprise.
But all that being said, we know that we're on a midpoint
in our journey. Working with our fellow agencies, with OMB and
ONCD and the private sector, we are going to keep advancing and
maturing to keep pace with the adversary. We look forward to
continued support of Congress so we can sustain the progress
we've made and make sure that we are modernizing in a way that
creates the security environment that Americans expect of their
Federal Government.
Thank you again for the privilege of being here, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Goldstein follows:]

Prepared Statement of Eric Goldstein

October 25, 2023

Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify today on behalf
of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)
regarding our Federal cybersecurity mission.
In January 2021, as the U.S. Government responded to a wide-spread
intrusion campaign exploiting a malicious software supply chain
compromise of SolarWinds software to gain access Microsoft cloud
environments in 2020, CISA and our partners noted material gaps in
Federal cybersecurity: A lack of resources, direction, centralization,
and prioritization. With the support of Congress over nearly 3 years,
we have made remarkable progress. We have used our Directive
authorities to drive wide-spread measurable risk reduction across
Federal Civilian Executive branch (FCEB) agencies. We have gained
unprecedented visibility into threats and vulnerabilities targeting
FCEB networks, including through our Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation (CDM) Federal dashboard and wide-spread deployment of
Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) tools. We have provided
effective, centralized shared services that save taxpayer resources and
enable coordinated management of significant risks. We have partnered
closely with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to increasingly
manage the FCEB as a single enterprise and drive toward quantifiable
performance measurement to show that our collective efforts are keeping
FCEB agencies, and Americans' sensitive information, safe. Most
notably:

For the first time, we have real-time visibility into
vulnerabilities and misconfigurations across 102 agencies,
allowing timely remediation before intrusions occur--including
directing the remediation of over 12 million Known Exploited
Vulnerabilities (KEV) over the past 2 years.

We have deployed EDR tools across 52 agencies, allowing our
analysts to actively hunt for intrusions and enable eviction
before adversaries are able to cause harm.

We have provided new shared services that measurably reduce
risks, including by blocking millions of communications with
malicious websites and enabling researchers to find over 1,000
vulnerabilities in Federal websites before they are exploited
by adversaries.

We have issued directives that have fundamentally
transformed how Federal agencies prioritize and fix
vulnerabilities, continuously monitor for security risks, and
harden frequently-exploited technology assets.

We have taken proactive steps to transform vulnerability
management by publishing our Industrial Control Systems (ICS),
Operational Technology (OT), and Medical Device vulnerability
disclosure information in the Common Security Advisory
Framework (CSAF), a machine-readable format that enables
greater automation and better tooling across the vulnerability
management ecosystem.

We launched a Federal Zero Trust Management Community of
Practice (CoP), which now has over 130 members and 31 unique
agencies including the 23 civilian CFO Act agencies and 8
critical small agencies. The CoP has advanced interagency Zero
Trust collaboration, increased agency expertise and readiness,
and built a community of value for our Federal partners.
Even as we reflect on our accomplishments, we recognize that we are
at a midpoint on our journey. Recent intrusions into cloud-based email
environments demonstrate our continued need to drive strong
accountability across Federal vendors, further advance our visibility
into cloud and mobile environments, and advance adoption of zero-trust
principles for agency environments and secure-by-design practices for
all technology providers.

cisa's mission and role in federal cybersecurity

CISA leads the National effort to understand, manage, and reduce
risk to the cyber and physical infrastructure on which Americans rely
every hour of every day. One of CISA's core missions is to serve as the
operational lead for Federal cybersecurity, charged with protecting and
defending FCEB networks, in close partnership with OMB, the Office of
the National Cyber Director (ONCD), and agency chief information
officers and chief information security officers. In this role, we
provide a common baseline of security across the FCEB and defend and
secure the Federal enterprise through proactive, collaborative cyber
defense and risk management. While agencies remain ultimately
accountable for their own risk, CISA is responsible for ensuring that
the most significant cyber risks to the Federal enterprise--the network
of all Federal systems--are being addressed effectively and driving
progress based upon accurate and timely data.
As part of this mission, we serve as the lead for Federal
cybersecurity shared services. We have learned that many cybersecurity
capabilities can be provided more effectively, affordably, and in a
scalable manner through a centralized model rather than having over 100
individual FCEB agencies manage cybersecurity risk independently.
Through our Cybersecurity Shared Services Office (CSSO), we provide
high-quality services to advance and centralize cybersecurity
capabilities across the FCEB and help agencies manage cyber risk. For
example, our Protective Domain Name System service has blocked over 300
million communications with malicious websites and our Vulnerability
Disclosure Platform service has enabled remediation of over 1,000
vulnerabilities in Federal websites over the past year alone. We
continue to explore investments in modern shared services, whether
provided by CISA or by contracted third parties, that will further make
the best use of Federal cybersecurity resources and show clear return
on investment.

hardening the terrain: driving risk reduction before harm occurs

Our work begins by making it harder for adversaries to exploit FCEB
networks. Core to this priority is the CDM program, which is our
foundational effort to enable real-time, continuous visibility into
risks affecting Federal agencies to drive timely risk reduction.
Within the last 3 years, the CDM program's scope, scale, and impact
on Federal cybersecurity has grown significantly. Previously, FCEB
operators and CISA counterparts lacked sufficient operational
visibility--insight into what devices, software, and users were
operating within the environment--to effectively mitigate risks prior
to a breach. Operators had no automated way to share valuable
intelligence with other Federal agencies; it was all manual data calls.
Now, because of the CDM program, agencies and CISA can respond to cyber
threats in a coordinated and expedited fashion by sharing data between
dedicated CDM Agency Dashboards and CISA's CDM Federal Dashboard. The
frequency, precision, and level of detail of this information sharing
has been a key enabler of CISA's operational visibility throughout the
FCEB. CISA's cyber defense operators are increasingly turning to the
Federal Dashboard to aid in incident response while agency cyber
leaders and practitioners alike are shaping operational and strategic
activities based on the evolving ``current state'' data provided by
CDM. As a result, our relationships across the FCEB have progressed to
much more effective, valued, and collaborative partnerships that
promote identifying, understanding, and reducing risks across the
Federal enterprise.
As an example, in early summer 2023, CISA leveraged CDM
capabilities as part of a broader response to two concerning cyber
events. CISA operators analyzed near-real-time agency dashboard reports
to coordinate targeted notifications for the MOVEit Transfer
vulnerability and understand prevalence within minutes. Additionally,
in response to the recent wide-spread email security gateway exploit,
CISA threat hunters utilized the CDM EDR platform in collaboration with
the impacted agency to directly access the agency's environment to
search of instances of threat activity working shoulder-to-shoulder
with agency staff. This demonstrates what the Federal enterprise gains
by evolving our collective, interactive cyber defense posture.
The expansion of CDM's operational visibility capabilities, enabled
through enhanced authorities in Executive Order (EO) 14028 and the
National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for fiscal year 2021, have
greatly increased the value of the CDM investment through newly-
accessible use cases that enhance threat hunting and vulnerability
management. CISA now utilizes the CDM Federal Dashboard, a tool of
operational first resort, to assess and coordinate effective response
to cyber threats. We're proud of the progress we've made over the last
decade and are looking forward to continuing to advance CDM's
capabilities in the future.
As we look to evolve the CDM program, we will extend the portfolio
of deployable cyber defense capabilities while updating our operating
model to protect the critical investments made to date. Over the next
several years, CDM will incorporate mobile devices, cloud services, and
the internet of things (IoT) into CISA's operational visibility. We
will deploy new protections for Federal agency data repositories;
provide rich, host-based insight into High-Value Assets (HVAs); and
integrate modern network sensor capabilities. Additionally, we will
ensure operationalization of our CDM investments to drive risk-based
decisions, respond to threats, and contribute to agencies' efforts to
implement Zero Trust architecture principles.
While CDM is a foundation of FCEB cybersecurity, it is not our only
mechanism to drive change. Through our Automated Testing program
(formerly known as Cyber Hygiene), we assess internet-facing assets
across every FCEB agency. This program provides near-continuous
vulnerability scanning across all types of internet-facing assets as
well as bi-weekly, deep-dive scanning for internet-facing web
applications.
We also conduct penetration tests, red team assessments, and
vulnerability assessments to identify exploitable conditions internal
to Federal agencies. The Federal Attack Surface Testing (FAST) program
leverages new legal authorities granted by the fiscal year 2021 NDAA to
conduct ``no notice'' continuous penetration testing, including across
seven FCEB agencies in the past fiscal year. This led us to
successfully identify critical and high findings on several agencies'
internet-facing web applications. In collaboration with the agencies,
CISA re-tested the findings to validate agency remediation actions to
ensure proper fixes were deployed. The SILENTSHIELD program also
exercises fiscal year 2021 NDAA authorities. The long-term, no-notice
approach afforded by these authorities enabled CISA to get an accurate
depiction of an agency's true security posture. Within its first
program year, SILENTSHIELD successfully targeted, compromised,
escalated, and maintained access to an agency's network and is enabling
long-term FCEB cybersecurity and architecture investments.
Recognizing that every agency must prioritize their finite
cybersecurity resources, we maintain the KEV catalog as the
authoritative source of vulnerabilities that have been exploited in the
wild, sending a clear message to all organizations to prioritize
remediation efforts on the subset of vulnerabilities that are causing
immediate harm based on adversary activity. CISA's efforts are enabling
FCEB agencies to deny threat actors opportunities to gain access to
Federal networks and reduce risk of compromise due to internet
accessible KEVs that frequently compromise public and private entities.
These activities are yielding clear results:

Since the creation of the KEV catalog in November 2021, FCEB
agencies have remediated more than 12 million KEV findings
including over 7 million this calendar year alone.

FCEB agencies have demonstrated a 72 percent decrease in the
percentage of KEVs exposed for 45 or more days.

The mean-time-to-remediate KEVs is an average of 9 days
faster than for non-KEVs, and 36 days faster for internet-
facing KEVs.

From fiscal year 2022 to fiscal year 2023, CISA observed a
79 percent reduction in the FCEB's attack surface due to
internet-accessible KEVs, based on analysis of Automated
Testing capability data, despite an increase in KEV catalogue
entries during this time frame.

leveraging our directive authority

Effectively securing the FCEB requires a coordinated action to
address urgent risks. While our directive authorities have proven
highly beneficial in emergency situations, we have derived even greater
value in mandating common steps to mature key cybersecurity
capabilities that yield enduring benefit. CISA works in consultation
with NIST and in conjunction with OMB and FCEB agencies to develop
these directives, and this collaboration has proven invaluable to
managing cyber incidents and driving collective action.
For example, in fiscal year 2022 CISA issued two Emergency
Directives (EDs) requiring agencies to enumerate and remediate all
instances of VMWare and Log4J, critical vulnerabilities that pose grave
risk to the Federal enterprise and report all findings to CISA. Through
issuance of these directives, agencies remediated 56,400 Log4J findings
and nearly 2,000 vulnerable VMWare instances. CISA's efforts
significantly reduced the risk that threat actors could exploit these
existing vulnerabilities, protecting Federal information and enhanced
enterprise network security. In fiscal year 2023 CISA issued two
Binding Operational Directives (BOD). BOD 23-01: Improving Asset
Visibility and Vulnerability Detection on Federal Networks drove
significant visibility improvements for agencies and CISA and vastly
improved Federal cyber defense. BOD 23-02: Mitigating the Risk from
Internet-Exposed Management Interfaces directed agencies to better
secure Networked Management Interfaces in response to threat activity
targeting network devices supporting underlying network infrastructure.
CISA has been identifying these interfaces across Federal agencies and
working with them to reduce their attack surface in compliance with the
directive requirements.
CISA is prioritizing development of additional directives to
address operational risk and drive action to reduce overall attack
surface and ensure better coordination across the Federal enterprise.
In fiscal year 2024, CISA is focused on directive requirements to
improve threat detection, incident response, and secure cloud
management. Furthermore, CISA plans to address gaps and redundancies in
legacy directives as a part of a broader strategic approach. Going
forward, CISA will remain committed to analyzing ways to leverage its
Directive Authority to address foundational cybersecurity challenges
and ultimately reduce the likelihood of a future cybersecurity
incident.

expanding our operational collaboration model: increased participation
and value for partners

Our Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC) continues to cultivate
multi-directional information sharing, operational collaboration, and
strong working relationships with members of the FCEB to counter
persistent, emerging cyber threats and comprehensively strengthen the
evolving Federal cyber domain.
In fiscal year 2023, JCDC established a portfolio-based approach to
FCEB engagements, enabling more focused operational engagements with
individual FCEB agencies and improving on-going collaboration and
multi-directional information exchange across the FCEB. This approach
organizes our FCEB engagements into 7 portfolios, each with dedicated
CISA portfolio managers and cyber experts. The seven portfolios are
Energy and Science, Financial and Business, Interior Services, Security
and Foreign Affairs, Medicine and Agriculture, Infrastructure and
Government Administration, and Education and Labor. Each portfolio
includes CFO Act Agencies as well as smaller and micro agencies. In
fiscal year 2023, CISA held 68 kickoff meetings (including meetings
with 21 CFO Act agencies).
To further drive focused and impactful information exchange and
joint collaborative action, CISA also established critically important
communications pathways through Slack, including channels built around
FCEB cybersecurity news, FCEB indicators of interest, cybersecurity
vulnerabilities impacting the FCEB, a channel specific to agency CISOs,
and a dedicated channel for micro agencies.

achieving persistent visibility: real-time analysis of fceb networks

The authorities granted to CISA to enable persistent access and
proactive hunting have fundamentally changed the way we work with
agencies to identify, assess, and remediate malicious activity on
Federal networks. Since 2021, CISA has procured over 1.2 million EDR
licenses to assist agencies in deploying advanced, host-based
protections that provide advanced monitoring, detection, and
remediation capabilities on Government laptops, workstations, and
servers. EDR supports threat-hunting and deep visibility in behaviors
and activity on covered endpoints, making it one of the most effective
cyber defense technologies available. Each of these EDR tools includes
the ability for CISA threat hunters to have direct and persistent
access to agencies' EDR platforms. With this access, our threat hunters
can easily conduct hunt operations across Federal agency organizational
boundaries, greatly enhancing CISA's ability to rapidly identify and
correlate malicious behavior in accordance with fiscal year 2021 NDAA
authorities and EO 14028 requirements.
This translates to a paradigm shift in CISA's Threat Hunting
services. Coupled with the operational visibility afforded through the
CDM Federal Dashboard, CISA acts as a force multiplier to assist agency
cyber operators in the investigation and remediation of cyber threats.
In the past, providing this level of support to agencies required CISA
to send fly-away teams with their own equipment to embed with agencies
on-site, often in a process that took days or weeks to complete. Now,
CISA can provide this support in near-real time. Throughout fiscal year
2024, CISA will be executing proactive hunts of agencies continually
targeted by malicious actors and baselining the FCEB enterprise to
inform strategic initiatives, modernization, and optimization.

creating a modern cyber defense agency: toward integrated data analysis

Through years of managing the National Cybersecurity Protection
System (NCPS), CISA gained a first-hand view of evolving adversary
techniques and changes in the technology environment, including
previously unseen tactics, tools, and techniques, increased
sophistication, and persistence with highly advanced evasion
capabilities. As our adversaries and technology change, we are adapting
accordingly.
The legacy NCPS program, to include the EINSTEIN sensor suite, was
built to provide intrusion detection and prevention capabilities,
advanced analytics, and information-sharing capabilities to mitigate
cyber threats to Federal civilian networks. Looking ahead, CISA has
proposed several program and activity changes reflected in the
President's fiscal year 2024 budget, focused particularly on the
transition of certain legacy NCPS systems into the proposed Cyber
Analytics and Data System (CADS) program.
To understand the transition to CADS, one must begin by
understanding a fundamental transition within CISA. For much of CISA's
history, including as our precursor organization, we had minimal access
to relevant and actionable cybersecurity information. The past 2 years
have seen a fundamental shift: as described throughout this testimony,
our analysts now have unprecedented access to ever-increasing amounts
of operational data from our sensors and EDR tools deployed across
agency networks, from our shared services, and from our partners. To
make best use of this data, we need an operating environment that is
highly interoperable with many systems and their highly diverse input
and output requirements, capable of consuming massive data amounts,
including multiple sources of threat intelligence and information and
rapidly-growing data volumes, and is reliable, adaptable, and includes
the most robust security measures to protect all systems, data, and
users. CADS will ingest data from myriad sources, apply robust
automation and analytics, and provide CISA's full suite of
cybersecurity teams with access to analytical results, threat insights,
and detailed visualization with capabilities to share results and
mitigations in real time.
NCPS intrusion detection capabilities, specifically EINSTEIN 1 and
EINSTEIN 2, will continue to be sustained under the legacy NCPS program
and will undergo sensor suite upgrades and modernization. EINSTEIN 3A
(E3A) Domain Name Service (DNS) intrusion prevention services will be
sunset after fiscal year 2024. To protect the Federal enterprise
against the latest threats and support emerging technologies, CISA is
actively working on upgrading these intrusion detection and prevention
capabilities. The latest example is the Protective DNS resolver, a
state-of-the art recursive DNS resolver service that replaces the
sunset E3A DNS services and prevents Government internet traffic from
reaching known malicious destinations.
CADS is designed to provide a critical capability as CISA continues
to evolve: A modern, scalable, unclassified analytic infrastructure for
CISA's cyber operators. CADS will serve as the cornerstone of CISA's
Joint Collaborative Environment (JCE), the central technology ecosystem
by which CISA and its partners will integrate, analyze, collaborate,
and act on cybersecurity information to conduct cyber defense
operations. A key recommendation of the 2020 U.S. Cyberspace Solarium
Commission Report, the JCE will support real-time data and information
sharing and operational collaboration by integrating internal and
external information sources, including CADS, threat intelligence
platform feeds, and various-source inputs.

the future of cisa's federal cybersecurity role

A strong operational lead agency is essential for the rapid
identification and mitigation of near-term urgent threats and
vulnerabilities as well as ensuring a consistent baseline for long-term
capability investments and risk management decisions. To achieve this
vision, CISA is focused on growing in several key areas.
First, we will further define and strengthen CISA's role as the
operational lead for FCEB cybersecurity. Specifically, we are taking
steps to strengthen CISA's ability to lead operational collaboration
across the FCEB, including by providing collaboration tools,
facilitating information exchange, and planning for operational risk
reduction. Going forward, we will continue to evolve governance
processes and capabilities for communications mechanisms such as Slack
to enable joint action, foster transparency, and increase visibility
across the FCEB. CISA is also exploring potential technology solutions
for a threat intelligence platform that allows us to on-board partners
into trusted enclaves to openly exchange threat information, as well as
building out a cyber playbook to enhance mutually-supportive FCEB
response and coordination during cyber events.
Second, to further ensure unity of effort, shared visibility, and
consistently effective security capabilities--and in line with the
National Cybersecurity Strategy and its Implementation Plan--we will
strengthen CISA's role as the shared service provider where there are
clear gaps or requirements to do so. This includes assessing the
expansion of our shared services to FCEB agencies to provide scalable,
cost-effective capabilities that drive down known security risks, while
growing into our role as the lead for providing and setting benchmarks
for cybersecurity shared services.
Third, we will strengthen our ability to gain operational
visibility across FCEB agencies, through capabilities such as our CDM
program, and using this visibility to more quickly address potential
intrusions and drive remediation. CISA looks forward to working with
Congress, OMB, and ONCD to optimize CISA's ability to build and sustain
the operational visibility required to achieve this vision, such as
through the development of a plan for centralized services as outlined
in the National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan.
Fourth, we will further drive and support adoption of modern
security practices, such as Zero Trust principles and secure cloud
implementations. We will partner closely with OMB and ONCD to ensure
agencies' long-term plans will align with and enable our operational
needs like defensible networks, operational visibility, and expedited
response. We will further build on newly-proposed procurement clauses
to help agencies incorporate cybersecurity and transparency
requirements into each of their contract relationships.
Fifth, we will bolster our ability and capacity to provide agencies
with hands-on support, including through our Federal Enterprise
Improvement Teams, to help agencies accelerate progress toward
implementing Zero Trust architectures and implement our directives.
Finally, at a strategic level, we will continue working to defend
the FCEB enterprise as a cohesive, interdependent organization, where
agencies maintain their responsibility and authority to manage their
own systems while centralized investments effectively address cross-
agency risks.

conclusion

As described in our Cybersecurity Strategic Plan, ``we must be
clear-eyed about the future we seek, one in which damaging cyber
intrusions are a shocking anomaly, in which organizations are secure
and resilient, in which technology products are safe and secure by
design and default.'' We must first build this future within and across
our own Federal agencies--the American people expect and deserve
nothing less.
We will continue to take swift action to make the FCEB a hard
target for our adversaries. This work will continue to take
investment--in technology, in people, in partnerships. The past several
years have shown the progress we can make with the support of Congress
and our inter-agency partners, while leveraging insights and expertise
from industry. Now is the time for us to take the next steps forward--
and we must take them together.
Thank you again for the opportunity to be to appear [sic] before
the subcommittee. I look forward to your questions.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Goldstein. It's always
impressive to me how you memorize that entire statement.
Sometimes I have to look at my own name before I say it out
loud.
Mr. Swalwell. Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Mr. DeRusha, I now recognize you for 5 minutes to summarize
your opening statement.

STATEMENT OF CHRISTOPHER J. DE RUSHA, FEDERAL CHIEF
INFORMATION  SECURITY  OFFICER, OFFICE OF MANAGE-
MENT AND  BUDGET;  DEPUTY NATIONAL CYBER DIRECTOR
FOR FEDERAL CYBERSECURITY, OFFICE OF THE NATIONAL
CYBER DIRECTOR

Mr. DeRusha. Thank you, Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member
Swalwell, and Members of the subcommittee. I really appreciate
you holding this important hearing today to discuss Federal
cybersecurity governance.
I'm always pleased to testify in front of you with my good
friend and colleague Eric Goldstein from CISA, and we look
forward to updating you on the progress we're making on
governance efforts, in particular where we've made good strides
in implementing Executive Order 14028, which we colloquially
refer to as the cyber EO, OMB's national--or, sorry, Zero Trust
Strategy for the Federal civilian government, and then the
President's recently-released National Cybersecurity Strategy.
As was mentioned, I am both the Federal chief information
security officer and deputy national cyber director in ONCD,
and in both of these roles I'm focused on ensuring that the
Federal enterprise is taking a holistic view and approach to
confronting threats. We often refer to this as collective
defense.
That unity of effort enables us to align this National
Cybersecurity Strategy, which was developed by the Office of
the National Cyber Director and issued by the President, with
the policy guidance that's coming from OMB and all the
operational assistance programs just outlined by Eric from
CISA.
It's all in the name of ensuring that departments and
agencies have the direction, the resources, the information,
but most importantly the support that they need to be able to
protect the Federal systems and data.
I'll tell you we're making meaningful progress toward
achieving our goals of collective defense. Honestly, the
importance of strong governance to that end cannot be
overstated.
So in May 2021, President Biden's Executive Order 14028 set
us on the path to aggressively and ambitiously shift our
mindset to one that is very clear-eyed about the adversaries'
capabilities and intent.
Over the last 2 years, the evidence is clear. The Federal
enterprise is better defended when we employ modern Zero Trust
architecture and principles. Agencies are implementing higher
levels of encryption and leveraging common toolsets that
establish vigilance within our Federal systems. We've also seen
deployment of phishing-resistant multifactor authentication as
a proven way to combat an adversary's ability to gain a
foothold in any system.
We must continue to aggressively invest in making our
systems more defensible by employing widely-accepted Zero Trust
principles to better detect and contain our adversaries who are
seeking to disrupt us from achieving our goals.
With the President's issuance of the National Cybersecurity
Strategy in March of this year, we're building on this progress
by setting an affirmative vision for managing risk in the
digital age.
The strategy outlines two fundamental shifts to achieving
that goal: First, we need to rebalance responsibility for
managing cyber risk by expecting more of the most capable and
best-positioned actors--that includes the Federal Government--
to make our digital ecosystem secure and resilient rather than
placing this burden on individuals, small businesses, local
governments, and critical infrastructure operators, who often
do not have sufficient expertise and resources to do it on
their own.
Second, our economy and society must incentivize activity
and make cyber space more reliable over the long term. The
strategy outlines how the Federal Government will use all
available tools to reshape incentives and achieve unity of
effort in a collaborative, equitable, and mutually-beneficial
manner.
The Federal Government's taking a data-driven approach to
measuring the investments and progress that we're making toward
achieving the actions that are set out in the strategy. In
July, we released a transparent roadmap to achieve these goals,
the National Cybersecurity Strategy Implementation Plan. The
plan details high-impact Federal initiatives, from protecting
American jobs by combating cyber crime to building a skilled
cyber work force equipped to excel in our increasingly digital
economy.
Each initiative is assigned a responsible agency and has a
time line for completion. In fact, 18 agencies are leading
initiatives, and ONCD is coordinating the activities of this
whole-of-Government plan, which will include an annual report
to the President and Congress on the status of the
implementation.
To ensure funding proposals are aligned to the President's
budget request, ONCD and OMB have issued a joint cybersecurity
priorities memo to inform the fiscal year 2025 budget bill. The
Federal Government's ability to deliver services to the
American people while providing the confidence that their data
is protected is contingent upon a strong foundation of
cybersecurity. The strategic path set by this administration is
enhancing collective defense to ensure our Federal systems are
safe, secure, and resilient.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look
forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. DeRusha follows:]

Prepared Statement of Christopher J. DeRusha

October 25, 2023

Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for holding this important hearing to highlight
Federal cybersecurity governance efforts. I am pleased to testify
before you today with the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency's (CISA) Executive Assistant Director for Cybersecurity Eric
Goldstein, a key partner in this effort.
I will use this opportunity to update you on progress the Federal
Government has made in implementing the President's Executive Order on
Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity (E.O. 14028), the Office of
Management and Budget's (OMB) Zero Trust Strategy, and the President's
National Cybersecurity Strategy (NCS). These efforts, and many others,
have shifted the Federal enterprise toward achieving greater collective
defense.
As I stated in my testimony before this subcommittee last year,
E.O. 14028 recognizes a hard truth: ``The United States faces
persistent and increasingly sophisticated malicious cyber campaigns
that threaten the public sector, the private sector, and ultimately the
American people's security and privacy.'' The E.O. outlines a bold
cybersecurity modernization agenda and serves as our roadmap for
securing the Federal enterprise. Following publication of the E.O., OMB
released the Federal Zero Trust Strategy (M-22-09) in January 2022 and
six additional implementation memos to guide agencies in meeting the
goals of E.O. 14028.
Released in March of this year, the President's NCS builds on these
foundational initiatives and provides an affirmative vision for cyber
space. The NCS calls for changes to the underlying dynamics of the
digital ecosystem, to shift the advantage to its defenders, and
persistently frustrate the forces that threaten it. The President's
vision is a defensible, resilient digital ecosystem where it is
costlier to attack systems than defend them; where sensitive or private
information is secure and protected; and where neither incidents nor
errors cascade into catastrophic, systemic consequences. In creating
these conditions, we can and must seize the opportunity to take full
advantage of technological advances while instilling America's values.
A key objective of the NCS is achieving public-private
collaboration at scale to reduce cyber risk at a systemic level. I
appreciate the subcommittee's approach to tackling hard cybersecurity
problems and was encouraged to see the subcommittee seeking feedback
from our private-sector partners last month. The private sector owns
and operates the majority of our critical infrastructure and develops
the leading digital technologies we use in our own environments, so
their feedback and participation in incident response exercises,
roundtable discussions, and other forums like this are critical to
strengthening the entire ecosystem.
As Federal chief information security officer and deputy national
cyber director for Federal cybersecurity, I am focused on Government-
wide improvement and ensuring the Federal enterprise is taking a
holistic approach to confronting evolving cyber threats. My role
encompasses the oversight, governance, and accountability of Federal
cybersecurity efforts, as well as aligning budgetary resources to
policy guidance through our annual priorities memo and working with our
resource management colleagues in OMB to assess agency funding needs.
CISA plays many critical roles as the operational lead for Federal
cybersecurity, most importantly as Federal agencies' security
coordinator. A model where hundreds of Federal agencies are left on
their own to defend themselves is not sustainable. CISA programs and
services provide an enterprise-view of risk across Federal agencies,
enabling a collective approach to defense, and often free up agencies'
scarce dollars and resources to be allocated elsewhere.
My testimony here today alongside CISA's executive assistant
director for cybersecurity, Eric Goldstein, illustrates the constant
coordination occurring between the Office of the National Cyber
Director (ONCD), OMB, and CISA. This collaboration is essential as it
enables us to align the NCS published by ONCD on behalf of the
President with the policy guidance issued by OMB and the operational
cybersecurity assistance and programs CISA offers to departments and
agencies.

setting the strategic direction

The President's NCS calls for two fundamental shifts in how the
United States allocates roles, responsibilities, and resources in cyber
space.
First, the most capable and best-positioned actors in cyber space
must be better stewards of the digital ecosystem. Today, end-users,
like your constituents, bear too great a burden for mitigating
cybersecurity risks. Individuals, small businesses, local governments,
and many critical infrastructure operators have limited cyber expertise
and resources. Yet, these users' choices--even when well-intentioned--
can have a significant impact on our National cybersecurity. Across
both the public and private sectors, we must expect more of the most
capable and best-positioned actors--including the Federal Government--
to make our digital ecosystem secure and resilient.
In a free and interconnected society, protecting data and assuring
the reliability of critical systems must be the responsibility not only
of the owners and operators of the systems holding our data and
enabling our daily lives, but also of the technology providers building
and servicing these systems.
Second, our economy and society must incentivize activity that
makes cyber space more reliable over the long term. Protecting the
systems we have now, while investing in and building toward a future
digital ecosystem that is more inherently defensible and resilient are
both priorities. The strategy outlines how the Federal Government will
use all available tools to reshape incentives and achieve unity of
effort in a collaborative, equitable, and mutually beneficial manner.
We must ensure that market forces and public programs alike reward
security and resilience, build a robust cyber workforce that draws from
all parts of our society, embrace security and resilience by design,
strategically coordinate research and development investments in
cybersecurity, and promote the collaborative stewardship of our digital
ecosystem with our allies and partners.
Our approach to Federal cybersecurity governance embodies these two
major shifts. The Federal Government can better support the defense of
critical infrastructure by making its own systems more defensible and
resilient. This administration is committed to improving Federal
cybersecurity through near-term efforts like multi-factor
authentication, endpoint detection and response, encryption, logging,
and establishing skilled security teams. We are also committed to
longer-term efforts to implement Zero Trust architectures and modernize
both information technology and operational technology infrastructure.
This includes the annual release of a cybersecurity budget priorities
memorandum to Federal departments and agencies. This annual guidance,
issued jointly by ONCD and OMB, outlines the administration's cross-
agency cyber investment priorities and directs agencies to prioritize
cybersecurity efforts that will bolster key initiatives laid out by the
NCS. By aligning our budget requests with our priorities, we will
ensure that agencies are investing in durable, long-term solutions that
are secure by design.

implementation and outcomes

The strategic objectives outlined in the NCS require a strong focus
on implementation. The Federal Government is taking a data-driven
approach and will measure investments and progress toward meeting the
goals of the strategy. The Federal Government is leading by example,
ensuring its own networks and systems are adopting best-in-class
security measures.
Additionally, over the last 2\1/2\ years, we have seen departments
and agencies across the Executive branch drive forward in implementing
E.O. 14028 and the Federal Zero Trust Strategy (M-22-09). Across the
Federal enterprise, agencies submitted Zero Trust plans that align to
the vision and goals laid out in M-22-09 (Moving the U.S. Government
Toward Zero Trust Cybersecurity Principles). Agencies have made
meaningful progress paying down technical debt and modernizing security
practices and tooling. Agencies are implementing higher levels of
encryption, using proven methods, and leveraging common toolsets that
establish constant vigilance within our Federal systems. Additionally,
the deployment of strong, industry-leading phishing-resistant multi-
factor authentication makes it harder for an adversary to gain a
foothold in any system.
In furtherance of E.O. 14028's goals, OMB has issued several
guidance documents to better protect Federal networks and minimize the
Government's risk exposure. M-21-30 (Protecting Critical Software
Through Enhanced Security Measures) is intended to: (1) Protect
critical software and critical software platforms from unauthorized
access and usage; (2) protect the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of data used by these software and software platforms; and
(3) allow agencies to quickly detect, respond to, and recover from
threats and incidents involving critical software and critical software
platforms. Additionally, M-21-31 (Improving the Federal Government's
Investigative and Remediation Capabilities Related to Cybersecurity
Incidents) established requirements for logging, log retention, and log
management across Federal Civilian Executive branch agencies. This will
ultimately increase information sharing, empowering both accelerated
incident response and more effective information system defense. Work
continues on implementation of Section 4, Enhancing Software Supply
Chain Security, of E.O. 14028. M-22-18 (Enhancing the Security of the
Software Supply Chain through Secure Software Development Practices)
and M-23-16 (Update to Memorandum M-22-18) seek to minimize the risks
associated with running unvetted technologies on agency networks. OMB
and CISA have worked in partnership to release the Self-Attestation
Common Form, which directs software producers to provide Government
users with assurances that they have taken specific measures to secure
the development of their software products.
Implementing the bold changes within E.O. 14028 requires
partnership with the private sector. On October 3, the Federal
Acquisition Regulation Council published two proposed rules for public
comment that implement Section 2, Removing Barriers to Sharing Threat
Information, of E.O. 14028: (1) Cyber Threat and Incident Reporting and
Information Sharing, and (2) Standardizing Cybersecurity Requirements
for Unclassified Federal Information Systems. These proposed rules
would require establishing minimum, consistent cybersecurity standards
that apply to contracts for Federal information systems; incident
reporting and CISA and Federal Bureau of Investigation access to
contractor facilities and systems for forensic analysis; and implements
IPv6 capability requirements, among others. In addition to implementing
the requirements of Section 2 of E.O. 14028, these rules also propose
changes necessary to implement the Internet of Things Cybersecurity
Improvement Act of 2020. These proposed rules open the dialog with the
public and our industry partners on the steps necessary to remove
barriers to information sharing, provide consistent processes for
threat reporting, and implement consistent cybersecurity standards. We
will continue to work with our industry partners to ensure the vision
of E.O. 14028 is fully realized.
The Federal Government is also leading the way in transitioning to
Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC). Per National Security Memorandum-10,
``the United States must prioritize the timely and equitable transition
of cryptographic systems to quantum-resistant cryptography, with the
goal of mitigating as much of the quantum risk as is feasible by
2035.'' Federal agencies were asked to conduct an initial inventory of
their cryptographic systems vulnerable to a Cryptanalytically Relevant
Quantum Computer (CRQC) and the initial cost estimates to transition
those systems. Agencies delivered on this request this summer. This is
the first time an inventory such as this has been collected, and as
such there is continued work that will be needed with agencies to
refine the inventories and cost estimates. Agencies will be updating
this inventory annually and initial analysis indicates agencies are
already thinking through the costs of the upgrades and transition to
PQC. Next year, OMB will be delivering a more in-depth report to
Congress on the status of agency transition to PQC, to include a risk
analysis and initial cost estimates.
Long-term and large-scale change requires continued and consistent
investment, complemented by innovative funding mechanisms, such as the
Technology Modernization Fund (TMF). The TMF has played a critical role
in supporting agencies on their journey to more modern cybersecurity
practices, serving as a catalyst to show what's possible across
Government and scale lessons learned while maintaining rigorous project
vetting and sustained oversight. With the $1 billion investment from
Congress through the American Rescue Plan Act, the TMF Board has
invested over $600 million in 29 projects across 23 agencies to help
address immediate security gaps and elevate the foundational security
of Federal agencies, with an emphasis on Zero Trust, multi-factor
authentication, and standardizing secure data and information sharing.

conclusion

This administration, both through Executive action and by working
with Congress, has made cybersecurity an immediate priority. Together,
we have been extremely active in laying the strategic groundwork for
the future of Federal cybersecurity to enable the U.S. Government to
deliver the services on which the American public depends. Building
upon the work that has been accomplished through E.O. 14028 and the
Federal Zero Trust Strategy, we will continue to help departments and
agencies implement the priorities laid out in the NCS with the
diligence this work requires and the urgency the moment demands.
Realizing our vision of a defensible and resilient digital economy
requires both whole-of-Nation collaboration to rebalance the
responsibility of securing cyber space and realigning our incentive
structure to favor long-term investments. I appreciate this
subcommittee's interest and support and I am confident that through
partnership and frank discussions about where we need additional
improvement, we will build a more defensible Federal enterprise.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look forward
to your questions.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. DeRusha.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized. I now
recognize myself for 5 minutes for questioning.
Mr. Goldstein, as I said in my opening statement, we
gathered input from private-sector witnesses in our last
hearing evaluating CISA's Flagship Federal Cybersecurity
Programs, the CDM program and the National Cybersecurity
Protection System Program. There are a few outstanding
questions directly from our witnesses that I have about these
programs specifically.
I want to start with how is CISA modernizing CDM to
consider newer technologies like cloud-based services to
complement legacy providers?
Mr. Goldstein. This is absolutely foundational to our
success. We know that the traditional model where we focus on
securing on-premises infrastructure and assets doesn't scale to
meet the--how agencies actually use technology today or how
adversaries are targeting us.
So even in fiscal year 2024, we are making significant
investments in expanding CDM's visibility into mobile assets
and cloud assets. We work closely with industry both through,
for example, industry days, requests for information, and going
to, for example, events where industry is presenting on the
latest technology to make sure that we are adapting those
innovations into the program accordingly.
Now, certainly where there are innovative companies that
have solutions that can help with our enterprise, we want to
hear from them. So my ask would be, if there are companies that
are not part of the program today that think they have a
solution that could help to reach out to us, because we want to
understand the state-of-the-art and apply it quickly to our
shared goals.
Mr. Garbarino. What's the best way to reach out to you?
Mr. Goldstein. So we have a vendor engagement. So you can
just go to the website and look at vendor engagement. We have a
single portal where any vendor can reach out to CISA and be
part of our programs.
Mr. Garbarino. The response is pretty quick?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. Great. Now I have another one: How does
CISA measure the success of its Federal cyber programs,
considering it spends almost one-third of its budget on
strengthening FCEB networks?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We were really excited a few
months ago to issue our first-ever Cyber Strategic Plan that
for the first time actually had measures of effectiveness for
security outcomes.
So we are really focused now on actually measuring very
specific security outcomes. For example, the mean time to fix
vulnerabilities, how many of what we call known exploited
vulnerabilities are actually present on Federal networks, how
quickly can we detect intrusions. So we are focused on
measuring security outcomes that then we can show are a result
of the investments that we're making.
On some of these measures, like mean time to reduce
vulnerabilities, we're making a lot of progress. Other measures
we know are more forward-leaning and will take more time to
collect data to measure against.
Mr. Garbarino. Have the results been getting better?
Mr. Goldstein. They have been. I will offer one example.
For the known exploited vulnerabilities that are visible from
the internet across Federal networks, we have seen a 79 percent
reduction over the past year, based upon our Attack Surface
Management efforts and driving agencies to adhere to BOD 22-01.
So we are seeing major progress in really key areas, but
certainly more work to do.
Mr. Garbarino. I just want to ask this one also: Has CISA
seen incidents on Federal networks that could have been
prevented through the use of technologies in CDM? Where was the
disconnect?
Mr. Goldstein. Certainly, it is still the case that every
organization experiences malicious cyber activity, and there
are certainly control gaps that may enable an intrusion to
progress further than we would like it to. I think where we are
today is we have the visibility that we need to identify
conditions that adversaries can exploit, and we have the
visibility we need in most cases to identify adversary
activity.
The work we are doing now is to make sure that we can drive
action against that information. So we know that, for example,
there are still exploitable vulnerabilities across Federal
networks. The more that we can work with agencies to make sure
that they also have the resources that they need to fix
vulnerabilities and make sure they have the right controls in
place, consistent with a Zero Trust Strategy, that's going to
help us to help take us to the next level in our maturation.
Mr. Garbarino. Does CISA believe CDM could benefit from a
true shared services model like EINSTEIN?
Mr. Goldstein. We are absolutely looking at the right mix
of delivery models across our portfolio. So, of course, right
now we do offer several services via a shared service model.
For example, I mentioned our Protective DNS program.
You know, as we evaluate the next generation of
technologies that will be delivered through CDM, we are
absolutely going to be flexible in the delivery model that will
add the most value at the best use of taxpayer dollars.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. I don't have time for
another question. I'll probably get you on the second round.
I now recognize Ranking Member Swalwell for 5 minutes for
any questions he may have.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Chairman.
Earlier this month, the Federal Acquisition Regulatory
Council, also known as FAR, issued a proposed rule requiring
Federal contractors to report cyber incidents on CISA within 8
hours of discovery.
This time line is not consistent with other Federal cyber
incident reporting mandates, including the 72-hour reporting
time line authorized in the Cyber Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act, CIRCIA.
As the proposed rule acknowledges, inconsistent reporting
requirements can result in the regulatory community shifting
focus away from security and toward compliance, which could
ultimately jeopardize the security of Federal networks.
Mr. Goldstein, public comments for the FAR Council's
proposed rule are due in December, as I understand it. The
proposed rule for CIRCIA should be released in March. To what
extent was CISA able to engage with the FAR Council in advance
of the proposed rule released on October 3 to ensure that time
lines and definitions are harmonized to the greatest extent
possible?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We engage significantly with the
FAR Council, including our partners at OMB, in development of
these proposed rules, and we very much look forward to
understanding feedback from industry on the proposal.
I will note, as a general matter, Federal contractors are
equally stewards of Americans' data, as are Federal agencies,
and it is absolutely of the utmost importance that we have
significant visibility into cybersecurity incidents and risks
affecting Federal contractors.
Just as we expect Federal agencies to report incidents to
CISA on an urgent time frame, we certainly anticipate expecting
similar requirements from Federal contractors who we trust with
so much of the work of the Federal Government.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. DeRusha, how is the administration
ensuring that any AI-related Executive Orders and policy
guidance will support continued expansion of AI use for cyber
defense?
Mr. DeRusha. Yes. Thank you for the question. So AI policy
is a top topic for us at the White House right now, and the
President will be issuing some Executive action on that soon.
In close follow to that will be a draft memorandum released by
the Office of Management and Budget which will talk about our
proposal for Government use and safe use of AI.
You know, I think the key thing here is we need to use this
technology. We need, as you mentioned, for defensive purposes.
Our adversaries are going to use it, so that would be one
reason, but also to stay apace with, you know, where technology
is moving and global economic competitiveness.
So I think you'll see very shortly from the administration
proposal, which very much embraces the technology for all of
its positive aspects, but also is going to propose some
significant, you know, methods of finding safeguards and
security throughout.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. Mr. Goldstein, we are approaching
a potential Government shutdown on November 17. Can you lay out
for me what would the effect be on CISA if there were a
Government shutdown?
Then also, could you lay out for me what would the effect
be on CISA if a 25 percent cut was actually imposed, as has
been voted on in the past here in the House?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir, absolutely. On the first question,
a lapse in appropriation, while we will rigorously interpret
our legal requirements in determining accepted personnel, you
know, our core operational functions will be able to remain
functional, but all of our strategic or more systematic work to
engage with agencies, to deploy technology, to advance
technology, to the Chairman's question, all of that work will
be on hold.
So we will be in a period of stasis where even as our
adversaries evolve, we will not be able to advance our mission
in the least, including in our critical interactions with
Federal agencies outside of urgent----
Mr. Swalwell. So, for example, like, would JCDC meet in a
Government shutdown?
Mr. Goldstein. So the urgent work that JCDC does to manage
imminent incidents and vulnerabilities would continue. The
critical planning work and publication work that JCDC does
would not.
Mr. Swalwell. Can you speak to the 25 percent cut?
Mr. Goldstein. Absolutely. A significant cut to our budget
would be catastrophic. We would not be able to continue even
sustaining some of the core functions across programs like CDM,
like our shared services.
You know, right now we are at the point where we have
reasonable confidence in our visibility into risks facing
Federal agencies. We would not be able to sustain that
visibility with that significant of a budget cut, and our
adversaries would unequivocally exploit those gaps.
Mr. Swalwell. Thanks. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize my friend from Florida, Mr. Gimenez, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. Now, being that I've been in public
service for a long time, let me tell you that I have never ever
heard somebody in a bureaucracy tell me that a cut to their
budget would not be catastrophic. So I didn't think you were
going to say anything differently.
I'm not saying it's not, I'm just saying I've never heard
it--``Yeah, we can sustain a 25 percent cut or a 5 percent cut
or 2 percent cut, or any kind of cut''--'cause it's always
going to be catastrophic. I always can tell you, being that I
was a head of bureaucracies, sometimes you can sustain some
cuts if you look deep enough. I'll let that go for now.
All right. Reduce vulnerabilities, what does that mean?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. So when a malicious actor--Russia,
China, Iran, North Korea--wants to break into a network, the
way that they will usually do it is they will find a technology
product that was designed in a way that they can run a piece of
software on it and gain access.
Most technology products at some point in time have these
vulnerabilities. Technology is designed by humans. Humans make
mistakes. A vulnerability is just a mistake in how a technology
product was designed. So when--if I'm the Chinese government,
the first thing that I do to break into a Federal network is
I'm going to look at all the technology products, I can see
they're running. I'm going to find one that has a known mistake
and I'm going to use that mistake to gain access into the
network.
So what we do at CISA is we prioritize those products that
have those mistakes that are most important that are being used
by the most severe adversaries. We then use our visibility to
find them, and then we go out to agencies and say, ``You've got
to fix this right away'', and then we can see when they do it.
If they don't do it, then we escalate to senior leadership of
the agency to make sure that the problem is fixed before the
adversary gets there.
Mr. Gimenez. Can I be as bold to say that ``reduce
vulnerabilities'' goes beyond that or should go beyond that? It
seems to me that whatever you do, how secure you think you're
going to be, somebody is always going to crack you. Am I off on
that? Somebody is always going to find a way, if they really
want to, to get through the system.
Is that true or not true?
Mr. Goldstein. So what I'd say, sir, is we know that many
adversaries are opportunistic and adversaries want to find a
network to break into. If we can make the Federal Government
and the agencies and systems we care most about as hard as
possible, many agencies are going to shift their focus
somewhere else.
Mr. Gimenez. I'm not saying that you shouldn't, but I'm
also now maybe laying the predicate for something else, which
is resiliency.
So once a system is cracked and it's tied to some vital
infrastructure, how do we make sure that that infrastructure,
once we know that that system has been penetrated, that we
somehow can decouple that infrastructure so that it continues
to work?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We couldn't agree more. This is
foundational to the principles of Zero Trust that my cowitness
mentioned. The idea behind Zero Trust is, even if an adversary
breaks into a system, they shouldn't be able to achieve an
objective that harms the services upon which Americans depend.
So by making sure that we understand where the most
important data and systems are that we harden those systems,
specifically. To your point, sir, absolutely. If an adversary
breaks into a network, you know, that's bad, but the real harm
we're trying to prevent is those most critical systems and
making sure that those are maximally secure and resilient under
all conditions. That absolutely is the core goal that we're
trying to achieve.
Mr. Gimenez. Where do you think we--where are we on that?
How far along are we on that?
Mr. Goldstein. So we have made tremendous progress. So we
made tremendous progress in identifying the systems that are
most critical. As my co-witness noted, pursuant to the
President's cyber Executive Order, we have made significant
progress in driving adoption of the Zero Trust security
measures to reduce the likelihood of a truly damaging
intrusion.
Now, to your point, Congressman, you know, adversaries
invest significant time, significant money, and we know better
than to say that security is perfect in any event, but
certainly that is exactly our focus and where we are driving
meaningful change.
Mr. Gimenez. In infrastructure, that's vital. Let's say
pipelines, et cetera, electricity and all that is. Have we
worked on a way to decouple from technology, go back and have
the redundancy of, say, back-up systems, the old way of doing
things all manual? Yes, it's not going to be as efficient, but
at least they'll work. Have we tried to strengthen America in
that way?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We spend tremendous time outside
of our Federal cybersecurity mission working with the private
sector and with the Sector Risk Management Agencies.
I will note, for example, this country's major energy
companies have really focused on what they call a black start,
which is their ability to maintain resilience of some
transmission and distribution under all conditions. Similarly,
our major pipeline companies have invested significantly in
being able to revert to manual operations, and that's useful
for a cyber attack or for a national disaster. So certainly,
companies are investing in just that need, sir.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you. My time is up. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Carter from Louisiana for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
Mr. DeRusha and Mr. Goldstein, thank you both. Technology
is moving fast. So the technology modernization fund is helping
Federal agencies improve their cybersecurity. How effective has
it been?
Mr. DeRusha. Congressman, I am a board member on the TMF.
I've found it to be extremely effective. We received a billion-
dollar appropriation under the American Rescue Plan. You know,
over the past couple of years we've made over $600 million of
investments just targeted at cybersecurity alone.
That's almost 30 different projects across 23 agencies,
where there's a significant portion of that project just
focused on enhancing the security----
Mr. Carter. Given the nature of the threats that are out
there with cybersecurity, if you had to sustain a 25 percent, a
10 percent, a 5 percent cut, would that not--wouldn't that
decrease your ability to protect our cyber space?
Mr. DeRusha. It would and meaningfully so.
Mr. Carter. I mention it because my colleague said a moment
ago that no one has ever said that they can sustain cuts. I
understand no one likes to have cuts. But in an area of
cybersecurity, one of the major threats to the security of
America, to talk about cutting those areas is very, very
dangerous.
Mr. DeRusha. Congressman, it would simply mean we would
manage less risk. So----
Mr. Carter. Said differently, we would have more risk to--
--
Mr. DeRusha. That is correct.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. Come at us.
Mr. DeRusha. That is correct.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Goldstein.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. Fully agree. You know, as I
mentioned, one of the critical areas of maturation for Federal
security is not just advancing CISA's resources and authorities
in the years to come, but also making sure that the Federal
agencies have the ability to deploy modern technology and
infrastructure that is, in fact, securable. The TMF has been
absolutely a critical resource in that regard, and certainly
any cuts to it would set us dramatically back on the progress
that we're trying to achieve.
Mr. Carter. In staying ahead of the bad actors who are
moving at rapid pace, not only are you maintaining, but you're
constantly having to adjust as you find new threats that I
imagine are coming on every single day.
Mr. DeRusha. Congressman, specific to the TMF, what's
really helpful about it is if you have an incident, you need
restoration, you need remediation immediately, those are funds
if you put the project forward that you can get fairly fast.
Or if you're working on a Zero Trust migration or
modernization at your agency, maybe you can fast-forward that
by a year, a year-and-a-half by leveraging TMF funds. So, I
mean, you are literally managing more exigent risk faster with
the TMF as a resource.
Mr. Carter. Pay me now or pay me later, and the risk later
is far, far, far greater in our National security.
One of the major shifts we've seen across the Federal
Government has been increased cloud adoption, which has
numerous benefits but also requires a shift in the approach to
securing Federal networks.
Mr. DeRusha, how is the administration ensuring that
Federal cloud migration includes cloud-native security?
Mr. DeRusha. Well, it's a top priority since EO 14028 and
then strongly reinforced in the President's National Cyber
Strategy. This is what we're talking about, that those are the
most resources, the most skill and capability which, in large
part, the cloud service providers all fall in that bucket.
They really need to be ensuring that they are doing
everything they can to protect their own platforms, their own
resources. We may need to make sure that they're doing
everything we would expect them to do. That is, in part,
subject of the new Cyber Review Board effort that we've taken
on.
Also, as they provision products and services to their
customers, which often include Federal agencies, we want to
make sure that they're making it easy for their customers, that
they're putting their configuration settings and giving that
environment with the most secure settings in place, not saying,
here you can have the optionality to put security in place but
as a default turned on. That's been a big part of CISA Secure-
by-Design and Secure-by-Default, which are different things,
efforts and push which are closely aligned between Office of
National Cyber Director and CISA's implementation.
Mr. Carter. Thank you very much.
Very quickly--I've just got about 53 seconds left--Mr.
Goldstein, what is CISA doing to increase the use of cloud-
native security solutions in the CDM program?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. So we are deeply focused on both
ensuring that as we leverage CDM tools to gain visibility
across agencies, we, for example, are deploying cloud security
posture management, or CSPM, solutions as part of that
approach.
Separately from the CDM program, I mentioned that we are
rolling out this calendar year our Attack Surface Management
program that is going to give us extraordinary advances in our
visibility of Federal assets that are operating both on
premises and in the cloud.
I'll offer one more note, sir, which is, working with
individual agencies and our partners at OMB and ONCD to ensure
that agencies are deploying the right security tools in their
cloud infrastructure and that they are driving the cloud
providers to make those tools on by default without added
charge.
Mr. Carter. Would you agree--real quickly, would you agree
that the bad actors out there could care less if we're
Republicans or Democrats?
Mr. Goldstein. Of course, sir.
Mr. Carter. They want to attack Americans. They want to
take our industry. They want to attack our infrastructure. They
don't care about what party battles we may have. Is that
correct?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir.
Mr. Carter. So we have to make sure that we keep you fully
funded that you can defend us against those threats. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I think I'd like to just say that I'm very proud that this
entire subcommittee, both sides, bipartisanly voted against
those cuts in the appropriations bill.
I'd even go on to further say, Mr. Carter, that I think
even a CR is not good for what we're doing here with
cybersecurity. We have to do a fully funded appropriations
package to make sure we keep up with technology. I think the
rest of--all of our colleagues understand that. I think this is
probably one of the most bipartisan committees in Congress.
So, with that, I now yield to my friend from Mississippi,
Mr. Ezell, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Our Nation's adversaries continue to find new ways to
undermine our national security. We see this in the increased
cyber attacks. For example, in 2020 Russian hackers altered a
code in the software SolarWinds to compromise a secured data of
several Federal agencies and critical infrastructure providers.
This attack was one of the most wide-spread hacking campaigns
ever launched, from what I understand.
In 2021, the Biden administration released an Executive
Order to improve the Nation's cybersecurity. Since it has been
2\1/2\ years since the Executive Order, I hope that agencies
have made progress in implementing the requirements outlined.
However, lately there have been some reports that the National
Security Advisor sent a memo to agencies reinforcing the need
to follow these requirements.
Mr. DeRusha, which requirements of the Executive Order are
agencies finding the hardest to follow and why is that?
Mr. DeRusha. Well, Congressman, as you highlight, Executive
Order 14028 laid out a bunch of aggressive actions in removing
barriers to information sharing, modernizing our cybersecurity
practices--we've talked about Zero Trust--improving software
security supply chain--we've done a lot of work around that--
and also ensuring that we are as prepared as we can possibly be
for managing incidents as they will continue to occur.
You know, look, we've taken an approach of having a large
strategy, multi-year, with the Zero Trust Strategy, but we've
also focused on a few areas like multifactor and encryption.
You know, traditionally implementing phishing-resistant
multifactor authentication has been hard for agencies and there
was a lot of work, but it is something that can really stop one
of the most common types of attacks dead in its tracks. So
there have been lots of challenges around that.
At times, you could find that it's a contractor-operated
system and it's not in the contract that they have to have MFA,
and it's more expensive and they won't implement it. You can
find work force and capacity constraints around it,
modernization challenges where the tech needs to be modernized
before it can employ modern encryption and authentication.
So I think those are some of the areas that we've been
really focused on but have also, you know, shown where there's
lots of gaps and challenges across.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you.
Mr. Goldstein, what can CISA do to improve an agency's
ability to follow these requirements?
Mr. Goldstein. Thank you, sir. There's a few areas. The
first is, as I mentioned in my opening, we are focused on
working with individual agencies through a team that we
maintain called the Federal Enterprise Improvement Team. This
was actually created with the help of Congress through the
American Rescue Plan Act several years ago.
What this team does is actually deploys two Federal
civilian agencies, sits down with the chief security officer
and his or her team, and walks through their gaps and actually
helps them figure out how they can make progress. So one way is
just by providing that direct almost consultative support to
agencies to help them address constraints and progress on their
journey.
We are also evaluating additional tools, technologies,
services that in the future might be able to help agencies on
this journey. But also just to tie it back, sir, to Mr.
Carter's point, which is one real constraint here is agencies
using old technology that actually isn't able to adapt to these
modern security controls. The more that collectively we can
invest not only in security but also modernization, that will
smooth the path for adoption.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much. You know, we're here to do
as much as we can because we understand. I've spent my entire
life as a law enforcement officer, and this is new to me and to
the country if you look at it.
So we want to do everything we can to help you and work
with this committee to get it done.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize my friend, and happy he's here. He got a
little late, but if you ever have the opportunity he has a
lovely singing voice. My friend from New Jersey, Mr. Menendez.
I recognize him for 5 minutes.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. Sometimes I do wonder
why I show up for your committee, which it's a pleasure to see
the witnesses and the Ranking Member, my friends across the
aisle, my friends here, the staff, everyone except the
Chairman.
Currently, the CDM program is designed to monitor IT assets
across Federal agencies. However, as technology evolves, risk
of internet of things, devices, and operational technology
continue to increase. We must ensure Federal network security
programs reflect the current attack structure.
Mr. Goldstein, how does CISA plan to ensure CDM can better
monitor the full range of technology assets that pose a risk to
Federal agencies?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. We actually issued a binding
operational directive a few months ago, Binding Operational
Directive 23-01, that required agencies to conduct scanning of
their assets at specific intervals and then provide automated
results of those scans back to CISA.
That directive specifically included IoT and OT assets for
just that reason, because we know, as articulated in the IC's
Annual Threat Assessment, that there are adversaries who seek
not only to steal information but to cause destructive impacts.
If you seek destructive impacts, you are going to seek to
compromise likely operational technology, and we need to drive
risk reduction in that space as well.
So certainly as we continue to modernize and refresh
technologies as part of CDM, we will make sure that the
technology therein is capable of scanning for vulnerabilities
in IoT and OT assets, but that is already a mandate for
agencies to be doing today.
Mr. Menendez. And you have a status following the issuance
of that directive, in terms of how Federal agencies have been
responding?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. So at this point now all CFO Act
agencies, who are the largest agencies, are compliant and
reporting automated data to CISA. There are several dozen other
agencies who are also doing so, and we are working with the
residual agencies to make sure that they have the technology
and resources they need to do the scanning and reporting at the
right intervals. But thus far, sir, agencies are meeting the
time lines as prescribed in the directive.
Mr. Menendez. Great. It's good to hear. In April, CISA
released an updated version of Zero Trust Maturity Model. This
version is aligned with OMB Zero Trust Strategy, which seeks to
bring Federal agencies in line with Zero Trust security goals
by the end of fiscal year 2024.
Mr. DeRusha, with less than a year until that deadline,
what is your assessment of the status of Federal agency efforts
to achieve OMB's Zero Trust security goals?
Mr. DeRusha. We have made a lot of progress. You know, the
key thing here--and you mentioned Capability Maturity Model,
which we did align the strategy to--is that we have to make
progress not in just one area.
We have to make progress in identity management, in
understanding where our sensitive data is and tracking that in
an automated way, device management, you know, network
segmentation and applications, right? It's across all of that.
Then below all of those pillars, we need to make sure that we
have the appropriate governance in place.
So we've seen investments in all of these things. We asked
each agency for a specific implementation plan. In some
instances we set specific deadlines, and they've been meeting
those. But we also gave some flexibility over that 3-year
period for them to tell us sort-of what order of events they
wanted to achieve the actions that we laid out.
You know, we do a lot of governance and oversight of that.
We use our FISMA metrics to track progress as well. So, you
know, we have the data to show as well that we're making
meaningful progress. But it will also, to get to the optimal
state of Zero Trust, take some time. You know, I just want to
be clear that that strategy was really an action plan to get
onto this road map, and that we've got to move up that stack of
Capability Maturity Model with continued investment.
Mr. Menendez. So you mentioned a lot of progress,
meaningful progress. You also mentioned flexibility. The
deadline is approaching. Do you think that they will meet the
goals by the end of fiscal year 2024?
Mr. DeRusha. Yes. I believe we will meet the goals that we
set out in that strategy by 2024. You know, in some instances
there will be opportunities for improvement, but I think it's--
you know, we're going to keep going, right? Like, there's going
to be another iteration.
But technology moves so fast. That's part of why we set the
3-year target. Like, we want to learn from these first 3 years.
We've got communities of action. Agencies are learning from
each other. We're going to take their input and feedback and
then build that next layer of the strategy.
Mr. Menendez. I would just encourage you to just keep
moving as quickly as possible because, as you alluded to, the
technology is quickly evolving. So we can't rest on sort-of the
plans from a year ago, 3 years ago. We have to continuously be
monitoring and implementing.
But just one quick question for Mr. Goldstein before my
time runs out: How is CISA supporting Federal agencies as they
seek to implement the Zero Trust Maturity Model?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. As my co-witness mentioned, we've
created a Zero Trust community of practice where we have
hundreds of participants across agencies who meet to discuss
best practices, constraints, and the way ahead.
Then additionally, through our Federal Enterprise
Improvement Team, we provide agencies with direct support and
guidance on their concrete issues.
Then finally, it is also the case that there are aspects of
the Zero Trust Maturity Model that can actually be addressed by
CISA services. So where that's the case, we just want to make
sure that we are offering those services to any agency that
requires it.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you so much. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Mr. Swalwell. Actually, would the gentleman from New Jersey
yield for a song request?
Mr. Menendez. My time is up.
Mr. Swalwell. Oh, that's too bad.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to return to the discussion of Attack Surface
Management. As we know, our sophisticated adversaries, like
Russia and China, are constantly probing our Nation's Federal,
State, and local critical infrastructure to try to identify
vulnerabilities. It's very important that we be able--our
network defenders must be able to identify where those
vulnerabilities are before they are exploited by those
adversaries. So they need to be able to view that network
attack surface through the eyes of the adversary, continuously
evolve to be prepared to defend those internet-facing assets.
As we've discussed today, Congress invested in an Attack
Surface Management program at CISA so that CISA can provide
Federal and non-Federal stakeholders visibility into those
vulnerabilities. I'd like to hear an update from you about how
that is working. We're hearing good things back, but we'd like
to know more about how that's working and where you see it
going from here, how we can continue to expand that work.
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. It's a great question. So, you
know, as you noted, there are going to be really two game-
changing advances as we fully deploy our Attack Surface
Management capability.
The first is getting better visibility into the assets
across all of the entities who we want to support, whether
Federal or non-Federal; and the second is to increase the
number of organizations participating in our visibility
programs by several multiples.
So at this point, over the past year we did a series of
technology evaluations. We have obligated the resources that
Congress so helpfully provided, and we are now at the point
where we are rolling out this capability with the full rollout
to be completed by the end of this calendar year.
I will already say that the visibility that we gain through
this capability has proven invaluable in many of the recent
significant vulnerabilities that we've seen reported in the
cybersecurity space. Already our ability to understand
prevalence and drive reduction has been absolutely critical. So
we think this is going to be a tremendous value both for our
Federal partners and for partners across the country.
Ms. Lee. Then going back to the Chairman earlier talked
about the subject, he asked questions about the subject of
shared services. There too, I know this is a really important
concept. It allows us to provide more services while also
saving money because of those efficiencies.
Is CISA at this point equipped, from an administrative and
a resource perspective, to grow its shared services offerings
for agencies?
Second to that, do you envision a world where CISA might be
actually providing, taking on the security responsibilities for
some of the smaller agencies?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, ma'am. We are--we have provided a
series of extraordinarily impactful shared services across
Federal agencies. I mentioned Protective DNS and vulnerability
disclosure as being only two examples.
We also take a disciplined approach to thinking through
which security abilities are appropriate for CISA to provide.
Do they offer cost savings? Are they filling a gap that
agencies aren't providing at scale? Is there benefit in CISA
having some centralized visibility into the risks?
I think vulnerability disclosure platforms is a great
example, where we are providing a service that is required by a
binding operational directive, and CISA having visibility into
the vulnerabilities that are being identified in Federal
websites then lets us drive broader improvements at scale.
So where we identify additional services that can be
provided that meet those criteria, we absolutely have the
authorities to do so and look forward to working with Congress
to ensure that the resources match.
You know, to your second question, Congresswoman, it's a
fantastic question. You know, we know today that there are many
agencies who are so small that they are equivalently small and
medium businesses for their IT infrastructure and security
function. Those are agencies that really need significant help.
So we are leaning forward with those agencies. For example,
there is a designated CDM group where we provide almost CDM as
a service with a cloud-based dashboard to help those agencies,
but that certainly is a group that we are really focused on
working with OMB and ONCD to understand where can we go next to
make sure that as those agencies do provide critical functions
we can support them in their security journey.
Ms. Lee. Then the last thing, I'd like to go back to the
topic of agency participation and agencies' voluntary
participation, compliance, cooperation with CISA. I know that
has been a challenge and you all have been working very hard to
bring them in and get them to provide the information and take
the steps that CISA is recommending.
What is--what other things do you think you can do to be
overcoming that challenge?
Then, Mr. DeRusha, I'll also take that one to you on what
OMB's role can be in ensuring that agencies cooperate with CISA
and its efforts.
Mr. Goldstein. I would really say it's a new day in that
area. I think Congress has provided really impactful
authorities to help CISA, for example, conduct threat hunting
without prior authorization.
Executive Order 14028 required agencies to enter into
memoranda of agreement with us to provide granular data through
CDM, and then certainly funding from Congress that enabled us
to deploy these EDR tools also really helped. But, most
importantly, we are now really showing reciprocal value to
agencies, which ultimately is what matters most.
So, you know, just this morning, actually, Chris and I
spoke at a session with 30-some Federal CISOs, including the
CISOs from every large agency. The goal was really to embark on
a shared planning process together for fiscal 2024 so that we
are not imposing burdens on agencies. We are working together
on a shared journey, and we think that is going to be the most
important piece here.
I will just add that a key part of that is, of course,
CISA's funding profile and making sure that as we are offering
services those services are sustained. The last thing we want
to do is get to a point where we have reasonable confidence and
visibility and security measures and then have that be pulled
back or degraded in a way that our adversaries, of course, will
exploit.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm out of time. I yield
back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
Now we're going to start our second round of questions. I'm
going to yield to myself for 5 minutes.
DHS and CISA have the authority to require agencies to take
certain actions through BOD's and ED's. Mr. Goldstein, in your
testimony you discuss the Known Exploited Vulnerabilities BOD
and its successes in getting agencies to patch vulnerabilities.
Mr. DeRusha, OMB and ONCD are responsible for overseeing
agency compliance with such directives. How does OMB enforce
compliance with these directives? What tools are at your
disposal?
Mr. DeRusha. Yes. So one of the tools we have are the
Federal Information Security Modernization Act 2014 metrics
that we jointly work with CISA, but they are OMB-driven
metrics.
You know, where we've put a lot of our emphasis are
ensuring that we're both measuring agency performance in key EO
14028 goals, but also some of these directives.
So, for example, you mentioned the CADS. You know, we've
got metrics in there that are measuring performance of
implementation of that binding operational directive.
Also for every BOD and binding operational directive and
emergency directive, we work closely with CISA to ensure that
we're getting all the data on agency implementation, like that
is a full partnership. So we're employing our oversight and
governance role there every day.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. A recent CSIS report says there
is a role for CISA in advocating for cyber investments on
behalf of FCEB agencies, but CISA's role is not necessarily to
help agencies strategize their cyber budgets.
Mr. Goldstein, I'll start with you. How can CISA best
strike that balance?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. Our goal is really to understand
(A), what is the appropriate baseline of security that every
agency should adopt, what are the risk-based deviations from
that baseline that agencies should adopt based upon their
unique risk profile, where can we help, and then where do
agencies have to invest?
By working that process, we can then help agencies work
with OMB, work with their CFO to advocate for the specific
investments to meet the gaps that they see. So certainly
agencies remain accountable for managing their networks, remain
accountable for their investments, but we can help them ask the
right questions about where to focus.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
Mr. DeRusha, where does OMB and ONCD fit into this equation
in addition to the joint memos that you issue?
Mr. DeRusha. Yes, well, it's a core role of both, and, you
know, again, with the dual-hat role, what's great is that we're
really doing that together as a team. We analyze every agency
submission. We do data calls to ensure that those investments
that they're proposing align to our priorities.
We actually can put and tag numbers now on Zero Trust
investments, because we're saying, all the way from the
capability, down to the tool set, the service, the contracts
being let, human resources being put behind it, we're mapping
all of that to ensure that the money being requested is really
being spent on the right thing.
Then we're--the second role is advocacy. You know, the
resource management officer of an OMB is a tough job,
especially in a year like this. They're trying to balance out a
lot of priorities, and when we're working collectively using
data, as I talked about before, just data-driven advocacy, to
ensure that cyber budgets remain high.
Mr. Garbarino. One more question.
You both are responsible for two different aspects of the
Federal cybersecurity. CISA is the operational lead. Federal
Cybersecurity OMB is responsible for overseeing compliance and
requirements.
Mr. DeRusha, you now wear two hats between your OMB and
ONCD role. A recent CISA report entitled ``CISA's Evolving .gov
Mission'' highlighted the concern that Federal cyber governance
organization and bureaucracy would negatively impact our cyber
posture.
Considering this, how do you distinguish between your two
roles at OMB and ONCD; how much overlap is there between the
two, and what is the benefit of having one single person fill
both of these roles as opposed to consolidating into one
entity?
Mr. DeRusha. Well, look, I mean, I think what a future
confirmed national cyber director does, you know, will be very
important to answer that question. I'd say, for the past 2
years, it's worked quite well.
As you mentioned, ONCD was stood up and has some
overlapping authorities with OMB, and the way we answered the
question in the interim is, we fused, and it has worked really
good and, I would say, has brought benefits that we really
couldn't even anticipate at the time.
You know, I sit in the leadership meetings every day of
both organizations and can kind-of translate back-and-forth
priorities, be a bridge between organizations just naturally,
and to also really understand everything that ONCD is doing to,
you know, implement the National Strategy and get success
across the Nation and internationally, and bring those best
practices, lessons learned, into the OMB side.
So, you know, it's possible one day someone will say,
``Hey, there's a better model'', but, you know, currently I
don't see one. This is working pretty well.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. I had a second one for
Mr. Goldstein, but I'm out of time, so I'll now yield to my--
I'll send it to you so you can answer in writing.
Mr. Swalwell. I'll yield----
Mr. Garbarino. No, no, no, it's all good, it's good.
I now yield to the Ranking Member, Mr. Swalwell, for 5
minutes for his second round.
Mr. Swalwell. Thanks.
Mr. Goldstein, I had asked Mr. DeRusha about AI, and I just
wanted to give you the opportunity to answer. How does CISA
plan to utilize AI to improve its cybersecurity defense?
Mr. Goldstein. Yes, sir. Thank you. Although we are, of
course, focused on managing the risks of AI, particularly as it
applies to Federal agencies and critical infrastructure, as a
cybersecurity agency, we see are also really bullish on the
benefits that it can provide.
So we are certainly working within CISA and working with
appropriate prudence, given the very valid security trust and
safety risks that AI systems may have, to make sure that we are
benefiting from that work as well. So certainly as we develop
advanced analytics that detect adversary activity, as we work
to detect vulnerabilities more at scale, we will certainly be
working to benefit from the latest advances in AI.
In addition, we want to make sure that our operators, our
analysts, can leverage AI tools so that they can do less of the
work that machines can do, and more of the work that only
humans can do.
So we are urgently embarking on that road, even while doing
it with all due prudence.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. DeRusha, this year's breach of multiple
high-ranking Government officials' emails highlighted that a
single vulnerability in a software vendor could create risks
across the Federal enterprise.
What are you doing to make sure that we're not overly
reliant on a small number of software vendors, and what more
can we do to ensure that one critical vulnerability in a single
vendor's software does not create risk across the entire board
of Federal Government networks?
Mr. DeRusha. Yes, Congressman, so the way I would describe
what you're laying out is concentration risk. It's something
that we talk about quite often and something we take very
seriously.
One direct action that we're taking, again, as I mentioned,
the Cyber Safety Review Board, of which both Eric and I are
board members--we're taking this on, and we're going to really
look at how back-end authentication and identity management are
occurring at these large cloud-service providers.
That breach occurred at one, and there are many others
we're not going to single out. We're going to look at this as
what it was. It is a broad risk held by many. We're going to
really ask hard questions of, is there anything else that we
need to be doing, is there any other support that they need
from us, and we're going to ensure that we interrogate that.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. I don't have any further questions.
Again, I just want to thank you all for engaging with us. I
agree with the Chairman that a CR also is a nightmare, that you
all need long-term certainty in planning, because the threat
actors, they don't operate by CR, and they need us, you know,
to be well-thought-out and prepared as we meet the threat
environment. I'll yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. I thank the gentleman. Yields back.
I thank you all for your valuable testimony, especially on
a dense topic like this--you made it very exciting--and for the
Members, who have all left me, for their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to
respond to these in writing. Pursuant to committee rule VII(D),
the hearing record will be open for 7 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 4:10 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X

----------

Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Eric Goldstein

Question 1a. The President's Fiscal Year 2024 Budget Request
outlined CISA's transition from the legacy National Cybersecurity
Protection System (NCPS), which includes the capability known as
EINSTEIN, to the new Joint Collaborative Environment (JCE) and the
Cyber Analytics and Data System (CADS). While we understand CISA is
currently undertaking this transition, there is a concern about the
lack of clarity about how these programs will work and how they will be
funded through the transition.
What is your time line for CADS implementation? Are you on track to
meet your time line's goals?
Question 1b. What is your time line for JCE implementation? Are you
on track to meet your time line's goals?
Question 1c. How much money do you need to build out the JCE and
CADS in the out-years?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2a. What efforts is the Federal Government undertaking to
prepare for quantum computing?
Are Federal agencies making sufficient progress in the migration of
post-quantum readiness?
Question 2b. What is CISA doing to aid this transition?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Threat actors are increasingly targeting mobile
devices, like smartphones, and they're using increasingly sophisticated
methods to do so.
What actions are under way to protect Federal mobile devices from
attack?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. How does CISA help agencies comply with reporting the
full inventory of assets on their network as required by BOD 23-01?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Ranking Member Eric Swalwell for Eric Goldstein
Question 1. On October 3, the FAR Council issued a proposed rule
that would require Federal contractors to develop and maintain a
software bill of materials (SBOM) for ``each piece of computer software
used in the performance of a contract.'' SBOMs have the potential to
expedite cyber incident response and make mitigation more efficient,
but only if agencies are positioned to action SBOM information
effectively.
What efforts are under way to ensure that Federal agencies are able
to make use of SBOM information once they begin receiving it?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. As part of the implementation of Executive Order 14028,
software vendors will need to self-attest their compliance with new
secure software development requirements. Earlier this year, CISA
released a draft self-attestation form and OMB established time lines
for agencies to collect self-attestations.
How is CISA incorporating feedback from industry to ensure that the
self-attestation form's instructions and requirements are clear and
accessible for vendors, large and small?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. In response to the breach of several high-ranking
Government officials' emails earlier this year, CISA and Microsoft
announced that Microsoft would provide additional logging information
to customers at no additional cost. I am pleased to see that Federal
agencies will have access to more logging information as this kind of
security is not a luxury but instead the kind of security-by-default
all software customers need.
How do you expect increased access to Microsoft logging will
improve the security of Federal agency networks?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. CISA is proposing to establish the new Cyber Analytics
and Data System to improve its ability to integrate and analyze the
data it receives. As we engage in oversight of this new program, it is
important to understand how investments in CADS will be an improvement
over existing efforts.
How is CADS different from CISA's existing programs to integrate
and analyze data? What is your time line for implementation?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. A major goal of the CADS program is to have increased
automation in the intake and analysis of the data CISA receives.
Considering the constantly-evolving cyber threats our Nation faces,
improving automation will be essential to staying ahead of our
adversaries.
What tools and capabilities are you seeking to have as part of CADS
and what new technology acquisitions will be necessary to implement the
program? What do you anticipate being the relationship between CADS and
the technologies CISA currently acquires through CDM?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

Questions From Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino for Christopher J. DeRusha

Question 1a. The timely and accurate reporting of cyber-centric
Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) metrics provides
valuable data points for the Office of Management and Budget (OMB),
Office of the National Cyber Director (ONCD), the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and Congress to analyze the
overall cybersecurity health of Federal agencies.
What metrics do you think are most important when it comes to
evaluating the security of Federal networks? Does OMB give guidance to
agencies on how to prioritize these metrics?
Answer. OMB works with agency chief information officers (CIOs) and
chief information security officers (CISOs), as well as CISA, to ensure
that agency metrics align with critical security outcomes. To that end,
in 2022, OMB established a FISMA Metrics Subcommittee under the CISO
Council tasked with automating and refining metrics to make them clear
and actionable for agencies.
While OMB does not directly instruct agencies to prioritize
specific metrics, this administration has put significant emphasis on
completion of the cybersecurity practices outlined and required in
Executive Order (EO) 14028, Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity, as
well as the subsequent Federal Zero Trust Strategy (M-22-09).
As a result, the Executive Office of the President continues to
hold an on-going dialog with agencies on their adoption of multifactor
authentication, encryption of data, the deployment of Endpoint
Detection and Response (EDR) solutions, and several other key metrics.
Question 1b. How confident are you in the FISMA metrics data
reported by agencies?
Answer. OMB collects hundreds of key data points from agencies
through the FISMA CIO metrics.\1\ We expect agencies to thoroughly
review and assess their data for accuracy. Upon submission, OMB and
CISA analyze agency data to identify anomalies that may indicate an
error or misunderstanding of the metrics, and then work with agencies
as needed to affirm or correct the data in question. That said, we are
committed to continuous improvement, and consistently review and refine
metrics to ensure accuracy and relevance.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Fiscal year CIO FISMA Metrics v 1.0 (cisa.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We continue to improve FISMA metrics each year by refining and
updating metrics and working toward automated reporting wherever
possible. Automating metrics provides more consistent data across the
interagency, creating clear comparisons while reducing agency time
spent on collecting and reporting data. We also engage with agency
experts and CISA to refine the metrics annually based on lessons
learned.
Question 1c. How is the administration leveraging this data to
prioritize investments and drive meaningful cybersecurity improvements?
Answer. To accelerate progress in shifting to a zero-trust posture
and improving security across the Federal Government, we will continue
to align resources to these priorities. By continuously analyzing
quarterly FISMA metrics and engaging agencies, OMB and ONCD have made
meaningful steps to utilize agency cyber data to inform resource
decisions throughout the annual budget process.
The fiscal year 2024 Cybersecurity Priorities Memo (M-22-16) was a
first-of-its-kind document, jointly developed by OMB and ONCD, that
outlined the administration's cross-agency cyber investment priorities
for formulating fiscal year 2024 budget submissions to OMB. The fiscal
year 2025 Cybersecurity Priorities Memo (M-23-18) built on this
foundation with an investment focus on durable, long-term solutions
that are secure by design. By providing agencies with clear guidance on
key areas to be resourced--and utilizing FISMA metrics as a means to
contextualize budget requests and areas requiring particular emphasis--
OMB is able to make targeted investments to drive specific security
outcomes that maximize risk reduction and makes efficient use of
funding.
Question 2. Metrics around mean-time-to-detect and mean-time-to-
respond to cyber incidents provide a clear and transparent way to judge
the effectiveness of our network defenses and justify the significant
amount of money requested each year for Federal cybersecurity and IT
modernization investments.
What is the average mean-time-to-detect and mean-time-to-respond to
cyber attacks for Federal agencies? Do certain agencies struggle more
than others to improve them? If so, what are the challenges?
Answer. Metrics around incident response time provide key insights
into the effectiveness of our network defenses, and we generally seek
to benchmark the Federal Government's responsiveness against industry
averages. OMB has partnered with CISA and agencies to improve metrics
on incident responsiveness, refining expectations regarding agency
measurement, and working toward automation to improve data accuracy.
Currently agency self-reported data around mean-time-to-detect and
mean-time-to-respond to cyber incidents fluctuates greatly from agency-
to-agency, and therefore, the mean is not necessarily the best
indicator of Government-wide responsiveness. Federal agencies vary in
terms of the organization and maturity of Security Operation Centers
(SOCs) that manage the detection and response to incidents, the risk
and threat profile that agencies face, and the resources available for
cybersecurity. These are just a few of the factors that contribute to
the differences in response time to cybersecurity incidents.
Question 3. The May 2021 Executive Order required Federal agencies
to implement Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) solutions to better
protect the Federal Civilian Executive branch (FCEB) from cyber
attacks. This requirement is overseen and funded through CISA's
Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program for up to 2 years,
then each agency must pick up the funding for it.
Do OMB and ONCD have the authority to clarify funding
responsibilities and expectations for programs like CDM and EDR at
individual FCEB agencies? Or is this a problem CISA must solve?
Answer. The CDM and EDR programs are critical for tracking risk
across the Federal enterprise. OMB and ONCD work with CISA to help
prioritize deployment, and ensure the appropriate level of funding is
requested through the President's budget. Additionally, through annual
FISMA guidance, OMB outlines requirements for agencies to allocate
resources for the CDM program.\2\ Specifically, CFO Act agencies are
responsible for covering the operations and maintenance costs of their
CDM-related tools and capabilities. FISMA guidance also calls on all
agencies to work with OMB to build CDM requirements into outyear budget
plans. OMB collaborates on these requirements with CISA in drafting the
policy. In the case of EDR, OMB is working with CISA to help prioritize
deployment and move agencies to enterprise-wide platforms that unify
visibility across all components, which enables more rapid detection of
and coordinated response to threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ M-23-03-FY23FISMA-Guidance-2.pdf (whitehouse.gov).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Question 4a. In October 2021, OMB issued a memo on ``Improving
Detection of Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities and Incidents on Federal
Government Systems through Endpoint Detection and Response'' which
required Federal agencies to work with CISA to identify EDR
capabilities and gaps. OMB later issued a Federal Zero Trust Strategy
in January 2022, which required all Federal agencies to implement EDR
by 2024.
What is the status of implementation of this directive?
Answer. We are seeing wide-spread deployment of EDR capabilities
across the Federal enterprise since the issuance of OMB's policy
outlining requirements in using EDR.
Question 4b. How many agencies have implemented it?
Answer. As of the end of fiscal year 2023, 60 Federal agencies
reported having 80 percent or more of their endpoints covered by EDR.
Question 4c. If agencies haven't implemented it, what are the main
challenges in doing so?
Answer. We are actively working with CISA and agencies that have
not fully deployed EDR across their environment. There are minimal
barriers to deploy EDR across the vast majority of Federal devices with
the support available to agencies through CISA. However, agencies may
have systems that are not able to implement EDR, including certain
research environments, operational technology, internet of things
devices, and other unique instances.
As CISA continues to expand its Continuous Diagnostics and
Mitigation (CDM) program to encompass more of these devices that may
not be able to leverage EDR, we are increasingly ensuring a
comprehensive protective suite providing visibility and defense across
agencies.
Question 5. Can you please provide an update on the status of
planned requirements for software vendors to submit security
attestations for their products when selling to the Federal Government?
Can you provide an update on the timing for implementation, and any
new developments on how these requirements will be implemented?
Answer. Ensuring software integrity is key to protecting Federal
systems from threats and vulnerabilities and reducing overall risk from
cyber attacks. In September 2022, OMB released M-22-18, which outlines
a series of actions that will give the Federal Government confidence
that the software we use is, indeed, securely designed.
Throughout the process, we have worked with experts--both within
Government and beyond--to hold public workshops to discuss best
practices for implementing the National Institute of Standards and
Technology's Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF), engage with
industry groups, and solicit public comment on approaches for attesting
to secure software development practices.
Based on public engagement efforts, OMB released M-23-16 in June
2023; this guidance reaffirmed the importance of secure software
development practices and provided additional clarity for agencies and
industry to ensure a smooth and effective process.
OMB worked with CISA on finalizing a common form for these
attestations to ensure a common approach, and--on November 16, 2023--
published a 30-day notice in the Federal Register. Once published, this
will allow industry to sign an attestation one time, with the potential
to be used many times by agencies across the Federal Government.
Additionally, OMB is collaborating with CISA on the development of a
central repository that will not only allow software producers and
agencies to efficiently share these attestations, but provide our
Federal cyber defenders additional visibility when determining cyber
risk.
An additional step in the process will involve the Federal
Acquisition Regulatory (FAR) Council issuing a proposed rule to
implement the self-attestation form in contracts. The intent is to
ensure software leveraged by Federal agencies are developed with
underlying secure software development practices in place. Over time,
our hope is that utilization of the SSDF begins to become commonplace
for the industry.

Questions From Ranking Member Eric Swalwell for Christopher J. DeRusha

Question 1. On October 3, the FAR Council issued a proposed rule
that would require Federal contractors to develop and maintain a
software bill of materials SBOM for ``each piece of computer software
used in the performance of a contract.'' SBOMs have the potential to
expedite cyber incident response and make mitigation more efficient,
but only if agencies are positioned to action SBOM information
effectively.
What efforts are under way to ensure that Federal agencies are able
to make use of SBOM information once they begin receiving it?
Answer. The FAR Council proposed rule requires contractors to
provide these SBOMs upon request. These tools are new to both industry
and Government, and the use of them will mature over time. That said,
CISA is leading the way in ensuring agencies and their partners are
collaborating to build best practices around their development and use.
Experts from the security field are creating best practices and
ensuring there is a clear path for maturation. More information on
these efforts can be found at cisa.gov/sbom.
Question 2. As part of the implementation of Executive Order 14028,
software vendors will need to self-attest their compliance with new
secure software development requirements. Earlier this year, CISA
released a draft self-attestation form and OMB established time lines
for agencies to collect self-attestations.
Is OMB considering additional guidance to Federal agencies on when
to impose additional requirements beyond what is provided for in the
self-attestation form in order to maximize consistency across the
Federal Civilian Executive branch?
Answer. OMB has engaged with both Federal agencies and software
producers to ensure a productive and seamless rollout of the
attestation process over the past 2 years. Additionally, OMB
continuously reviews its policies and guidance to determine if agencies
would benefit from additional guidance in the implementation of EO
14028 requirements.
Question 3. Over the course of the Republican Speaker fight, we
have heard proposals for a long-term continuing resolution, which would
lock in last year's budget and prevent starting new programs. The
President's budget request proposed a 13 percent increase in civilian
cybersecurity funding, yet with a long-term CR, Federal agencies would
lack these critical resources.
How would a long-term CR inhibit Federal agencies' ability to
improve their cyber defenses?
Answer. Investing in modern cybersecurity practices at Federal
agencies is paramount to the successful implementation of the Executive
Order on Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity. Agency CIOs frequently
voice high implementation costs as one of the biggest barriers in
implementing advanced cybersecurity measures such as multifactor
authentication and logging. The fiscal year 2024 President's Budget
reflected a critical increase to cybersecurity funding for many Federal
agencies. We encourage Congress to appropriate resources to address
critical cybersecurity needs.
Question 4. Thanks to President Biden's Executive Order 14028 and
American Rescue Plan Act funding, Federal agencies have enhanced their
cybersecurity through the deployment of Endpoint Detection and Response
technology, bringing Federal agencies in line with private-sector best
practices. In January 2022, as part of its Zero Trust Strategy, OMB
directed all Federal agencies to implement EDR by 2024.
What is the status of EDR deployment across Federal agencies? What
is OMB doing to ensure all agencies are in compliance? Has there been
any consideration to changing the funding structure so that agencies
are not on the hook for funding EDR systems going forward and instead
providing EDR as a shared service operated by CISA?
Answer. As of the end of fiscal year 2023, 60 Federal agencies
reported having 80 percent or more of their endpoints covered by EDR.
OMB is working with CISA to help prioritize EDR implementation and move
agencies to enterprise-wide platforms that unify visibility across all
components and enable more rapid future capability enhancement.
Question 5. In response to the breach of several high-ranking
Government officials' emails earlier this year, CISA and Microsoft
announced that Microsoft would provide additional logging information
to customers at no additional cost. I am pleased to see that Federal
agencies will have access to more logging information as this kind of
security is not a luxury but instead the kind of security-by-default
all software customers need.
Microsoft indicated that it would begin deploying enhanced logging
in September. Can you update the subcommittee on the status of
implementation at Federal agencies? How are you ensuring that Federal
agencies are prepared to utilize access to this additional information?
Answer. Adding logging into the suite of Microsoft products already
procured by the Federal Government--and many private entities--enhances
and creates consistent visibility during cybersecurity incidents and
reduces our cybersecurity risk. Following their work with Microsoft to
identify key logging activities to include in their offerings, CISA,
with support from OMB and ONCD, is working directly with agencies to
conduct a phased roll-out of additional logging capabilities.
In addition, CISA is engaging with agencies to identify proven
practices and lessons learned, so that all agencies can benefit from
enhanced capabilities and additional information as the deployment
process progresses.
Question 6. National Security Memorandum-10, on Promoting United
States Leadership in Quantum Computing While Mitigating Risks to
Vulnerable Cryptographic Systems, directed OMB and ONCD to ``establish
requirements for inventorying all currently deployed cryptographic
systems'' to enable a prioritized transition to quantum-resistant
cryptography. Federal agencies were then charged to create an inventory
and submit it to ONCD and CISA. The first submissions were due in the
spring, and must be submitted annually thereafter.
How is ONCD working with agencies to improve the quality of agency
inventories to ensure the Federal Government is on track to mitigate
quantum risk and achieve the goals set out in NSM-10?
Answer. Per NSM-10, to mitigate quantum risk, Federal departments
and agencies were instructed to inventory their cryptographic systems
within their High-Value Assets, high-impact information systems, and
any other system that an agency determines is likely to be particularly
vulnerable to a Cryptanalytically Relevant Quantum Computer. Agencies
provided their submissions over the summer of 2023. Since that time,
ONCD, in collaboration with OMB and CISA, evaluated the inventory
submissions and engaged agencies to provide technical assistance to
improve the data quality and information submitted. OMB, in
coordination with ONCD and in collaboration with CISA, will provide to
Congress a report on this inventory in 2024. This report will include:
a strategy to address the risk posed by the vulnerabilities of
information technology of agencies to weakened encryption due to the
potential and possible capability of a quantum computer to breach that
encryption; an estimate of the amount of funding needed by agencies to
secure the information technology from the risk posed by an adversary
of the United States using a quantum computer to breach the encryption
of the information technology; and a description of Federal Civilian
Executive branch coordination efforts led by NIST, including time
lines, to develop standards for post-quantum cryptography.

[all]
