- \2\ Department of Planning City of New York. (2013). The Newest New Yorkers. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/data-maps/ nyc-population/nny2013/nny_2013.- pdf. Currently, globally, individuals and families are increasingly migrating, seeking safety from violence, persecution, conflict, government collapse, and the impacts of climate change. In the Western Hemisphere, there are 20 million people displaced. Those seeking refuge from Latin America and the Caribbean face extreme instability that drives the movement of people across multiple borders in search of safety. No one leaves their home because they feel safe; they leave for their safety and the safety of their families. The increase of individuals at the U.S. Southern Border is not unique to the United States. More than 7.3 million Venezuelans have fled their country in recent years, with over 6.4 million remaining in surrounding countries.\3\ Similarly, we see an increase in migration of Ukrainians across Europe, with over 6 million seeking refuge in European nations, due to the on-going war. In the United States, due to the success of Uniting for Ukraine, the United States has been able to resettle several hundred thousand Ukrainians.\4\ \3\ Migration Policy Institute. Selee, A., Lacarte, V., Ruiz Soto, A. G., Chaves-Gonzalez, Jesus Mora, M., & Tanco, A. (2023, April 11). In a Dramatic Shift, the Americas Have Become a Leading Migration Destination. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/latin-america- caribbean-immigration-shift. \4\ Department of Homeland Security. (2022). Uniting for Ukraine. https://www.dhs.gov/ukraine. Immigration continues to power the U.S. growing economy, addressing our workforce needs and meeting our humanitarian obligations. Migration to the United States is not a new phenomenon; it is what keeps our country moving forward and honors our pledge as a beacon of light for those yearning for freedom and safety.

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROTECTING OUR PREPAREDNESS: ASSESSING
THE IMPACT  OF THE  BORDER CRISIS ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND
TECHNOLOGY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION
__________

DECEMBER 5, 2023
__________

Serial No. 118-41
__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/
__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

56-593 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2024

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman
Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Daniel S. Goldman, New York
officio)                           Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Mr. Bruce A. Blakeman, County Executive, Nassau County, New York:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................    10
Mr. David N. Favro, Sheriff, Clinton County, New York:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Mr. Andrew Ansbro, President, Uniformed Firefighters Association
of Greater New York:
Oral Statement.................................................    21
Prepared Statement.............................................    24
Mr. Murad Awawdeh, Executive Director, New York Immigration
Coalition:
Oral Statement.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    28

For the Record

The Honorable Nicholas A. Langworthy, a Representative in
Congress From the State of New York:
Letter From Northern Border Security Caucus to Secretary
Mayorkas.....................................................    52
Letter From Troy A. Miller to Hon. Nicholas A. Langworthy......    57

.
PROTECTING OUR PREPAREDNESS: ASSESS-
ING THE IMPACT OF THE BORDER CRISIS
ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT

----------

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:15 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Anthony D'Esposito
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives D'Esposito, LaLota, Strong,
Brecheen, Lawler, Garbarino, Langworthy, Molinaro, Carter,
Goldman, Moskowitz, and Correa.
Mr. D'Esposito. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology of the U.S.
House of Representatives will come to order. Without objection
the subcommittee may recess at any point.
The purpose of this hearing is to examine the impact of the
open border policies they have on emergency management services
and how the unprecedented flood of migrants has strained public
services and resources in cities, States, and counties across
this Nation.
Without objection, the gentlemen from New York, Mr.
Garbarino, Mr. Molinaro, Mr. Lawler, and Mr. Langworthy, and
the gentleman from California, Mr. Correa, and the gentleman
from Florida, Mr. Moskowitz, are permitted to sit on the dais
and ask questions to the witnesses. So ordered.
I recognize myself for an opening statement.
I want to begin by thanking our witnesses for testifying
before the Emergency Management and Technology Subcommittee
today. Today's hearing will focus on how the border crisis has
impacted our national preparedness and emergency management.
I look forward to hearing from each of you and thank you
for your dedication to keeping your communities and this
country safe.
As Members of this subcommittee, it is important that we
shed light on what is happening to our Nation's emergency
services as a result of the unprecedented surge in illegal
immigration.
President Biden and Secretary Mayorkas' open border policy
are having a direct impact on our first responders' ability to
help their communities in their time of need and to prevent
future emergencies.
We have heard reports of how State, city, county, and other
resources are being strained across this country. Basic
services are being cut to offset the cost of housing illegal
immigrants.
In my home State of New York, even New York City Mayor Eric
Adams has said that, quote, this issue will destroy New York
City.
I am concerned that Americans' quality of life will never
be able to recover from this crisis. I am concerned that law-
abiding taxpayers will suffer and experience delayed services
by first responders.
I am concerned that we will have gaps in our National
preparedness and response should a significant event occur.
As a former councilman in America's largest town, a retired
NYPD detective, and former chief of the Island Park Fire
Department, I know first-hand that emergency preparedness
requires advanced investigation, training, and resources. It is
essential for protecting vulnerable communities from extreme
weather events, man-made disasters, and acts of terrorism.
However, emergency personnel, such as police and fire
departments, are diverting much of their attention to managing
the thousands of migrants who are arriving weekly in their
communities.
In 2023 white paper, the National Emergency Management
Association stated that emergency management agencies and
systems are being strained due to being asked to, quote,
provide support to a growing number of challenges not related
to natural hazards such as cyber attacks, school safety,
homelessness, the opioid crisis, and the humanitarian support
for migrants.
This committee has already investigated the humanitarian
cost of the migrant crisis to cities across this great country.
However, as the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology, it is important that we specifically assess how the
border crisis has hindered emergency preparedness and first
responders' services.
Last week I had the pleasure of traveling to Ranking Member
Carter's district in New Orleans to conduct a hearing on the
state of emergency preparedness in coastal communities and had
the opportunity to view completed and on-going recovery
projects following Hurricane Katrina.
It was sobering to see the foundations of houses that were
never rebuilt and to think all those stranded during the
immense flooding.
Before Hurricane Katrina made landfall in 2005, the State
of Louisiana evacuated an estimated 1.5 million people.
Government officials were challenged to relocate and house
people in every gymnasium and open space available.
With this in mind, how is the unprecedented migrant crisis
impacting our preparedness for future emergencies?
Cities across this Nation are already having difficulty
managing the migrant population, leaving very little room and
resources for disaster preparedness.
In Chicago, migrants have been housed in police stations
and school gymnasiums. In California, a State with the largest
homeless population in the United States of America, the
Department of Homeland Security has released thousands of
migrants into cities like San Diego.
With limited shelters and housing options available,
officials have struggled to meet the demand for housing
migrants, moving them to airports, public buildings, and any
space available.
Across the country, emergency managers in every community
are burdened and unable to meet the increased demand for their
services, all while some cities have made concerning budget
cuts to their police departments to offset the cost of housing
migrants.
In a time when carjackings are skyrocketing and fentanyl
deaths are overwhelming, cities should not be cutting police
departments' budgets, or city-wide services such as fire
service, for tax-paying Americans.
It is understandable that migrants would seek safety and
opportunity in the greatest country in the land. So many of our
families started out with a relative who sought the American
Dream.
However, the influx of migrants that we are seeing today is
having unprecedented consequences on public safety and our
emergency management.
People come to the United States of America because they
want safety and opportunity. However, the Biden
administration's inability to secure the Southwest Border and
discourage illegal immigration has encouraged millions of
migrants to take advantage of city resources, which is
negatively impacting local communities.
As a result, first responders and emergency managers are
strained, making our own communities less safe. We should all
be concerned about its impact on the future of this great
country.
I look forward to discussing these challenges and hearing
more about what Congress can do to support our brave first
responders from every corner of this great Nation.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]

Statement of Chairman Anthony D'Esposito

December 5, 2023

I want to begin by thanking our witnesses for testifying before the
Emergency Management and Technology Subcommittee today. Today's hearing
will focus on how the border crisis has impacted our national
preparedness and emergency management. I look forward to hearing from
each of you, and thank you for your dedication to keeping your
communities safe.
As Members of this subcommittee, it is important that we shed light
on what is happening to our Nation's emergency services as a result of
the unprecedented surge in illegal immigration. President Biden and
Secretary Mayorkas' open border policies are having a direct impact on
our first responders' ability to help their communities in their time
of need and to prevent future emergencies.
We have heard reports of how State, city, county, and other
resources are being strained across the country. Basic services are
being cut to offset the cost of housing illegal immigrants. In my home
State of New York, even New York City Mayor, Eric Adams, has said that,
``This issue will destroy New York City.''\1\ I am concerned that
Americans' quality of life will never be able to recover from this
crisis. I am concerned that law-abiding taxpayers will suffer and
experience delayed services by first responders. And, I am concerned
that we will have gaps in our national preparedness and response should
a significant event occur.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ https://www.nytimes.com/2023/09/07/nyregion/adams-migrants-
destroy-nyc.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As a former Hempstead Town Councilman, retired NYPD detective, and
former chief of the Island Park Fire Department, I know first-hand that
emergency preparedness requires advanced investigation, training, and
resources, and it is essential for protecting vulnerable communities
from extreme weather events, man-made disasters, and acts of terrorism.
However, emergency personnel, such as police and fire departments, are
diverting much of their attention to managing the thousands of migrants
who are arriving weekly in their communities. In its 2023 White Paper,
the National Emergency Management Association stated that emergency
management agencies and systems are being strained due to being asked
to ``provide support to a growing number of challenges not related to
natural hazards, such as cyber attacks, school safety, homelessness,
the opioid crisis, and humanitarian support for migrants.''
This committee has already investigated the humanitarian cost of
the migrant crisis to cities across the Nation. However, as the
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology, it is important
that we specifically assess how the border crisis has hindered
emergency preparedness and first responder services.
Last week, I had the pleasure of traveling to Ranking Member
Carter's District in New Orleans to conduct a hearing on the state of
emergency preparedness in coastal communities and had the opportunity
to view completed and on-going recovery projects following Hurricane
Katrina. It was sobering to see the foundations of houses that were
never rebuilt and to think of all those stranded during the immense
flooding. Before Hurricane Katrina made landfall in 2005, the State of
Louisiana evacuated an estimated 1.5 million people.\2\ Government
officials were challenged to relocate and house people in every
gymnasium and open space available.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK54237/.
\3\ Ibid.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
With this in mind, how is the unprecedented migrant crisis
impacting our preparedness for future emergencies? Cities across the
country are already having difficulty managing the migrant population,
leaving little room for disaster preparedness.
In Chicago, migrants have been housed in police stations and school
gymnasiums. In California, a State with the largest homeless population
in the United States, the Department of Homeland Security has released
thousands of migrants into cities like San Diego.\4\ With limited
shelters and housing options available, officials have struggled to
meet the demand for housing migrants, moving them to airports, public
buildings, and any space available.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ https://apnews.com/article/biden-border-migrant-shelters-
afd3a60803902eb4e1d68907852- 75a2c.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Across the country, emergency managers in every community are
burdened and unable to meet the increased demand for their services.
All the while, some cities have made concerning budget cuts to their
police departments to offset the cost of housing migrants. In a time
when carjackings are skyrocketting and fentanyl deaths are
overwhelming, cities should not be cutting police departments' budgets
or city-wide services for taxpaying Americans.
It is understandable that migrants would seek safety and
opportunity in the United States. So many of our own family stories
started out with a relative who sought the American dream. However, the
influx of migrants that we are seeing today is having unprecedented
consequences on public safety and our emergency management. People come
to the United States because they want safety and opportunity. However,
the Biden administration's inability to secure the Southwest Border and
discourage illegal immigration has encouraged millions of migrants to
take advantage of city resources, which is negatively impacting local
communities. As a result, first responders and emergency managers are
strained, making our own communities less safe. We should all be
concerned about its impact on the future of America. I look forward to
discussing these challenges and hearing more about what Congress can do
to support our brave first responders in these chaotic times.

Mr. D'Esposito. I now recognize the Ranking Member of the
subcommittee for his opening statement.
Mr. Carter. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, and thank you. Let
me start by saying that this subcommittee, under the leadership
of Congressman D'Esposito, has been very productive and has had
a series of productive hearings.
Just last week, we were in my Congressional district in
Louisiana, where we received testimony about emergency
preparedness challenges in coastal communities like the ones
Chairman and I represent.
Unfortunately, I'm concerned that this hearing may be a
departure from the way we have worked together in Congress. I
hope that is not the case.
Some Republicans like to grandstand about border security,
but the reality is, many of them have voted against border
security funding and opposed Federal funds to help communities,
like New York, that is receiving migrants.
Many Republicans would rather demonize asylum seekers and
talk about impeaching Secretary Mayorkas than come up with
productive solutions to border challenges. I sincerely hope
that this practice will change and we will get back to doing
the work of this committee for the American people in a true
bipartisan way, one that demonstrates the ability and the
willingness to find real solutions and not finger-pointing.
It's hard to have productive conversation with some on the
other side focused on scoring political points. That's not what
we're here for. I respect my colleagues on both sides of the
aisle and hope that we will work in a vein to come up with
solutions and not brinkmanship.
Instead we should be working together to respond to global
migration phenomena, implement a more orderly and humane
process at our border, and fix our broken immigration system.
America's long been known as a land of opportunity, a place
where diverse people from different cultures have come one way
or another and made this country a better place.
Surely that can't be lost on my colleagues and friends from
New York who live and work in the shadow of Lady Liberty, of
Ellis Island, and the city where millions have arrived from
around the world fleeing poverty and persecution.
Louisiana, and specifically my community of New Orleans and
Baton Rouge, is also a testament of how diverse cultures merge
and create a vibrant and unique community.
The city's cultural amalgamation is shaped by French,
French American, Spanish, Italian, Native Americans, and Creole
influences, among others, creating a distinctive and diverse
identity.
The city's music, cuisine, language, and tradition reflects
the contributions immigrants have made to our community. Jazz,
a genre synonymous with New Orleans, is a perfect example of
this cultural rich--rich cultural fusion.
Immigrants also play a crucial role in Louisiana's labor
force, making up 13 percent of residents employed in farming,
fishing, and forestry occupations.
Across the country, migrants fill crucial gaps in the labor
market, providing a diverse and skilled work force,
particularly in industries such as technology and agriculture,
where their expertise and hard work are essential to the
Nation's prosperity.
Immigrants also play a pivotal role in driving economic
growth. Many bring entrepreneurial spirit and business acumen,
establishing businesses that create jobs and stimulate local
economies.
That doesn't mean migration is without challenges. As we
all know, there are, in fact, many challenges. There certainly
are issues to address regarding people arriving at our border,
and we are absolutely in need to provide resources to
communities receiving migrants.
If there are impacts to emergency services, we need to
understand what they are and find ways to move forward.
But migration always has been and will continue to be a
benefit to our country. I hope we will not lose sight of the
fact that during today's hearing, and I hope that the hearing
will be productive rather than political.
Going forward, I hope the subcommittee will focus its
attention on important programs within its jurisdiction, such
as emergency preparedness grants, which are critical to places
like New York and New Orleans, and the Nonprofit Security Grant
Program which helps vulnerable nonprofit organizations
strengthen their security.
The subcommittee should also focus on Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Office which has uncertain future because
Republicans have failed to do the necessary work to ensure the
office's existence. We have yet to hold a hearing on this
important office. Yet I'm hopeful we will soon.
The subcommittee is also yet to hold a hearing on the
Office of Health Security and the Science and Technology
Directorate, and they certainly need our oversight as well.
Once again, I am hopeful we will do that soon.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today, and I look
forward to your testimony and appreciate your time, your
experience, your expertise, and your willingness to share with
us today.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Troy A. Carter

December 5, 2023

Let me start by saying that this subcommittee has had productive
hearings and briefings so far this Congress. Just last week, we were in
my Congressional district--where we received testimony about emergency
preparedness challenges in coastal communities like the ones the
Chairman and I represent. Unfortunately, I am concerned that this
hearing may be a departure from the way we have worked together this
Congress.
Some Republicans like to grandstand about border security, but the
reality is they have voted against border security funding and opposed
Federal funds to help communities, like New York, that are receiving
migrants. Many Republicans would rather demonize asylum seekers and
talk about impeaching Secretary Mayorkas than come up with productive
solutions to border challenges. It's hard to have a productive
conversation when some on the other side are focused on scoring
political points.
Instead, we should be working together to respond to the global
migration phenomenon, implement a more orderly and humane process at
our border, and fix our broken immigration system. America has long
been known as a land of opportunity; a place where diverse people from
different cultures have come, one way or another, and made this country
what it is today. Surely that can't be lost on my colleagues and
friends from New York, who live and work in the shadow of Lady Liberty,
of Ellis Island, and the city where millions have arrived from around
the world fleeing poverty and persecution.
Louisiana, and specifically my community of New Orleans, is also a
testament to how diverse cultures merge and create a vibrant and unique
culture. The city's cultural amalgamation is shaped by French, African,
Spanish, Italian, Native American, and Creole influences, among others,
creating a distinctive and diverse identity. The city's music, cuisine,
language, and traditions reflect the contributions immigrants have made
to our community. Jazz, a genre synonymous with New Orleans, is a
perfect example of this cultural fusion.
Immigrants also play a crucial role in Louisiana's labor force,
making up 13 percent of residents employed in farming, fishing, and
forestry occupations. Across the country, migrants fill crucial gaps in
the labor market, providing a diverse and skilled work force,
particularly in industries such as technology and agriculture where
their expertise and hard work are essential to the Nation's prosperity.
Immigrants also play a pivotal role in driving economic growth. Many
bring entrepreneurial spirit and business acumen, establishing
businesses that create jobs and stimulate local economies. That doesn't
mean migration is without its challenges.
There certainly are issues to address regarding people arriving at
our border, and we absolutely need to provide resources to communities
receiving migrants. If there are impacts to emergency services, we need
to understand what they are and find a way forward. But migration
always has been and will continue to be a benefit to our country. I
hope we will not lose sight of that fact during today's hearing, and I
hope that the hearing will be productive rather than political.
Going forward, I hope the subcommittee will focus its attention on
important programs within its jurisdiction, such as emergency
preparedness grants, which are critical to places like New York and New
Orleans, and the Nonprofit Security Grant Program, which helps
vulnerable nonprofit organizations strengthen their security.
The subcommittee should also focus on the Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction Office, which has an uncertain future because
Republicans have failed to do the necessary work to ensure the Office's
existence. We have yet to hold a hearing on this important office. The
subcommittee has also yet to hold hearings on the Office of Health
Security or the Science and Technology Directorate, and they need our
oversight as well.

Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Ranking Member Carter.
Other Members of the subcommittee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson

December 5, 2023

Today's hearing is ostensibly going to cover the impact of
increasing migration on emergency management. Unfortunately, however, I
am doubtful that this hearing will be anything more than another
extreme MAGA Republican attempt to discredit the Biden administration.
It is disappointing that Republicans have chosen to spend this
Congress looking for political wins and issuing press releases rather
than working with Democrats to help communities receiving migrants,
pass comprehensive immigration reform, or enact meaningful border
security legislation. Instead, in May, my Republican colleagues passed
H.R. 2, the ``Child Deportation Act''--on a party line vote. Their bill
would bring back President Trump's cruel and ineffective border
policies.
Instead, we need to ensure legal pathways for migrants who are
fleeing violence and persecution in search of a better life for
themselves and their families. They know the journey is dangerous, but
many feel they have no other option. Staying home is more dangerous
than leaving. Following our Nation's asylum laws is not only the right
thing to do, but it also enriches our communities.
Migrants bring diverse perspectives that lead to innovation in
various fields, including science, technology, and the arts. They also
stimulate our economy and fill an important role in the workforce. In
Mississippi, immigrants have contributed hundreds of millions of
dollars annually in taxes. In 2018, immigrant-led households in
Mississippi paid $379.5 million in Federal taxes and $171.1 million in
State and local taxes. We need to process migrants in a humane and
orderly manner, as well as ensure they can contribute to the
communities they settle in while going through the asylum process.
Democrats have provided new resources to build capacity for safely
and efficiently processing all travelers, including migrants, in an
orderly manner, as well as additional resources to secure the border.
My Republican colleagues voted against these resources.
More specifically, Democrats provided funding for more CBP agents
and officers to help with the influx of migrants. Republicans voted no.
Republicans also voted against providing additional technology between
ports of entry and are attempting to prohibit DHS from using technology
for screening migrants before they approach a land port of entry.
In contrast, Democrats established and provided record funding for
the Shelter and Services Program, which reimburses local governments
and groups that provide short-term shelter and some services to newly-
arrived migrants. Republicans want to terminate this program.
The White House has requested funding to further strengthen border
security and help communities respond to arriving migrants. Instead of
taking up that legislation that would actually help with the situation
at the border, Republicans prefer to focus on meaningless messaging
bills and a sham impeachment.
I genuinely hope this hearing is productive, and I look forward to
hearing from first responders and those working with migrants in our
cities. We know there is a challenge, and it is past time we got to
work on passing real, bipartisan solutions.

Mr. D'Esposito. I'm very pleased and thankful to have such
an important panel of witnesses spanning for many places before
us today.
I ask that the witnesses please rise and raise your right
hand.
Do you solemnly swear that the testimony you will give
before the Committee on Homeland Security of the United States
House of Representatives will be the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth so help you God?
Thank you. Please be seated.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses
starting with Mr. Bruce Blakeman who currently serves as the
county executive for my home county, home of 1.4 million people
in New York, where he has advocated for improved law
enforcement to fight rising crime.
Mr. Blakeman has served in a variety of local government
capacities such as a councilman in America's largest town and a
former commissioner of the Port Authority of New York and New
Jersey in the aftermath of September 11, 2001.
Mr. David Favro has served as sheriff of Clinton County,
New York, since 2003 and has an extensive background in law
enforcement, spanning decades. The sheriff is a dedicated
public servant and throughout his career has received numerous
State and community acknowledgements, including Citizen of the
Year.
Mr. Andrew Ansbro is president of the Uniformed
Firefighters Association of Greater New York. As president, he
represents over 20,000 active-duty and retired New York City
firefighters.
Prior to joining the FDNY in February 2001, Mr. Ansbro
served with the New York City Police Department. Mr. Ansbro is
a September 11 survivor and assisted in recovery efforts at
Ground Zero.
Mr. Murad Awawdeh is the executive director of the New York
Immigration Coalition. He has dedicated over 2 decades to
advocating for low-income communities of color across the State
of New York.
Mr. Awawdeh was honored with a U.S. Congressional
recognition and public service awards from the New York State
Senate and Assembly.
I thank the witnesses for being here today and again thank
you for your service to New York, to our country, and for being
dedicated to keeping our communities safe.
I now recognize Mr. Blakeman of Nassau County for 5 minutes
to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRUCE A. BLAKEMAN, COUNTY EXECUTIVE,
NASSAU COUNTY, NEW YORK

Mr. Blakeman. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking
Member Carter, and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology, for holding this hearing
and allowing me the opportunity to address you regarding
preparedness and protecting our communities.
I especially want to thank my Congressman, Chairman
D'Esposito, for all you do to keep our communities safe, our
country safe, and the world a safer place for Americans.
I want to thank my fellow witnesses for appearing with me
today. I am honored to be in your presence.
Nassau County is home to almost 1.5 million people. We are
larger in population than 10 States. Our gross domestic product
is larger than 144 nations in the United Nations.
In Nassau County, we have every race, every religion, and
every ethnic group. In many respects, we are a snapshot of
America. In Nassau County we have made a determination that we
do not want to take part in the misguided migrant program.
Nassau County is not a sanctuary county.
This decision was not made lightly. The residents of Nassau
County understand some of the humanitarian arguments made
during this migrant crisis. The one thing that is clear from my
constituents is that they want our borders secured. They want
to know who is coming into America. They want anyone coming
into America to be properly vetted. They want only--they only
want immigrants who share American values.
The current situation, where virtually everybody is allowed
to reside in America by merely claiming asylum status, is an
untenable situation for many reasons.
First of all, there is such a large amount of migrants
crossing the border that many migrants do not get fully vetted
and may not receive an asylum hearing for more than 2 years.
In essence, people are roaming around the United States for
2 years without any determination on whether or not they are
truly entitled to asylum status.
This is not a humanitarian program. This is a foreign
invasion. Asylum status has always been a consideration for
individuals from other countries whose life and freedom was in
jeopardy based on either their political beliefs, religious
beliefs, or their ethnicity.
It is inconceivable that millions of migrants who have
crossed our border seeking asylum qualify as truly eligible for
asylum status.
As we have seen around America, municipalities have become
burdened with the responsibility to clothe, feed, house, and
educate migrants, as well as provide social services without
any cogent Federal program to regulate or pay for these
individuals.
In Nassau County, we have seen a surge in crime by migrants
who have engaged in all types of criminal activity, from drug
dealing, car theft, burglary, to more violent crimes.
Recently, a gang from Chile was arrested by our outstanding
Nassau County Police Department only to be released without
bail due to State laws that give more rights to criminals than
they do to victims.
These Chilean gang members who were a part of this migrant
program were freed by liberal bail laws. They disappeared, and
they may still be in the United States committing more crimes
against the public.
That is outrageous and it is dangerous. The Federal
Government should mandate that any migrant in the United States
who is arrested for a crime with probable cause be deported.
Our police officers also arrested someone who was in our
country illegally for transporting over 3 kilos of pure
fentanyl that was smuggled across the border illegally from
China to Nassau County.
This amount of fentanyl was enough to kill almost 3 million
people--virtually the whole population of Long Island, Nassau,
and Suffolk County.
If we are serious about ending the heroin and opioid
epidemic that is killing our kids once and for all, the first
step is securing our borders.
In Nassau County, many leaders of school districts,
especially in minority communities, have expressed their
opposition to migrant and sanctuary programs as they cannot
accommodate the large influx of new students that they have not
budgeted for.
Nassau County residents are not heartless. Most of our
residents are immigrants or relatives of immigrants. We believe
in an immigration program that makes sense but not open
borders.
I would urge this committee and the other Members of
Congress to consider a common-sense approach to immigration.
Seal our borders. Nobody should be let into this country until
they have had a hearing and found eligible for asylum status.
There should be an organized guest worker program that
allows for legal immigration for those who want to be gainfully
employed.
We have seen in many communities the current disaster
created by the current migrant policy. This is fixable only if
we revert to traditional American values, defend our borders,
and apply a common-sense approach to immigration.
I want to thank the Members of the committee for this
opportunity. I'd like to thank you for your service, for your
hard work in tackling this issue, and I want to wish you all a
merry Christmas, a happy Hanukkah, may God bless you all and
God bless America. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Blakeman follows:]

Prepared Statement of Bruce A. Blakeman

December 5, 2023

Thank you Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
distinguished Members of the subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology for holding this hearing and allowing me the opportunity to
address you regarding ``Protecting our Preparedness.''
I especially want to thank Chairman D'Esposito for all you do to
keep our community safe, our country safe, and the world a safer place
for Americans.
Nassau County is home to almost 1.5 million people. We are larger
in population than 10 States. Our gross domestic product is larger than
144 nations in the United Nations. In Nassau County, we have every
race, every religion, and every ethnic group. In many respects, we are
a snapshot of America.
In Nassau County, we have made a determination that we do not want
to take part in the misguided migrant program. Nassau County is not a
sanctuary county. This decision was not made lightly. The residents of
Nassau County understand some of the humanitarian arguments made during
this migrant crisis. The one thing that is clear from my constituents
is that they want our borders secured. They want to know who is coming
into America. They want anyone coming into America to be properly
vetted. They want only immigrants who share American values.
The current situation where virtually everybody is allowed to
reside in America by merely claiming asylum status is an untenable
situation for many reasons.
First of all, there is such a large amount of migrants crossing the
border that many migrants do not get fully vetted and may not receive
an asylum hearing for as many as 2 years or more.
In essence, people are roaming around the United States for 2 years
without any determination on whether or not they truly are entitled to
asylum status.
Asylum status has always been a consideration for individuals from
other countries whose life and freedom was in jeopardy based on either
their political beliefs, religious beliefs, or ethnicity.
It is inconceivable that millions of migrants who have crossed our
borders seeking asylum qualify as truly eligible for asylum status. As
we have seen around America, municipalities have become burdened with
the responsibility to clothe, feed, house, and educate migrants, as
well as provide social services without any cogent Federal program to
regulate or pay for these individuals.
In Nassau County, we have seen a surge in crime by migrants who
have engaged in all types of criminal activity, from drug dealing, car
theft, and burglary to more violent crimes.
Recently, a gang from Chile was arrested by our outstanding Nassau
County Police Department, only to be released without bail due to State
laws that give more rights to criminals than victims.
These Chilean gang members who were a part of this migrant program
were set free by liberal bail laws, disappeared, and may be here in the
United States committing more crimes against the public. That is
outrageous and dangerous! The Federal Government should mandate that
any migrant in the United States who is arrested for a crime with
probable cause be deported.
Our police officers also arrested someone who was in our country
illegally for transporting over 3 kilos of pure fentanyl that was
smuggled across the border illegally, to Nassau County. This amount of
fentanyl was enough to kill almost all of Long Island's almost 3
million residents. If we are serious about ending the heroin and opioid
epidemic that is killing our kids once and for all, the first step is
securing our borders!
In Nassau County, many leaders of school districts, especially in
minority communities, have expressed their opposition to migrant and
sanctuary programs as they cannot accommodate the large influx of new
students that they have not budgeted for. Nassau County residents are
not heartless; most of our residents are immigrants or relatives of
immigrants. We believe in an immigration program that makes sense but
not open borders. I would urge this committee and the other Members of
Congress to consider a common-sense approach to immigration.
1. Seal the borders.
2. Nobody should be let into this country seeking asylum until they
have been adjudicated in a hearing to be eligible.
3. There should be an organized guest worker program that allows
for legal immigration for the purposes of working so long as
those immigrants are eligible to be gainfully employed, free of
any criminal or subversive background, and stay out of trouble
while they are here in the United States.
We have seen in many communities in the United States the current
disaster created by the present migrant policy. This is fixable only if
we revert to traditional American values, defend our borders, and apply
a common-sense approach to immigration.
Once again, I want to thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Members of the
committee for your time and attention to this very important issue.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, County Executive Blakeman.
I now recognize Sheriff Favro for 5 minutes to summarize
his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DAVID N. FAVRO, SHERIFF, CLINTON COUNTY,
NEW YORK

Mr. Favro. Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
esteemed Members of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology, thank you for convening this crucial hearing on
protecting our preparedness.
My name is David M. Favro and I proudly serve as the
sheriff of Clinton County, New York. Today I stand before you
to discuss the challenges facing our law enforcement and shed
light on the pressing difficulties faced by our community in
light of the border crisis.
It is crucial that Congress act now to secure the border
and protect our communities. One policy that could easily be
reimplemented is Remain in Mexico, or simply deeming migrants
ineligible for asylum if they have touched a safe third country
prior to illegally crossing into the United States.
The border crisis has placed a significant strain on our
small, rural community. The influx of transient populations
funneled through our region has not only raised concerns but
has led to a surge in emergency response calls.
Staffing shortages, which are exacerbated by Nation-wide
challenges in hiring and retention, hinder our ability to
address safety needs promptly.
Recent high-speed vehicle pursuits involving migrants have
led to bodily injury and property damage, highlighting the
pressing need for comprehensive national strategy to protect
our community and law enforcement resources.
Nestled in the most northeastern point of New York, Clinton
County boasts a unique landscape with a population of
approximately 80,000 residents, nearly all of whom are native
of the county.
Our region spans over 1,000 square miles, sharing a
northern border with Canada and an eastern boundary with Lake
Champlain, also known as the sixth Great Lake.
With over 70 miles of lakeshore and approximately 30 miles
of international border, our county plays a crucial role in
interstate traffic. Interstate 87 serves as a main thoroughfare
from Canada directly to New York City.
Key statistics paint a stark picture. Got-aways have surged
99 percent, reaching 995 in fiscal year 2024. Yet despite
handling 70 percent of all encounters with immigrants, the
Swanton Border Patrol Sector who is responsible for 295 miles
along the Northern Border operates with only 15 percent of the
staffing allocated to that entire region.
The impact on our emergency management is evident. Our
9-1-1 call centers are experiencing increased calls for
services with language barriers that are now complicating
responses and rescues.
Detention presents its own challenges, the Clinton County
Jail being the sole facility accepting detainees from the
Border Patrol. Financial cost of housing Federal detainees has
already exceeded over $2,000 just for that one facility.
Health issues that have been created when inmates were
detained at Clinton County Jail, they were in and out in a
matter of 24-hour process. We fought hard because they were not
even able to be properly TB-tested which could be spreading
significant disease to the rest of our communities, the rest of
our country.
While you may be familiar with Southern Border crossing
challenges, the North provides similar physical challenges like
weather-related issues, including harsh winters with
temperatures exceeding minus 35 degrees.
Extreme temperatures pose additional risks for both
migrants and law enforcement who are in dense forests in the
county throughout the night.
One issue impacting our local residents that I'd also like
to highlight is the housing shortage. We are all familiar with
stories of migrant relocation to--New York City's solution to
migrant crisis also been--and have also been relocated, these
migrants, and this time, to Clinton County.
This shuffle affected--affects with human lives, not only
strains our resources but also impacts our local residents who
house current short--excuse me--housing shortage issues.
In closing, the legal migration of northern New York is not
just a matter of law enforcement. It is a challenge that
touches every aspect of our community. The strain on resources
and the security threats posed by an open border demand urgent
attention.
The Federal Government must enact legislation to ensure the
lasting security of our border. Reinstating the MPP, Remain in
Mexico policy, is a crucial step toward regaining control and
understanding who enters our country.
A significant problem law enforcement faces to be able to
investigate and track down crimes is having information, having
DNA, having fingerprints, and most importantly, having an
identity.
We are allowing people by the millions to come into our
country that we are not able to obtain any of this critical
data. Therefore, our function becomes useless for an impact
with people migrating in without recognition.
Thank you for the opportunity to share my perspective. I'm
committed to assisting this committee and addressing the
critical issues that continue to impact our community.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Favro follows:]

Prepared Statement of David N. Favro

December 5, 2023

Thank you Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
distinguished Members of the Subcommittee on Emergency Management and
Technology for holding this hearing and allowing me the opportunity to
address you regarding ``Protecting our Preparedness.''
I'm David N. Favro, and I serve as the sheriff of Clinton County,
New York. My career in law enforcement began in July 1982, and I've
dedicated over 41 years to the safety and well-being of the residents
and visitors of Clinton County. For the last 21 years, I've been
honored to hold the position of the people's elected sheriff. The
mission of the Clinton County Sheriff's Office is to enhance safety and
improve the quality of life in our community. We are committed to
delivering services with pride and excellence, fostering a strong
partnership with our community.
Clinton County is the most northeastern point in New York.
Population approximately 80,000 (2021 census)
97.6 percent of residents are native to Clinton County (2021
census)
1,117.53 square miles
Northern boundary with Canada
Eastern boundary is Lake Champlain (the sixth great lake)
Over 70 miles of lake shore
Approximately 30 miles international border
Interstate 87 is a main traffic point from Canada to New York City.
The Border Crisis significantly strains Emergency Management in our
small rural community. A notable surge in transient population,
funneled thought a small rural community whose residents are primarily
native to the area, raises concerns and has led to an uptick in
emergency response calls.
Like many Sheriffs' Offices, we face staffing shortages (22
deputies in Clinton County Sheriff's Office) due to challenges in
hiring and retention, partly due to lower pay compared to other law
enforcement agencies. Responding to reports of ``strangers'' on private
property may tie up one or two units, impacting our ability to address
other safety needs. Adding to the complexity, high-speed vehicle
pursuits involving migrants are on the rise. A recent incident caused
bodily injuries and property damage in what resulted as the busiest
traffic point in our small rural county. This highlights the need for
urgent attention to the Border Crisis' impact on our emergency
capabilities and calls for strategic solutions to protect our community
and law enforcement resources.

Key Statistics
Got-aways are up 99 percent from 499 in 2023 to 995 in fiscal year
2024. This is concerning. The Swanton Border Patrol sector of the
United States Customs and Border Patrol oversees a vast expanse of 295
miles along the Northern Border. Despite covering 70 percent of all
Northern Border encounters, this sector operates with only 15 percent
of the staffing allocated to the entire Northern Border region.
Seventy-three percent of encounters in the Swanton sector are single
adults, 27 percent are family units with less than 1/2 percent
unaccompanied children.
Fatalities = 2
Rescues = 29
Assaults = 9
Drive Through's = 44

Emergency Management
Nine-one-one call centers Nation-wide have experienced
``recognizable'' increases in calls for service. Since 9-1-1 callers'
migrant statuses are not questioned during incoming calls and when
responding to an emergency calls, it is difficult to establish just
what those actual numbers are. However, the challenges in rescues and
general assistance requests have also intensified due to diverse
language barriers.

Interagency Partnerships/Communications
While substantial progress has been made, there remains a
significant amount of work to be done. Operation Stonegarden has played
a pivotal role by providing resources to the Border Patrol. This
program enables local police agencies and sheriff offices to carry out
active patrols along the Northern Border. In 2024, Clinton County was
granted $300,000, to be shared with three other agencies, facilitating
better collaboration, strengthening working relationships and
increasing awareness among all area law enforcement regarding migrant
activities within their jurisdictions. Continued financial support for
Federal grants, such as Operation Stonegarden, would enhance the
capacity of local law enforcement to address security concerns linked
to the open border.

Detention
The Clinton County Jail is currently the only facility accepting
detainees from Border Patrol. Many county jails refuse to accept
Federal detainees for a variety of reasons. Notably, the heightened
conditions mandated by ICE Detention far surpass the requirements set
by the New York State Commission on Corrections for our domestic
detainees. The increased costs associated with maintaining two sets of
jail standards, coupled with the arduous annual inspections without any
reimbursement present overwhelming challenges. Without Clinton County
Jail, the staff of CBP would be depleting their resources by
transporting detainees to facilities several hours away from the
border.
The cost to house each Federal detainee is $112 per day. Since the
beginning of the year, the Clinton County Sheriff's Office has already
recovered costs of over $2 million housing expenses from the Federal
Government. Medical costs are in addition to, but not expected to
exceed, the cost of housing.

Weather-related Concerns
In Clinton County, we regularly experience temperatures falling 35
degrees below zero with a deadly wind-chill. Ponds and swamps freeze
quickly and require conducting rescue missions with volunteer fire and
rescue teams alongside Border Patrol and Sheriff Deputies. Tragically,
two deaths have occurred among migrants attempting to traverse dark
wooded terrain.
Migrants are arriving predominately from the Southern Border where
they are accustomed to survivable temperatures with minimal clothing.
Most do not realize how cold it can become, particularly at nighttime
when they tend to move and cross without detection.
Migrants attempt to seek shelter in barns, sheds, basements, or
even what they think may be unoccupied homes. We have responded to
calls of residents awaking in the middle of the night to unfamiliar
noises only to discover migrants that entered their home to get out of
the weather.
Many communities across the country are facing a housing shortage
for their local residents. The increase in migrants has created a
shuffle effect for example, where communities are relocating their
excess overage of migrants from one region to another. For example, we
have all seen Texas relocating migrants to New York City? What you do
not see is New York then busing migrants to the Northern Border
communities where there are literally no resources to assist these
people. Some private organizations (Plattsburgh Cares) are providing
essentials like food and clothing, as well as guidance and an
occasional bus ticket to a different location of the migrants'
choosing.

Nationalities as Provided by CBP Regional Briefings
CBP data shows that migrants arrive into the United States from 180
different countries. Similarly, Clinton County also sees a diverse
group of migrants in its 1,117.53 mi\2\. We have encountered
individuals from 43 different countries.
Mexico--over 55 percent.
India--22.1 percent.
Haiti, Romania and Guatemala--each under 4 percent.
Mr. Chairman in closing, the illegal migration into Northern New
York is costing my office considerable time cycles and money. Moreover,
it is taking away resources from the legal local residents and that is
simply not fair to my constituents.
Law enforcement officers at the Federal, State, and local levels
are consistently confronting hazardous situations and criminal
activities stemming directly from an open border that is being
exploited by criminals. The National Sheriffs' Association has long
voiced concerns about open border policies and has provided
recommendations on securing it, which are attached to my testimony.
Under the current administration's policies, the discretionary
approach to border security and immigration laws allows criminals and
cartels to thrive in our very own backyards. The on-going crisis,
exacerbated by the expiration of Title 42, poses substantial threat to
the security of local communities. These communities find themselves
neglected and left to rely solely on local and State resources to
address this crisis, without any concrete plan by the Secretary of
Homeland Security to address these impacts.
I'd like to emphasize the most expeditious means by which the
Federal Government can enhance its support for local law enforcement
and first responder efforts. It is imperative for Congress to enact
legislation that ensures the lasting security of our border. I urge the
U.S. House to reinstate the MPP (Remain in Mexico) policy which seemed
to work so well just a few years ago. It is crucial that we have a
clear understanding of who is entering our country!
Thank you again for the opportunity to share my perspective and I
am happy to help this committee address the critical issues it
continues to address.

Attachments
National Sheriffs' Association Letter to Speaker Johnson
National Sheriffs' Association Letter to House and Senate
Appropriations
Press Release: Nation's Sheriffs Call for the Eradication of Drug
Cartels, Starting with the Sinaloa and Jalisco New Generation Cartels
Press Release: Nation's Sheriffs Call for Action at the Border Due
to Heightened Threat Picture
______

NATION'S SHERIFFS CALL FOR THE ERADICATION OF DRUG CARTELS,
STARTING WITH THE SINALOA AND JALISCO NEW GENERATION CARTELS
Thursday, February 9, 2023--(Washington, DC).--The American Sheriff
Alliance met in Washington, DC, last week to discuss the continued rise
in overdose deaths and violence plaguing their jurisdictions in all
areas of the country. These troubling patterns can all be traced to two
main drivers of illicit narcotics into the United States--the Mexican
Sinaloa and the Jalisco New Generation Cartels, both Transnational
Criminal Organizations (TCOs) which are headquartered south of the
United States border with Mexico.
On September 11, 2001, terrorists killed 2,977 innocent people and
our Nation was outraged. America's response included declaring a war on
terrorism and bringing justice to the victims of this unthinkable
tragedy by holding terrorists and terrorist countries accountable.
Last year, on December 14, 2022, the White House issued a statement
regarding the Center for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC) release
of provisional drug overdose death data for the 12-month period ending
in August 2022. Over 107,000 overdose deaths were recorded in this 1-
year period, with most attributed to illicit synthetic drugs like
fentanyl and methamphetamine, often in combination with other drugs,
including cocaine and heroin. Despite the incredible number of deaths,
which can be directly attributed to the trafficking of illegal
narcotics into the United States by the Mexican Cartels there has been
little call to action or change in foreign policy to address this
alarming issue. This crisis has caused 35 more times the amount of
death to American citizens in a 1-year period than was inflicted upon
the United States on September 11 by al-Qaeda and Osama Bin Laden.
The Mexican drug cartels, as well-documented in the successful
prosecution of Joaquin Archivaldo Guzman Loera, also known as El Chapo,
operate sophisticated crime operations fueled by fear, terror,
intimidation, extortion, and murder. These criminal organizations are
directly responsible for the increases in deaths, human trafficking,
sex trafficking, and unprecedented violence occurring in cities and
counties across our Nation. These cartels and their operatives are
operating with disastrous effects not just on our Southern Border, but
their influence can also be felt across our Northern Border and
maritime borders as they seek to exploit all avenues to deliver lethal
narcotics and violent criminals into our communities.
Sheriff Greg Champagne, of St. Charles Parish, Louisiana, and
president of the National Sheriffs' Association (NSA) stated, ``We can
no longer allow these murderers to terrorize our communities. We need
every American to join us in demanding our government focus on this
crisis and take whatever actions are necessary to eliminate these
criminal networks and operations.''
``This is not a partisan issue. This is a life-and-death issue,''
said Sheriff Bill Brown, of Santa Barbara County, California, and vice
president of the Major County Sheriffs of America (MCSA). ``Two
criminal organizations, the Sinaloa and Jalisco New Generation cartels,
operate in Mexico with near-impunity, producing and trafficking
fentanyl and other deadly drugs that are killing more than 100,000
Americans every year. America's sheriffs are calling for meaningful
change in our Nation's foreign policy. The Federal Government must put
greater pressure on the Mexican government to take aggressive action to
disrupt and destroy these unlawful cartels. The current situation is
intolerable and cannot stand.''
Sheriff Brett Schroetlin, of Grand County, Colorado, and president
of the Western States Sheriffs' Association (WSSA) said, ``These
cartels are operating in every part of our Nation. It's not an urban,
suburban, or rural issue. These massive, well-financed criminal
enterprises kill, enslave, and destroy families and communities. We
need the people of the United States to demand, that our government
commit the necessary resources to eliminate these organizations here
and abroad as they did following the horrific events of 9/11.''
``This is not an immigration issue; this is a public safety and
public health issue. It's not just the violence and drugs, it's the
sexual assaults, human trafficking, enslavement, and fear and terror
that are destroying neighborhoods here in the United States,'' Stated
Sheriff Eddie Guerra, of Hidalgo County, Texas, and chairman of the
Southwestern Border Sheriffs' Coalition (SWBSC). ``We are asking every
person who knows someone who has died or family who has suffered at the
hands of these criminal organizations, to make their voices heard with
their Federal, State, and local elected officials who have the power to
create the necessary change.''
Sheriff Eusevio Salinas, of Zavala County, Texas, and chairman of
the Texas Border Sheriffs' Coalition (TBSC) said, ``Americans can save
lives by calling upon the President of the United States, U.S.
Senators, and representatives in Congress and demanding immediate,
comprehensive action to identify and destroy these criminal operations,
wherever they may exist. Until our elected officials stand up to fight
this epidemic sweeping the Nation, we will continue to set records
related to the number of our loved ones we continue to lose each year
at the hand of these violent cartels.''
The American Sheriff Alliance is imploring the public to demand
their elected officials use every available sanction and accountability
tools at their disposal in combating the atrocities committed against
our country and its citizens by the Sinaloa and Jalisco New Generation
Cartels. Without such action, these dangerous cartels will continue to
destroy the very fabric of our families and communities.
The American Sheriff Alliance consists of sheriffs, leadership, and
chief law enforcement officers from the National Sheriffs' Association,
Major County Sheriffs of America, the Western State Sheriffs'
Association, the Southwestern Border Sheriffs' Coalition, and the Texas
Border Sheriff's Coalition. This alliance was formed to advocate for
policy change and reform in order to keep our Nation's citizens safe as
well as support the men and women who protect and serve the United
States of America.
______

Nation's Sheriffs Call for Action at the Border Due to Heightened Threat
Picture

September 28, 2023

The American Sheriff Alliance continues to call out cartel activity and
lack of reinforcements at the border
San Diego, California.--The American Sheriff Alliance met in San
Diego this week to discuss the continued pressure and strain on
resources the lack of border enforcement is having on local communities
throughout the United States including the alarming statistics of
encounters with individuals found to be on the Terrorist Watch List,
also known as the Terrorist Screening Dataset (TSDS). Further, the
diversity of the countries of origin for migrant encounters also
concerning particularly with those with those who have strained
diplomatic relations with the United States. The driving forces can be
traced back to the lack of border security as well as the Sinaloa
Cartel run by Ismael Zambada Garcia (``El Mayo'') and Jalisco New
Generation Cartel run by Nemesio Ruben Oseguera Cervantes (``El
Mencho'').
Along the Southwest Border, U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(CBP) TSDS encounters between ports of entry of non-U.S. citizens have
continually risen over the past 6 years. The following are the number
of TSDS encounters according to CBP: 2017--2 encounters, 2018--6
encounters, 2019--0 encounters, 2020--3 encounters, 2021--15
encounters, 2022--98 encounters, and in 2023 YTD--151 encounters. Since
2021, this represents a 906 percent increase in TSDS encounters and
there are still 3 months left in 2023.
In addition to these alarming rates of TSDS encounters, other
criminal statistics continue to rise. The number of arrests of
individuals with criminal convictions or those wanted by law
enforcement by noncitizens has increased exponentially from 6,562
encounters in 2021, to 16,992 in 2022, and year to date in 2023 there
have been 18,586 encounters which marks a 183 percent increase since
2021 with again 3 months left this year.
The statistics for TSDS encounters and those who have criminal
convictions or who are wanted by law enforcement are reflective of only
those who have encountered authorities. It is unknown how many
concerning individuals have entered the United States who have not been
accounted for. It has been reported by CBP that they have estimated a
total of 600,000 got-a-ways this year, but there is no way of knowing
the exact numbers. These alarming statistics are extremely concerning
to the Alliance and there are major homeland security concerns with
these individuals especially with the lack of information and vetting
as to their intentions, criminal histories, or connections to our
adversaries.
Further, the strain on local resources both for border sheriffs and
law enforcement across the country who do not have the adequate
staffing or funding to respond to this influx of migrants is troubling
and continues to affect communities across the country who are left to
deal with violent criminals, illicit narcotics, as well as the pressure
felt on community services including housing and medical needs.
``When the number of people dying from drug poisonings is the
equivalent to a 737 airplane crashing each day and the number of
migrants that we are aware of coming across the border could fill the
Caesars Superdome in New Orleans weekly, we have to sound the alarm,''
said Sheriff Greg Champagne of St. Charles Parish, Louisiana, and
president of the National Sheriffs' Association (NSA). ``If a plane
crashed daily, there would be immediate action taken and yet instead of
seeing numbers decrease, we continue to set records for those who are
dying from illicit narcotics mostly originating from the drug cartels
in Mexico.''
``Communities across the United States whether or not they are
located near a southern, northern, or maritime border are being
affected by the lack of resources available to address the overwhelming
challenges in stopping the volume violent criminals and illicit
narcotics flowing into our country at the hands of the cartels,''
stated Major County Sheriffs of America Executive Director Megan
Noland. ``The implications to the Nation's homeland security threat
picture continues to expand as migrant flows and cartel activity
continue to increase with no relief in sight. Terrorists and foreign
bad actors are monitoring the current weak border policies and they
will absolutely exploit these failings given the opportunity.''
Sheriff Leon Wilmot of Yuma County, Arizona and a member of the
Western States Sheriff's Association stated, ``The pressure on law
enforcement at the local level is unsustainable with the continued
daily increases at the southern ports of entry. With the sustained
unrelenting flow of migrants coming from all over the world and the
background checks and vetting process being limited it is concerning
who is being released into the interior. The cartels are actively
promoting the weak border policies through social media networks, and
it is clear they have been sadly, very successful in their mission.''
``While we know that these pressures are affecting U.S. borders
from all sides, the Southern Border is clearly the center of concern
when we see migrants from countries across the world enter our country
into the Southwest Border,'' said Sheriff Eddie Guerra of Hidalgo
County, Texas, and president of the Southwestern Border Sheriffs'
Coalition. ``CBP has reported that migrant encounters at the Southwest
Border covers 180 international countries--many who are adversaries
with the United States, which should be concerning to every American
citizen.''
Sheriff Tom Schmerber of Maverick County, Texas, and president of
the Texas Border Sheriff's Coalition noted, ``While Federal, State, and
local law enforcement are doing everything they can to keep their local
communities secure and ensure humane conditions for migrants who are
truly seeking asylum, there is no doubt that the asylum system is being
abused and the traditional avenues are overwhelmed to keep up requests
forcing the release of these individuals without any accountability. El
Mencho, El Mayo, and other troubling cartel criminals will continue to
exploit these easy loopholes without action from our elected officials.
The American Sheriff Alliance encourages elected officials at every
level of government to draw attention and make the proper reforms to
these extreme challenges--this includes actions needed to be taken by
the White House administration as well as Congress to ensure our border
is secure. With hundreds of violent criminals entering communities
around the country as well as the flow of illicit narcotics poisoning
our citizens, the Alliance is demanding that all available sanctions
and statutes be used to help alleviate the pressure the men and women
of law enforcement are facing during this unprecedented period in our
Nation's history. With a potential Government shutdown on the horizon
where staff will deal with this crisis unpaid, the environment is ripe
for the perfect storm with American's citizens suffering the
consequences and we ask for the public's support is asking for the
necessary reforms.
The American Sheriff Alliance consists of sheriffs, leadership, and
chief law enforcement officers from the National Sheriffs' Association,
Major County Sheriffs of America, the Western State Sheriffs'
Association, the Southwestern Border Sheriffs' Coalition, and the Texas
Border Sheriff's Coalition. This alliance was formed to advocate for
policy change and reform to keep our Nation's citizens safe as well as
support the men and women who protect and serve the United States of
America at the Federal, State, and local level.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Sheriff, and thank you for your
service.
I now recognize Mr. Ansbro for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ANDREW ANSBRO, PRESIDENT, UNIFORMED
FIREFIGHTERS ASSOCIATION OF GREATER NEW YORK

Mr. Ansbro. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito. I'd like to
thank the other Members of the committee for having me down
here today to discuss the--from the FDNY, the labor
perspective, the effects of the migrant crisis on our
operations.
My name is Andrew Ansbro. I'm the president of the
Uniformed Firefighters Association, Local 94. I represent
approximately 8,500 active firefighters and 11,000 retired
firefighters in the Fire Department in the State of New York.
In relation to the recent $7 billion in budget cuts imposed
by the city of New York due to the escalating migrant crisis,
the FDNY budget has been reduced by $75 million. Due to this
the department has had to make some cuts that are--some of
which are quite Draconian.
I would like to bring to your attention the significant
safety concerns from the perspectives of firefighting and how
these budget cuts will affect the residents of New York City
and also the firefighters.
As we are all aware, firefighting is an inherently
dangerous business, and the risks continue to grow each year.
We must do all that we can do ensure that the members of my
department return safely every tour but also to make sure the
New York City residents are not compromised by these budget
cuts. So the--we must prioritize safety above all else.
A little history of the FDNY staffing issues. The FDNY is
made up of 193 engine companies and 140 ladder companies. New
York City has periodically reduced staffing during budget
crises. In the 1960's engine companies had 6 firefighters. In
the eighties, it was dropped down to 5.
They tried to drop it down to 4 at that time, and we fought
back and forth, probably for the last 20 years, 4 firefighters
on an engine being the rock bottom New York City could operate
with.
As of recently, we had 20 firefighters on--4 firefighters--
I'm sorry--5 firefighters on 20 engine companies in New York
City, approximately 10 percent of the companies.
These are the busiest companies in the city, regularly
doing 5- to 6- or 7,000 runs a year. They cover the areas,
let's say, with the most dense population and the highest fire
load.
They have been staffed with 5 firefighters for the past
several years. The number was 60 at one point in time, but
dropped by Bloomberg--by Mayor Bloomberg.
Recently, due to the staffing reductions, the mayor has
chosen to drop staffing on these engine companies. The last
time he attempted to do this was when he first entered office
in January 2022.
One week after he removed the staffing, we had the famous
Twin Parks fire in the Bronx in which 17 people were killed.
Many of those companies would've been staffed with 5
firefighters, and we believe lives could've been saved.
We explained to the mayor how the fifth firefighter's
removal would've affected operations, and he agreed and brought
back the fifth firefighter immediately. He felt the savings was
not worth the additional risk.
However, due to the budget cuts, it appears the FDNY has
changed its position, and they have taken away the fifth
firefighter in these companies. This is a serious public safety
issue that affects these areas. The majority of the
firefighters--the majority of the fires are in these areas
where these fire companies reside.
Numerous studies have highlighted the importance of having
adequate staffing in firefighters on an engine company. Studies
have been done that show having an additional firefighter in
these companies will reduce the time it takes to get water on
fire by 50 percent.
In a profession where seconds matter, this adds minutes to
a fire operation that will absolutely cost people their lives.
Another issue is that it's a decrease in the manpower pull.
From time to time, we have people leave during the middle of a
tour due to injury. Those people are usually replaced by the 20
additional firefighters that are working on the engines.
Having these people not available will cause other
companies to go below staffing which is below safe operating
procedures. Truck companies will be forced to operate without
an OV position, outside vent.
This person's position is to go to the rear of a fire
building, open the window, let the gases out, but also enter
the back of the building searching for victims. These will be
the positions that will be lost when firefighters get injured
mid-tour or go sick mid-tour.
Regularly we use 15 to 20 or 25 members per day. So
basically an eighth of the city would be without their OV
position for the remainder of the tour which is a serious risk
to the lives of civilians and also firefighters.
Other issues that we have with the lack of the budgetary
financing, we're currently in an on-going negotiation with the
city of New York regarding our counterterrorism operations.
It would probably shock a lot of people to know that only
10 percent of the FDNY is properly trained in counterterrorism
measures where they are also outfitted with bullet-resistant
gear to go into an active shooter's zone.
Right now the level is set at 10 percent. We have been
negotiating with the city to increase it so that every company
in the city has proper vests and proper training. Right now the
city of New York is only offering 10 percent of the engine
companies, 10 percent of the truck companies, and the training
they wanted to implement is 3-day training, they've actually
dropped it down to 1-day training.
These negotiations have been on-going even before the
budget crisis due to the migrants, and we are quite confident
there will be no money to fully equip the FDNY for
counterterrorism training to enter active-shooter zones due to
the migrant crisis.
I know many of the other speakers here spoke directly about
the issue of how the migrants directly affect them. I'm here
to--I feel I've discussed a lot of the indirect issues on how
all the budgets are strained due to the migrant crisis, and the
FDNY has been operating on a bare-bones budget like most
municipal, you know, operations throughout the country.
The strain causes a serious affect on our operational
ability. It will, in my opinion, definitely cause the loss of
life, and it's something that if we could straighten this out
and budgetarily get our house back in order, we can restore our
funding to the department.
I appreciate the opportunity to speak today. I know I've
gone over time. I had a lot more that I would like to get into,
but apparently I can't. Time is an issue. I yield to the
Chairman and finish up. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Ansbro follows:]

Prepared Statement of Andrew Ansbro

Tuesday, December 5, 2023

Good afternoon. My name is Andrew Ansbro, and I am the president of
the labor union, the Uniformed Firefighters Association, Local 94,
IAFF, (the ``UFA''). The UFA represents approximately 8,500
firefighters in the Fire Department of the city of New York. The UFA
also includes fire marshals and various ranks within the FDNY Marine
Division.
In relation to the recent budget cuts imposed by the city due to
the escalating migrant crisis, I would like to specially address the
issue of staffing of firefighters within the FDNY.
I would like to bring to your attention the significant safety
concerns from the perspective of firefighting and how these budget cuts
will affect the residents of New York City, particularly on the issue
of staffing of firefighters.
As we all are aware, firefighting is an inherently dangerous job,
and the risks continue to grow each year. We must do all we can to
ensure that my members return safely after every tour. To achieve this,
we must prioritize safety above all else.

background of the fdny engine company staffing

The FDNY is made up of Engine Companies and Ladder Companies.
New York City has periodically reduced staffing during economic
downturns on Engine Companies in the city. In the 1960's, NYC Engines
Companies were staffed with 6 firefighters. In the 1980's most NYC fire
engines were staffed with 5 firefighters. Thereafter, the city has cut
down the number of firefighters staffed on an Engine Company and there
has been a long history of litigation and negotiations with the city.
As of now, 20 of the 149 Engine Companies are staffed with 5
firefighters. These 20 Engine Companies are subject to being reduced to
4 firefighters, when there is a rise in medical leave usage by
firefighters. This staffing reduction is within the discretion of the
Department, and it is not mandatory. The last time the Department chose
to exercise the discretion to reduce the firefighters on an Engine from
5 to 4 was in 2022 when Mayor Adams took office. Shortly thereafter, at
the Twin Parks fire in the Bronx at a high rise, which caused the
deaths of 17 people, including 8 children, the FDNY continually chose
not to impose the reduction, feeling that the savings weren't worth the
additional risk. However, since the budget cuts caused by the migrant
crisis, it appears that the FDNY has changed its position on this
critical issue, to the detriment of residents and firefighters.
The bottom line is that public safety will be compromised if
staffing is not adequate.

effects of losing the 5th firefighter on an engine company

Numerous studies and reports have highlighted the importance of
having adequate staffing of firefighters on an Engine Company.
Because New York City has more 6-story (or taller) buildings than
any other city in the United States, New York City requires a minimum
of 5 firefighters in an Engine company to effectively wage an
aggressive interior attack on a fire.
Engine companies require a minimum of 5 firefighters (the chauffeur
to operate the pump, plus 4 others to stretch the hose up to the
highest floor of a 6-story building). In high-rise buildings, such as
many office buildings in New York City, 5-man firefighter crews are
required for effective firefighting due to the necessity to stretch
multiple lengths of hose line.
Studies have shown that when a hose stretch team was reduced by 20
percent (5 firefighters reduced to 4 firefighters), the hose stretch
time was increased approximately between 50 to 75 percent.
In tests involving stretching 2 hose lines, a 1987 study by Vincent
Dunn, a former firefighter and renowned expert in firefighting safety,
showed that 2 5-man Engine Companies operating independently can place
2 lines in operation faster than 3 4-man Engine Companies operating
collectively.
In these studies, it was clearly demonstrated that a crew of 4
firefighters in an Engine Company has serious deficiencies. The safety
of firefighters in an Engine company with a crew of 4 is reduced to an
unacceptable degree. Reduced Engine Companies take longer to attack a
fire, thereby giving the fire time to spread and potentially causing
dangerous explosions or flashover, which is defined as the rapid
ignition of heated fire gases and smoke that have built up in a burning
room.
An Engine Company with crew of 4 cannot provide an aggressive
interior attack on a structural fire and cannot maintain an acceptable
standard of safety for New York City firefighters. In such a crew, the
chauffeur operates the pumping engine on the apparatus, while the other
3 firefighters stretch the hose and attack the fire. If there are only
3 firefighters available to attack the fire, then the ``buddy system''
for safety is not possible as one firefighter may have to enter a
dangerous fire area alone. Firefighters work in pairs for safety.

decrease in manpower pool

Another result of reducing the staffing on Engine Companies is a
decrease in the manpower pool, now that the extra 20 firefighters are
not available, it will sometimes trigger 3 firefighters operating on an
Engine and can also affect the Ladder Companies too. During a tour of
duty if a member becomes sick or injured, his position, if on a 4-
firefighter engine, would be covered by a member of a 5-firefighter
crew mid-shift. If the sick or injured firefighter were from a 5-
firefighter crew, then they would become a 4-firefighter crew. When all
5-firefighter crews are removed, this means that if there is an illness
or an injury, then the engine crew will operate as a 3-firefighter
crew, or if in a Ladder Company, they would be forced to operate
understaffed and eliminate the Outside Vent Position which is tasked
with going around the building to vent the building to allow gasses to
escape, and also to enter the building from the rear and search for
victims, meaning the very important life-saving position of operating
the Outside Vent will be eliminated. Front-line firefighters are forced
to sacrifice themselves to make up for the lack of another firefighter
needed on the engine.
Firefighters routinely get injured when working and are placed on a
medical leave status while they recover. To keep the workforce healthy,
staffing needs to be maintained to minimize the risk of injury. When
firefighters are forced to work more overtime due to staffing, medical
leave rates will continue to increase. Reducing the number of
firefighters available to respond to emergencies can have serious
consequences for the safety of the public. The safety of our
firefighters and the public must be prioritized.
Moreover, firefighters who have long-term injuries but cannot
fulfill firefighting duties due to injury are placed in Reasonable
Accommodation.
Recently, the UFA had a Labor Management meeting with the FDNY to
discuss new changes to the Employee Reasonable Accommodation Policy.
Given the timing of this proposed change, it is clear that this is
another cost-saving maneuver derived from the budget crisis facing the
city.
There are several key takeaways from this policy that impact my
members. Traditionally, there was no set number of Reasonable
Accommodation spots in the FDNY. Accordingly, if a member was qualified
for an RA, then the member could apply and receive an off-line position
to support the needs of the Department--there was no pre-determined
limit on these positions.
The new policy would create Reasonable Accommodation positions
designated as a ``Permanent Administrative Staff Position for Qualified
Firefighting Members''. Of great import is that we have been informed
that these positions will be a ``closed universe''. Our understanding
of this is that once the RA positions are so designated and they are
full, the next person who is entitled to and needs an RA position would
be denied due to the unavailability of a designated spot. This member,
presumably, would need to leave the fire service at that point.
To make matters worse, the new FDNY policy indicates that the FDNY
will not be required to offer a member an RA position if 90 days have
elapsed since the member filed the request for a Permanent
Administrative Staff position as a Reasonable Accommodation. Thus, our
understanding is that a member with a line of duty disability can be
forced from the FDNY if 90 days have expired from the beginning of that
member's application for an RA.
This policy's end goal, it seems, is to achieve cost savings
through removal of injured firefighters from the FDNY. This is
particularly troublesome when the vast majority of those who will need
a Reasonable Accommodation suffered their disabling injury in service
to the city of New York in response to an emergency. These are hardly
the people who should become expendable due to the budget.
Likewise, we suspect that this will become a compounding problem
that will cause greater safety issues for the city of New York and my
members. As the city reduces staffing by removing the 5th firefighter,
it increases the time it takes to get water on the fire and naturally
permits emergency situations to escalate. This will lead to more
serious fires and result in more injuries to firefighters and the
public at large. If there are more disabling injuries sustained and now
limitations on the number of RA positions available, members could be
forced out of the job.

rise in lithium-ion e-bike fires

I also want to stress the recent rise of fires due to lithium-ion
batteries and e-bikes in New York City. Recent events have shown the
dangers posed by these devices including the risk of fires and
explosions which have caused numerous injuries and fatalities. We know
that the New York City Council has investigated over 200 fires caused
by these batteries resulting in almost 150 injuries and at least 18
deaths this year alone. These are alarming numbers which require more
proactive and faster response times when these unfortunate fires occur.
Based on the rise in e-bike fires alone, common sense dictates that an
increase in staffing levels rather than a decrease in staffing levels
is needed to maintain the safety of firefighting operations.
Due to the budget cuts in the FDNY, it is clear that the community
will suffer.

counter-terrorism training

We must also recognize the fact that New York City is a top target
for terrorist organizations. We must ensure that the city is well-
equipped and well-staffed to prevent and respond to these potential
attacks. Unfortunately, it appears that the budget cuts have affected
the amount of training time that will be provided to our first
responders in this critical area. The safety and security of our
residents are dependent upon the counterterrorism measures in place and
all necessary resources should be applied.
Our firefighters are continued to be expected to do more with less.
Responses to fire incidents increase exponentially year after year. In
2022, the FDNY responded to more than 300,000 fires and non-fire
emergencies and over 1.5 million medical emergencies. We must ensure
that every firefighter is able to return home to their loved ones.
While budgetary concerns are important, the value of a firefighter's
sacrifice lies in their commitment to serving their communities and
bravely saving others. The city's overall budget reductions and the
FDNY's changes to staffing and to other vital policies present a real
direct threat to the safety of the public as well as to firefighters.
Thank you once again for allowing me to speak on these crucial
safety matters.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ansbro. I now recognize Mr.
Awawdeh for his 5 minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF MURAD AWAWDEH, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
NEW YORK IMMIGRATION COALITION

Mr. Awawdeh. Good morning, Chair D'Esposito and Ranking
Member Carter, and the Members of the committee. It is my
pleasure to discuss protecting our preparedness and our work
with you today. I am Murad Awawdeh, the executive director of
the New York Immigration Coalition, the Nation's oldest and
largest immigrant rights organization, providing policy,
advocacy, coordinated services, and integration support to our
200 members across the State of New York.
Immigrant New Yorkers have been at the forefront and the
front lines of every emergency and natural disaster our State
has faced. They are not only critical to our emergency
preparedness working as first responders, essential workers,
and at every level of emergency response infrastructure, they
are the backbone of New York's economy and resilience.
The challenges we are experiencing today result from 30
years of Congressional inaction. Contrary to the framing of
this hearing, immigrants are not the problem. They are the key
to the solution.
For this, Congress should take action to make our
immigration system more orderly, predictable, and humane so we
do not continue to lurch from one manufactured issue to the
next.
Stop scapegoating immigrants to divert attention from the
true source of the problem we face--Congressional paralysis--
and recognize that immigration is the leading source of the
country's moral, social, and economic strength.
In the past 2 centuries, immigration and migration have
played a critical role in developing the United States.
Immigration to the United States has kept our country
competitive and a leader in innovation on the world stage.
Migration to the United States has consistently contributed
to our country's social, cultural, and economic fabric, as
reflected in my home State of New York.
Each era of migration has brought streams of immigrants
from Europe, Asia, Latin America who contributed to the growth
of this country and kept the American Dream alive.
Immigrants, regardless of their status, have contributed
some $1.3 trillion in spending power to our Nation. New York's
immigrant population contributes $140 billion in annual
spending power and contributes over $62 billion in taxes
combined.
Across the State, immigrants are driving our local
economies, and when you examine the Congressional districts
represented on this committee from New York, in New York
Congressional District 4, home to over 180,000 immigrants, they
contribute $6.3 billion in annual spending power and pay more
than $2.9 billion in taxes.
In Congressional District 1, home to over 105,000
immigrants, they contribute $4.3 billion in spending power and
pay over $2.1 billion in taxes.
In New York Congressional District 10, home to over 190,000
immigrants, contributing over $8.6 billion in annual spending
power, and paying more than $4.4 billion in taxes.
These 3 New York Congressional Districts' immigrant
populations contribute more taxes than the State of Alaska,
Wyoming, and South Dakota collected combined in State
government tax revenue last year.
The United States has struggled to handle most emergencies
such as floods, wildfires, and natural or man-made disasters,
yet even during these emergencies immigrants have stepped up to
aid our rebuilding and recovery efforts, including during
Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, Hurricane Sandy in New York,
and the COVID-19 pandemic.
Our Nation has relied on immigrants of all statuses during
these most challenging moments whether as emergency response
team members, medical professionals, agricultural, or food
service workers, or other areas requiring essential workers.
It has been over 35 years since we reformed our immigration
system under then-President Ronald Reagan who eloquently said,
if we ever close the door to new Americans, our leadership in
the world would soon be lost.
Our immigration system is our gain, and now is the time to
finally reform and modernize the system to create a more fair,
just, and equitable process, while also creating a pathway for
permanent protections for those who already call the United
States home.
While we continue to wait to repair our broken immigration
system, these are some steps Congress can and must take right
now.
In the immediate, Congress should pass existing bills that
would begin to address the issues of our immigration system
such as the registry bill, H.R. 1511, the Asylum Seeker Worker
Authorization Act of 2022, Fairness to Freedom, allocating
funds to provide case support services for asylum seekers, fund
legal services, fund the Emergency Food and Shelter Program,
increase funding for the Shelter and Services Program, support
FEMA's case management pilot program, increase funding for
USCIS processing and backlog reduction.
Regardless of immigration status, place of origin, skill
level, or language proficiency, immigrants contribute
significantly to preserving the American Dream.
Countless polls show the American people and the economy
agree--we need many more immigrants if we want our economy to
continue to grow and lead.
In short, more Americans are good for America. Fixing our
antiquated immigration system will require willpower, a
functional political system, and a commitment to investing in
our country's future.
I urge you to implement the outlined recommendations to
allow our Nation to remain the leader in driving the American
people and the world forward. Thank you for your time.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Awawdeh follows:]

Prepared Statement of Murad Awawdeh

December 5, 2023

Good morning, Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and
Members of the committee. I am Murad Awawdeh, executive director of the
New York Immigration Coalition (NYIC). Thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you to discuss ``Protecting our Preparedness'' here today
and about our work.

introduction: the new york immigration coalition

The New York Immigration Coalition (NYIC) is one of the oldest and
largest immigrant rights organizations in the United States. As an
umbrella policy, advocacy, coordinated services, and integration
organization, we represent over 200 member agencies across the State of
New York. The NYIC serves one of the largest and most diverse newcomer
populations in the United States.
The multi-racial and multi-sector NYIC membership base includes
grassroots and non-profit community organizations, religious and
academic institutions, labor unions, as well as legal and socio-
economic justice organizations. The NYIC not only establishes a forum
for immigrant groups to voice their concerns, but also provides a
platform for collective action to drive positive change.
Since the organization's founding in 1987, the NYIC has evolved
into a leading voice spearheading innovative programs and policy,
promoting and protecting the rights of immigrant communities, improving
access to services, developing leadership and capacity, expanding civic
participation, and mobilizing member organizations to respond to the
needs of immigrant communities. Our mission as a State-wide member-led
coalition of immigrant and refugee organizations is to work to
transform the lives of all New Yorkers so all can thrive.

historical and current migration

In the past two centuries, immigration and migration to our shores
have played an important part in the development of the United States
of America. Immigration to the United States has kept our country
competitive and a leader in innovation on the world stage. Migration to
the United States has consistently contributed to the social, cultural,
and economic fabric of our country and my home State of New York. From
the Frontier Expansion (1820-1880), Industrialization (1880-1920), and
all the way to the Post-1965 immigration (1965-present) era. Each era
brought streams of immigrants from Europe, Asia, and Latin America who
contributed to the growth of this country and kept the American Dream
alive.
On April 17, 1907, thousands of immigrants filed through Ellis
Island's Registry Room. By the end of that day, they had set a record
for the most immigrants processed in a single day: 11,747. By the end
of that year, more than 1.2 million immigrants would make their way to
the United States to build their lives here.\1\ Since that time, New
York welcomed tens of thousands of migrants per year from the late
1990's to early 2000's.\2\ While immigrating to the United States was
not quite so easy in the early 1900's, aspiring Americans didn't
necessarily have to deal with the broken immigration system that exists
today.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ New American Economy. (2019). Remembering Ellis Island's
busiest day: How has immigration changed since 1907? Retrieved from
https://research.newamericaneconomy.org/report/immigration-1907-v-2017/

\2\ Department of Planning City of New York. (2013). The Newest New
Yorkers. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/planning/download/pdf/data-maps/
nyc-population/nny2013/nny_2013.- pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Currently, globally, individuals and families are increasingly
migrating, seeking safety from violence, persecution, conflict,
government collapse, and the impacts of climate change. In the Western
Hemisphere, there are 20 million people displaced. Those seeking refuge
from Latin America and the Caribbean face extreme instability that
drives the movement of people across multiple borders in search of
safety. No one leaves their home because they feel safe; they leave for
their safety and the safety of their families. The increase of
individuals at the U.S. Southern Border is not unique to the United
States. More than 7.3 million Venezuelans have fled their country in
recent years, with over 6.4 million remaining in surrounding
countries.\3\ Similarly, we see an increase in migration of Ukrainians
across Europe, with over 6 million seeking refuge in European nations,
due to the on-going war. In the United States, due to the success of
Uniting for Ukraine, the United States has been able to resettle
several hundred thousand Ukrainians.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Migration Policy Institute. Selee, A., Lacarte, V., Ruiz Soto,
A. G., Chaves-Gonzalez, Jesus Mora, M., & Tanco, A. (2023, April 11).
In a Dramatic Shift, the Americas Have Become a Leading Migration
Destination. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/latin-america-
caribbean-immigration-shift.
\4\ Department of Homeland Security. (2022). Uniting for Ukraine.
https://www.dhs.gov/ukraine.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Immigration continues to power the U.S. growing economy, addressing
our workforce needs and meeting our humanitarian obligations. Migration
to the United States is not a new phenomenon; it is what keeps our
country moving forward and honors our pledge as a beacon of light for
those yearning for freedom and safety.

social and economic impact

In the United States, immigrants, with and without status,
contribute some $1.3 trillion in spending power to our Nation.\5\
Immigrants make New York stronger, with an estimated 4.4 million
immigrants living in our State, making up nearly a quarter of the total
population.\6\ Across the State of New York, about 630,000 U.S.
citizens live in mixed-status households.\7\ According to data analysis
from FWD.us,\8\ immigrants live in 31% of the households in New York
and contribute to every sector of our economy, including 34% in the
construction industry, 13% in agriculture, 25% in manufacturing, 26% in
business services, and 27% in leisure and hospitality. New York's
immigrant population generates $140 billion in annual spending power
and contributes over $62 billion in annual combined taxes. The
population is well-versed, with over 34% having college or advanced
degrees, 67% earning two times higher than the poverty line, and 76%
speaking English. Across the State, immigrants are driving our local
economies. Taking a more micro-level look at NY Congressional Districts
represented on this committee:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ American Immigration Council. (2021, September 21). Immigrants
in the United States. https://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/
research/immigrants-in-the-united-states.
\6\ FWD.us. (2023, February 17). New York needs pro-immigrant
policies to bolster its population and economy. https://www.fwd.us/
news/new-york-economy/.
\7\ FWD.us (September 9, 2021) Immigration reform can keep millions
of mixed-status families together. https://www.fwd.us/news/mixed-
status-families.
\8\ Custom State and district analysis provided by FWD.us based on
data analysis from the 2021 American Community Survey, according to
this immigration status methodology.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

In NY Congressional District 4, home to over 180,000
immigrants, contributing $6.3 billion in annual spending power
and pay more than $2.9 billion in annual combined taxes.

In NY Congressional District 1, home to over 105,000
immigrants, contributing $4.3 billion in spending power and pay
over $2.1 billion in combined taxes.

In NY Congressional District 10, home to over 190,000
immigrants, contributing $8.6 billion in annual spending power
and pay more than $4.4 billion in combined taxes.
These three NY Congressional Districts contribute more taxes than
the States of Alaska, Wyoming, and South Dakota collected combined in
State government tax revenue.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Statista. (2023, November 3). U.S. State government tax revenue
fiscal year 2022, by State. https://www.statista.com/statistics/248932/
us-state-government-tax-revenue-by-state/#:?:-
text=U.S.%20'State%20government%20tax%20revenue%20FY%202022%2C%20by%20'-
State&text=In%20the%20fiscal%20year%20of,at%20117.98%20billion%20U.S.%2
0- dollars.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
preparedness, management, and solutions

As a Nation, we are ill-prepared for the climate emergencies and
disasters we have and will continue to face. In New York over the past
year, we have witnessed devastating flooding from aged and arcane
infrastructure that can't handle more than two inches of rain before
flooding streets, transportation systems, and homes. This past June, I
stood in Times Square waiting for my bus to go home and couldn't
believe the density of smoke that had reached New York City from the
eastern Canada wildfires. For weeks, the after-effects of the wildfire
made the air quality unsafe.
This hearing is being held to discuss the impacts of emergency
preparedness and the increase of migrants arriving at the Southern
Border seeking their lawful right to seek asylum in the United States.
As a country, the United States has struggled to handle most of the
emergencies we have faced. Yet, even during emergencies migrants have
stepped in to help our rebuilding and recovery efforts. During
Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, migrants helped remove toxic mold
from hospitals and schools to restore public services to the devastated
city. It took the Southern Poverty Law Center filing lawsuits against
two of the largest Federal contractors to fight for migrant's fair
wages and reports of abuse.\10\ In New York, after Hurricane Sandy, I
witnessed first-hand the ways in which immigrants (those with and
without status) stepped up alongside their neighbors to help rebuild
hard-hit communities. During the COVID-19 pandemic, 5.2 million of the
country's 23 million immigrant essential workforce were
undocumented.\11\ These immigrant essential workers were in critical
industries like medical, agricultural, food service, and others, making
up nearly 1 in 5 individuals in the total U.S. essential work force.
They remained on the front lines of this pandemic, picking and
delivering our food, treating our sick, and caring for children and the
elderly as so many of us sheltered at home.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Laurel E. Fletcher, Phuong Pham, Eric Stover, and Patrick
Vinck, Latino Workers and Human Rights in the Aftermath of Hurricane
Katrina, 28 Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L. 107 (2007). https://doi.org/
10.15779/Z38JD03.
\11\ FWD.us. (2020, December 16). FWD.us Estimates Show Immigrant
Essential Workers are Crucial to America's COVID-19 Recovery. https://
www.fwd.us/news/immigrant-essential-workers/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While some may say that what is happening at the Southern Border is
taking away emergency management from more pressing needs, the Federal
emergency management agency isn't coordinating a response at the
Southern Border. While more coordination and support is needed between
border and interior states from the Federal Government, using this
moment to divide our Nation instead of proposing a humane and lasting
solution is counterproductive to wanting to create a humane and orderly
system at our Southern Border.
It has been over 35 years since we reformed our immigration system
under then-President Ronald Reagan, who eloquently said, ``If we ever
closed the door to new Americans, our leadership in the world would
soon be lost.''
Our immigration system is arcane and now is the time; finally
reform and modernize the system to create a more fair, just, and
equitable system, while also creating a pathway for legalization to
those who already call the United States home. While we continue to
wait to fix our broken immigration systems, there are steps the Biden
administration and Congress can take:
In the immediate, Congress should:

Pass the Registry bill (H.R. 1511 & S. 2606), which would
update the registry date and make green cards available to
long-time residents without status.

Pass legislation to eliminate or significantly reduce the
delay in work authorization for asylum seekers, such as through
the Asylum Seeker Work Authorization Act of 2022.

Pass appropriations to provide case support services to
connect all asylum seekers with social and legal resources and
fund legal representation for indigent persons in immigration
courts, before the Asylum Office, and for other immigration
matters;

In addition to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Emergency Food and Shelter Program (EFSP) funding,
appropriate multi-year, committed funding for sustainable,
expanded capacity in border and interior communities for
transitional housing arrangements to host asylum seekers who do
not have sponsors immediately available. These Federal
contracts should go to experienced community-based nonprofits
and should not pass through Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) or Customs and Border Protection (CBP) accounts, nor
require any form of detention;

Appropriate sufficient funds to provide legal orientation
and information to all individuals released from the Department
of Homeland Security (DHS) custody after arriving through a
U.S. border or port of entry. Ensure that DHS works with
qualified community humanitarian services providers to provide
legal orientation and information in asylum seekers' best
language, including Indigenous languages.

Pass the Fairness to Freedom Act, which establishes the
right to legal representation for anyone facing removal from
the United States who is unable to afford it; and

Defund harmful and costly ICE ``alternatives to detention''
that impose highly invasive surveillance and monitoring
requirements like GPS tracking and ankle shackles and currently
cost the Government over $300,000 per day. Instead, the
administration should increase funds for the Case Management
Pilot Program (CMPP) funded through FEMA, which provides
community-based case management services to support immigrants
undergoing asylum and other case adjudication.

Increase funding for U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS) for employment authorization and other
application processing, backlog reduction, and integration
funding.

Increase funding for the Shelter and Services Program (SSP).
SSP is a new grant-making body that supports cities,
localities, and non-governmental organizations assisting newly-
arrived migrants. These funds are often described as a
``lifeline,'' supporting the provision of food, clothing, basic
medical aid, legal information, and transportation support for
people recently released from Department of Homeland Security
(DHS) custody.
In the immediate, the Biden administration should:

Address the Humanitarian Need

Develop an Emergency Resettlement Plan: In October 2022, the
United States followed the successful program Uniting for
Ukraine and began to parole those from Venezuela, Haiti, Cuba,
and Nicaragua into the United States. While that significantly
eased the pressure of new arrivals at the Southern Border, it
restricted who was able to utilize that program. The United
States should launch a new Emergency Resettlement Plan for
asylum seekers at the Southern Border to get the support needed
to begin their new lives in a new country, which can be modeled
after the hugely successful Refugee Resettlement Program.

Modernize and Expedite Processing and Coordination in the Interior

Sufficiently fund Customs and Border Patrol (CBP) Office of
Field Operations (OFO) only for processing capacity. The part
of the CBP responsible for screening and processing travelers
and migrants at ports of entry is the OFO (officers in blue
uniforms), not the Border Patrol (agents in green uniforms). It
is imperative that OFO have the funding it needs to screen and
process people as they arrive at the border to seek asylum or
other forms of protection.

Coordinate the movement of vulnerable new arrivals to the
United States. Working with cities that have capacity to
welcome them: The administration should coordinate
transportation and support for new arrivals and not let them be
used by individuals as political pawns to sow division. The
administration should take active steps to help resettle
vulnerable populations, by, for example, creating a task force
of grassroots service providers and immigrant rights experts to
work in partnership to welcome new arrivals.

Replicate the Success of Operation Allies Welcome and
Uniting for Ukraine to Modernize Border Processing and Provide
Housing Supports for New Arrivals: This administration has
successfully managed large-scale resettlement of tens of
thousands of people from Afghanistan and hundreds of thousands
from Ukraine. The administration set up Operation Allies
Welcome--a multi-agency effort--to help Afghans start their
lives in the United States. Over the past decade, the United
States has needed to modernize regional processing centers in
the border communities, where multiple Federal agencies can
work together with State and local officials to process mixed
flows of forced migrants. Similarly, the administration safely
processed 20,000 Ukrainians who came to our Southern Border by
coordinating closely with local service providers. Instead of
allowing the State of Texas to coordinate and target cities and
States it does not agree with, the administration should
replicate the success of its past emergency response efforts
and modernize our border processes by creating regional
processing centers.

Continue to Utilize TPS to Protect More People and Allow
them to Work: The administration should issue updated
designations and new designations for countries that meet the
statutory requirements for the program and are facing deadly
armed conflicts, wide-spread human rights violations,
disasters, and other humanitarian crises including El Salvador,
Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, Nepal, Guatemala, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Mali, Nigeria, and Mauritania.

Increasing Legal Pathways

Expedite Refugee Processing in the Western Hemisphere:
Provide additional decompression at the border; the U.S.
Refugee Admissions Program should prioritize admissions from
the Western Hemisphere.

New Private-Public Sponsor Pilot: For countries where
specific parole processes do not exist, such as Ecuador and
Peru, where acute needs for resettlement are on the rise.

conclusion

There is no doubt that immigrants, regardless of their immigration
status, place of origin, skill level, or language proficiency,
contribute significantly to making America better. The American economy
and the American people agree as countless polls have shown.
More Americans are good for America. We need many more immigrants
if our economy is to continue to grow and lead. There are plenty of
ideas for reform that simply require will, a functioning political
system, and the determination to vigorously engage in public investment
in the country's future workers. I strongly urge you to implement the
outlined recommendations to allow our Nation to remain the leader in
driving the American people and the world forward.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Awawdeh.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
will be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
County Executive Blakeman, the major difficulty that
communities are facing in New York is where to house migrants.
The State of New York's Right to Shelter law requires cities to
provide anyone who experienced homelessness with a bed.
At one point the Nassau Coliseum, right in the heart of
Nassau County in my district, was identified as the potential
site for housing migrants by New York city officials.
However, you have been crystal clear that Nassau County is
not a sanctuary county and will not be offering housing or
other services to migrants. I know you mentioned it briefly in
your opening statement, but can you please elaborate on that
decision for a minute?
Mr. Blakeman. Well, I think we anticipated early on the
problems with the current migrant policy, which many of our
residents find to be absolutely bizarre.
First of all, we're letting people into the country that we
have no idea who they are, where they came from, whether or not
they're entitled to asylum status because they haven't had a
hearing.
What we've seen is a surge in crime, and we've seen
situations where, with our firefighters--our volunteer
firefighters in Nassau County, we've seen homes that are meant
for one family with as many as eight families in them, which
creates a terrible public health crisis and the potential for
the types of tragedies in a fire that the gentleman who
represents our firefighters mentioned.
So we have made a determination not to be a sanctuary
county, but that doesn't mean that we're immune to the issues.
As I mentioned, the individual that tried to come into our
county with enough fentanyl to kill 3 million people was from
the Bronx where they have a sanctuary city program.
They migrate--no pun intended--into Nassau County, they
commit crimes, and it's a real burden on our public safety. Our
county police department we've had to reinforce with additional
members. We, under my administration, hired a hundred new
police officers.
I am flying back this afternoon to Nassau County, where I'm
promoting new police officers because we need more superior
officers.
I am hearing from educators in our school districts, many
of them from minority communities, who say, we don't have the
resources, we don't have the classrooms, we don't have the
teachers, and we haven't budgeted for this.
So we made a decision in Nassau County not to take part in
any sanctuary program, and I think we made the right decision,
especially when you see what's going on in New York City and
other parts of the country.
Mr. D'Esposito. I agree, but I think it's crystal clear
that the policies set forth by cities like New York City are
plaguing other communities that surround them, whether or not
they are sanctuary counties or cities or not.
Mr. Ansbro, I know you mentioned in your opening statement
and when you finished up, you said that there was so much more
to talk about, and that's why we're thankful that you're here
today.
New York City Mayor Eric Adams estimates that the mounting
migrant crisis will cost taxpayers, at minimum, $12 billion,
with a B, through the end of the fiscal year.
As such, he has recently announced sweeping budget cuts
across the city, and I know you mentioned some of them in your
opening statement, but can you please go into a little bit
further detail in the next minute-and-a-half how these budget
cuts will affect the FDNY and its ability to serve the people
of the city of New York and all who visit?
Mr. Ansbro. Thank you. As I recommended, we would--having
mandatory staffing cuts on engine companies. That's one issue.
One of the other issues we're having is, they're reducing
training for our members. We're supposed to have, I believe, a
hundred hours of training per year. They have to cut the amount
of training we're going to do.
They're taking off-line positions and moving them--putting
all the off-line positions back in the field. A lot of these
are training positions, research positions, new tactical
positions.
Issues that are affecting my members is, they have--
traditionally, we always have members that are injured due to
the nature of our work. There are approximately 8,000
firefighters--there's been about a thousand of them currently
on light duty. Some have 9/11-related illnesses.
They've taken a position that they're going to alter the
reasonable accommodation policy to limit the number of jobs and
start forcing members out that are injured, that they can't
find a job for.
There's approximately 500 off-line jobs, and they're
looking to limit the RA positions to 125 and basically excess
everyone above that number.
So we're going to have senior members of the Fire
Department that get injured, get told they're not going back to
work, and the Fire Department is saying, Well, we used to have
jobs for you in training or in R&D, but we're out of positions.
Now you're going to have to leave.
So there's going to be a brain drain in the Fire
Department, and basically they're going to balance the budget
on the backs of injured firefighters.
Mr. D'Esposito. So contrary to the comments of many of
those that are imposing these budget cuts, it is very clear
that they will have devastating affects to the operations of
one of the greatest fire departments in the world.
Mr. Ansbro. Absolutely. They've already cut staffing on 10
percent of the engine companies and have made it clear that we
don't have the money to increase our capabilities in
counterterrorism activities and training.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
My time is expired, and with that, I recognize the Ranking
Member from Louisiana, Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.
Mr. Awawdeh, contrary to the often cruel and dangerous
rhetoric that some in the Republican Conference push related to
immigrants and the current global migration challenges, surges
in migration are not a new phenomena.
We can look back to multiple points in history and see
large surges in migration. We can go back to the early 1900's
and look at Ellis Island in New York to understand the
migration challenges are nothing new. They continue to be
exacerbated, but they aren't new.
Can you put the current migration challenges in context,
particularly as it relates to New York's history of migration?
Mr. Awawdeh. Absolutely, and thank you for that question,
Ranking Member Carter.
New York is no stranger to immigrants. We have the Statue
of Liberty in our harbor. Ellis Island has been a welcoming
beacon and processing center up until it was decommissioned.
You know, we don't have to go too far back in history--
we'll start at 1907--where Ellis Island saw the largest
increase in people arriving to New York, with that year seeing
1.2 million people arriving to the New York shores.
On April 17th of 1907, it's the largest arrival date of
individuals being processed and registered, with 11,747 people
arriving that day.
Let's not go that far back. Even in New York's past
history, in the late nineties to early 2000's, we were seeing
over 100,000 people arriving to New York City as well.
What's unique about this moment is that approximately half
the population that is arriving to New York has no familial
community or friend connection where historically people would
have been able to crash with family or friends, have not been
able to do that, where now they are needing shelter support in
this moment.
I think another piece here is that we are constantly
talking about this moment as a crisis, and it is a moment of
challenge. Where we see the crisis is in inaction in providing
real solutions that are going to change the conditions, the
material conditions on the ground across the country, that are
going to support people who are seeking their right, their U.S.
legal right, to seek asylum in the United States.
People who are coming here seeking asylum have the right to
do so, and by presenting themselves at the Southern Border or
to immigration officials at the border, they are, in fact,
seeking their legal right to seek asylum in the United States.
That's step one of the process.
Mr. Carter. Thank you.
Mr. Awawdeh, the Biden administration and Secretary
Mayorkas are working together to create an orderly process at
the border. There are challenges. I don't think anyone
disagrees with that. It's not as easy as it appears. There's a
lot of moving parts. Unfortunately, some would rather make this
a political tug-of-war than to find real solutions.
Still, some of our Republican friends are hell-bent on
pursuing chaos by not passing comprehensive border, bipartisan
immigration reform.
What legislation is needed in your opinion, and what
recommendations do you have to address the current migrant
challenge?
Mr. Awawdeh. First and foremost, we need to actually tackle
and finally reform our immigration system. That has been
something that has not happened since 1987, as I mentioned
earlier, then under President Ronald Reagan, where about 3
million people were provided a pathway to legalization and some
of the system and infrastructure was put in.
Every single aspect since then has been limiting or
constricting immigration policies. We need to actually move
very quickly in this moment to put better systems in place,
open up at the Southern Border more regional processing
centers, making sure that we're implementing better solutions
that are providing supports to communities that are receiving
individuals who are coming in seeking asylum, or others, and
creating multiple pathways for people to come into the United
States.
You know, kudos to the Biden administration for expanding
parole and allowing those from Venezuela, Haiti, Cuba, and
Nicaragua to apply for the similar program that we created for
the Uniting for Ukraine where we allowed Ukrainians to come
into the country and about several hundred thousand have
already done so.
We need more policies that are going to, (A) help the
system be more equitable, more fair, and operate smoother. At
the same time, we need to move forward in processing
applications through USCIS and expediting that process and
modernizing our systems.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. My time is up.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
I now recognize fellow Long Islander, fellow New Yorker,
Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you to my good friend from Long Island,
Chairman D'Esposito, for hosting today's hearing and to our
witnesses, all 4 from New York for being here today. Who
doesn't love a panel with four New Yorkers on it? But,
gentlemen, don't waste your time with the pizza here in the
District of Columbia. It's just not worth it.
Chairman, it's no surprise that you, a former NYPD
detective, picked such a good topic for today's hearing--
Protecting our Preparedness, Assessing the Impact of the Border
Crisis on Emergency Management.
Like your Nassau County constituents, Mr. Chairman, my
Suffolk County constituents to your immediate east are
frustrated by the border and migrant crises, and they fear for
their safety.
On Long Island, when President Trump was in office, we
defeated MS-13 and made Nassau and Suffolk Counties safer. We
Long Islanders don't want our Nation's leaders to put us down
that bad path, and we don't want their policies to drag us back
to that ugly place.
These crises are especially frustrating to Long Island's
leaders because the root causes of each of them are beyond our
control.
Today we have three witnesses who every day are downstream
from the policies which have caused America's border crisis and
New York City's migrant crisis. Yet, despite their awesome
authorities and responsibilities, these talented individuals
have no control over the root causes of the crises with which
they have to deal.
I would posit that our Nation's border crisis and New York
City's migrant crisis are both crises of choice, of policy
choice, crises which stem from two main policy choices.
First, President Biden repealing former President Trump's
Remain in Mexico policy. By President Biden doing so, migrants,
the overwhelming majority of them, without valid asylum claims,
have been able to enter the United States by the tens of
thousands, just to disappear into the shadows because most
aren't showing up for their asylum court date which is often 2
years later.
The second policy choice which is causing New York's
migrant crisis are the sanctuary city policies of both New York
State and New York City, which prevent city and State law
enforcement from enforcing our Nation's immigration laws.
Mr. Blakeman, sir, thanks for being here.
Full disclosure to the committee, one of my first jobs
outside the Navy was Mr. Blakeman's campaign manager, but truth
be told, I was an overpaid driver and assistant because Mr.
Blakeman was, and still is, very hands-on with everything he
does.
Good to be with you, Mr. County Executive.
Mr. Blakeman. You're no worse for the wear.
Mr. LaLota. I applaud that you've been very clear
throughout all this, and Nassau County is not a sanctuary
county.
You, sir, have the courage and wisdom that both Mayor Adams
and Governor Hochul have lacked throughout this crisis, and
your courage and wisdom, sir, is helping to keep Long Islanders
safe.
I'd like you, sir, Mr. Blakeman, to go into a little more
detail about how the migrant crisis has affected crime in
Nassau County and the subsequent effect that it has had on
police departments and first responders, sir.
Mr. Blakeman. Yes. So we have seen an increase in crime
basically because you have these organized gangs that are part
of the drug cartels from Mexico and other countries who have
come to the metropolitan area. They're residing primarily in
New York City, and they do cross-border crime. We are just to
the east of New York City.
I might add that those who try to characterize this as just
a Republican issue, the Democrat County Executive of your
county, Mr. LaLota, did not create a sanctuary county in
Suffolk County.
I think common-sense people realize that the problem is
that we don't know who is coming in, we can't control the
numbers, and they are committing crimes. They are also creating
burdens on our young people that are devastating.
In the United States, over 65,000 young people have
overdosed on fentanyl. Where's it coming from? It's coming from
south of the border, and many of it's coming from Chinese
nationals.
I read today that there are 24,000 Chinese nationals that
were detained at the border. Those are the ones that were
detained. How many got through?
We need to secure our borders to make sure that we know
who's in this country. We are not anti-immigration. We're for
common-sense immigration.
I could go on and talk about the schools and the burden
that it's placed on our school districts, on our social
services, trying to to find social services.
But I'll tell you one thing that was really something that
stood out to me. Flying down here last night, through LaGuardia
Airport, I talked with an airport employee--I used to be a
commissioner of the Port Authority. We ran that airport--and
that person was telling me that when migrants come to LaGuardia
Airport, they're escorted by airport personnel to a place where
they can get a voucher for a hotel, a voucher for food, and a
free Uber ride to anywhere they want to go.
This is taking away resources that we desperately need to
take care of our own citizens, and it's done without Federal
programs and Federal money, and it's done without knowing who's
come in.
We need to secure our borders. Then we can have a guest
worker program where we have immigration that's controlled, we
know who's coming in, and we can have people in this country
that want to work hard, and we want to compensate them.
If they want to stay in this country and have a path to
citizenship, that's fine. They want to go back to their
country, that's fine. But we need to know who they are, we need
to know how many are coming in, and we need to make sure that
they're not criminals.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Blakeman. Your testimonies
inform--I've run out of time, but I want to say thank you for
informing Members. You know, we from New York, we get it. You
know, there's folks from across the Nation who are on this
panel today, from both sides of the aisle, they need to hear
feedback like this so they understand the impact of these
Federal policies, that they have on good suburban folks who
just want to be safe. I appreciate you being here today.
Mr. Blakeman. Thank you so much.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. LaLota. I now recognize,
also from New York, Mr. Goldman, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I am from New York City, and as I sit here today, I would
expect that this would be a really powerful hearing for the New
York City Council, but not clear why it's one in the Congress
of the United States which seems to be fixated on New York.
Another bill we had last week was totally focused only--as
a messaging bill, only on New York.
I appreciate that our witnesses are buddies of the
Chairman, but respectfully none of you, other than Mr. Awawdeh,
have any expertise about immigration policy.
I've been listening to what you've had to say, and I just
want to go through a couple of things so that we can make sure
that our facts are correct.
Mr. Blakeman, you are aware that every single migrant who
has come through the New York City--the Roosevelt Hotel, has
been vetted at the border, are you not?
Mr. Blakeman. They have not, sir.
Mr. Goldman. Yes, they have.
Mr. Blakeman. In my opinion----
Mr. Goldman. The ones who--the ones who have gone----
Mr. Blakeman. Sir, may I answer----
Mr. Goldman [continuing]. Through official channels on
the--through the city----
Mr. Blakeman. Sir, may I answer your question?
Mr. Goldman [continuing]. Have been vetted at the border. I
mean, that's a fact.
Mr. Blakeman. You asked me a question. I'd like to answer.
Mr. Goldman. I'm asking if you know or not.
Mr. Blakeman. Would you like the answer first?
Mr. Goldman. Let me ask you another question. Are you
aware----
Mr. Blakeman. Are you going to let me answer the question?
Mr. Goldman. No, I'm not. I'm not going to let you, because
you already answered it.
Mr. Blakeman. No, I didn't.
Mr. Goldman. Are you aware that the proportion of migrants
who have come through New York City who commit crimes is far
lower than the general population?
Mr. Blakeman. Sir, I would not agree with your facts. I
have spoken extensively with our police commissioner who has
indicated to me that because of the migrant policy there has
been a spike in crimes, especially organized burglaries----
Mr. Goldman. Wait, sorry. Who--the commissioner, which----
Mr. Blakeman. Commissioner Patrick Ryder. We have the
finest police department----
Mr. Goldman. From where? From where?
Mr. Blakeman [continuing]. In the United States.
Mr. Goldman. From where?
Mr. Blakeman. He is a commissioner who was appointed by a
Democratic County Executive, and I retained him.
Mr. Goldman. What county?
Mr. Blakeman. The greatest county in America, Nassau
County.
Mr. Goldman. OK. Well, let me tell you, in New York City--
--
Mr. Blakeman. You should visit once in a while.
Mr. Goldman [continuing]. In New York City, where almost
all of these migrants are, the crime is much, much lower among
the migrant community than it is among the general population.
Mr. Blakeman. I don't know where you get your facts from,
sir.
Mr. Goldman. Go check it out. We're in a public hearing.
You can check it out.
Mr. Blakeman, let me continue--or Mr. Ansbro, you indicated
to me that one of the real issues--or you indicated to us that
one of the real issues that the fire department is having is
budget cuts.
Mr. Blakeman, I think you said just a minute ago that one
of the problems that the city of New York and the State of New
York is having is that there is very little Federal money
flowing to help with the migrants who are coming. Is that
right?
Mr. Blakeman. That would be Mayor Adams' testimony, not
mine.
Mr. Goldman. OK.
Mr. Blakeman. I agree with that.
Mr. Goldman. I mean--all right. You just said it.
Mr. Blakeman. I agree with him, but Mayor Adams----
Mr. Goldman. You just said it.
Now you're aware there's a program----
Mr. Blakeman. Can I----
Mr. Goldman. There's a Federal program called the Shelter
and Services Program that can reimburse localities and States
for expenditures on immigration.
Are you not aware of that program?
Mr. Blakeman. I think they provide a very small part of the
financing and funding that would be needed.
Mr. Goldman. I agree. I agree, which is why if we had
Republican support, we could increase the funding in the
Shelter and Services Program so that the Federal Government
could offset the expenditures of New York City and of the State
of New York through the Shelter and Services Program so that we
would not have to have budget cuts to the FDNY.
But you want to know what the problem is? In H.R. 2, their
prize border security bill, it cuts all funding for the Shelter
and Services Program. You know what else H.R. 2 does? It cuts
all funding for legal counsel for unaccompanied minors. Not
surprisingly, it does not mention guns.
Now, Mr. Blakeman, you've discussed, as several of you
have, the scourge of the fentanyl trade that is going on in our
country. I agree with you. It is really bad, and we've had
testimony from actual experts on this over the course of the
last year who have made it very clear that the Mexican drug
cartels are the ones who control the fentanyl trade at the
border.
Unfortunately, the Mexican drug cartels have that authority
because they possess guns and weapons of war. But,
unfortunately, those weapons of war come from American
manufacturers, not from Mexico or elsewhere.
I have introduced a bill called the Disarming Cartels Act
which is designed to curb the exportation of weapons
manufactured by American companies to the drug cartels which
fuels the fentanyl trade operation. There's not yet one
Republican cosponsor.
I would urge my colleagues on the other side to recognize
that the source of power of the cartels who control the
fentanyl trade comes from American-made guns and we need to
stop that exportation. I hope my Republican colleagues will
join us in that effort.
I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Goldman.
I just want to take the opportunity to remind everyone that
we are at the Committee on Homeland Security, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology. The title of this hearing
is, ``Protecting Our Preparedness: Assessing the Impact of the
Border Crisis on Emergency Management.''
This is not an immigration hearing nor are we are focusing
on immigration. We're focusing on the failed policies of
Secretary Mayorkas and Joe Biden, and I want to thank the 3
Republican witnesses who I believe are experts on emergency
management and handling this crisis.
But thank you very much for your comments, Mr. Goldman.
I now recognize from the great State of Alabama, Mr.
Strong.
Mr. Strong. Thank you.
Sheriff Favro, as you mentioned in your testimony, there's
been a recognizable increase in 9-1-1 calls across your county
over the last 2 years.
As a retired assistant fire chief, firefighter, EMT myself
for over 39 years, I know how challenging this job is under
normal circumstances. When you add the influx of millions of
illegal aliens into our communities, it's only increases that
pressure on those leadership.
It's hard to imagine how some of our first responders are
keeping their heads above water. Like much of northern New
York, my district has many rural communities with limited
resources and manpower. These communities are not able to
handle the sudden increase in emergency calls like you
mentioned in your testimony.
Law enforcement and emergency services personnel,
particularly in border States, have reported that the influx of
illegal immigrants arriving at the border is straining the
system, whether it's first responders taking emergency 9/11
calls or sending ambulances to illegal aliens in need, with
hospitals inundated by non-U.S. citizens.
Sheriff, can you talk more about what you're seeing and the
strain that this administration's border policies are having on
emergency services like in your county?
Mr. Favro. Yes. Thank you, sir.
First of all, let me clarify in law enforcement the fact of
the unknown, going into the dark, going into the woods. We've
heard different issues and different comments and opinions on
firearms and weapons. You're walking into these situations with
zero information.
Now when you exacerbate that with dealing with somebody who
decided to illegally enter the country and crawl on their
stomachs through the woods, through swamps, wetlands, and
marshlands to be able to get to the United States, what is the
desperation that that person may be going through? What are
they dealing with?
All of these create more and more unknowns for not just law
enforcement but for our EMTs, our firefighters that assist us.
We've had a couple of rescue missions lately up along the
Northern Border where you go from a wooded area to swamp areas
that are probably knee to thigh deep. In the cold weathers,
when these start to freeze up, it becomes very, very dangerous.
These people get trapped in the swamps, and we end up having to
go out and do rescue missions.
In most cases it's volunteer staff that we're working with,
with our EMTs and our fire services, which makes it even more
difficult to come out. So it puts--it puts a strain not only on
the volume of calls and taking away those emergency responders
from other necessities within the community but it also puts an
additional mental health risk on the responders that are going
to these situations.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Sheriff. I can relate. I come from a
volunteer fire department that runs 2,200 calls a year with an
average response time of 5 minutes.
Have you ever seen conditions like this in your time as a
result of this invasion at our Southern Border? How is it
affecting your jail costs, your medical costs, corrections
officers, and burnout?
Mr. Favro. I'll answer it in reverse, starting with the
jail. We are seeing a significant increase. After bail reform
in New York State, our jail population went down significantly.
We are averaging about 100 to 105 detainees on a given day.
That went up to about 160 to 170 about 2 years ago because we
were--we have a contract with the United States Border Patrol.
I believe we are the only county jail left in the State of New
York than will house Border Patrol detainees. The--I'll say
revenue, but the cost is approximately $112 a night. It results
in over $2 million a year that is paid out for the detention at
our facility.
There are multiple barriers there because now in New York,
you're well aware, we have the MAT program, the medicated-
assistant treatment for detainees, and that's trying to be
pushed over to our Federal inmates, as well.
That becomes a little bit of a problem because you don't
know the medical history, you don't know the background, and it
can create more of a hazard and liability for the jail. That
creates a great frustration for our staff. The burnout and the
frustration comes from the language barriers.
We are firm believers that we are not jurors. We are not
judges. We are there to create a safe, secure, and humane
detention for these people until they are dealt with, with the
further part of the process.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Sheriff.
In my last 20, 30 seconds, Mr. Awawdeh, you stated we need
more immigrants. Where would you like them--where would you
like them to be sent to?
Mr. Awawdeh. Well, as I----
Mr. Strong. You say you need more immigrants. I'll tell you
this right here. I've spent a lot of time in New York over the
last couple of months. I was there this last weekend, met with
hundreds of people from New York. I didn't have one that said
send us more illegal aliens to New York.
I want to know, if you want more illegal aliens, tell me
where you want them and how many do you want.
Mr. Awawdeh. Well, Congressman, this is kind-of endemic of
the rhetoric we've been hearing, right, is we have had a
population loss in the State of New York because of the COVID-
19 pandemic and then people leaving the State of New York. We
need a stronger work force.
Mr. Strong. How many do you want, and where do you want
them?
Mr. Awawdeh. Sir, that's kind-of, like, a question that
doesn't----
Mr. Strong. You don't want them.
Mr. Awawdeh. It's a rhetorical question.
Mr. Strong. And the people of New York don't want them.
Mr. Awawdeh. It is not about having----
Mr. Strong. I yield back.
Mr. Awawdeh. It's not about having people----
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Strong.
I now recognize my good friend from California, Mr. Correa,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I want to thank you very much for holding this hearing.
I want to thank our guests today. You know, we're policy
makers and like to hear different perspectives of issues
because try to approximate some good public policy and all of
us can add to the discussion. So I thank the four of you for
being here today.
Frustrating right now, the challenges we have. A Washington
Post article last week says record 15 percent of population
now, immigration, immigrants. Last time we had the situation
was the turn of the century when it got up to 14.8 percent, 15
percent of our population. Had dinner with the Ambassador of
Germany last week as well, the day after this article came out.
He said, Lou, in Germany, it's 20 percent, 20 percent.
I would say it right now. We have a challenge, a world-wide
challenge. COVID devastated economies around the world. The
United States is probably the only one that came out hitting on
all eight cylinders. We're the only economy right now that's
pushing the rest of the world.
You mentioned Chinese. Unemployment among China's youth,
through the roof.
Mr. Blakeman, I used to be a county commissioner, county
supervisor in Orange County. That, sir, fact, is the best
county in the United States. We also made history 20, 30 years
ago, making history by being the county with the biggest
bankrupt county in the United States. We had to declare
bankruptcy. It wasn't because of immigrants. It was because of
management.
You mentioned something, sir. Let me ask you. Securing the
border, sealing the borders, can you define for me, what do you
envision securing the border? What is a secure border?
Mr. Blakeman. Well, a secure border has a wall that people
can't get through. It has a vetting process that if someone is
asking for asylum status----
Mr. Correa. We--I only have a couple of minutes so we've
never had that in this country. We've never had what you
envisioned. But I just wanted to get a picture what you're
thinking about.
You mentioned you went to La Guardia. You had the workers
there say these folks come in, they get a voucher, they get
this, they get that. One thing they don't get is a work permit.
I say this because when you talk about--I believe my colleague
from Alabama said where do you want these immigrants to go.
Right now there's a lot of folks, a lot of companies in the
United States that are looking for workers. The challenge is we
don't give them work permits, and that's on this administration
that we let Ukrainians in as refugees. They're not seeing it as
a problem because they get, as they walk across the border,
they're given a work visa, 2 years.
I think anybody who wants to come to this country, I agree
with you, in general, gentlemen, should come here to work, not
be on the dole, not be here to get some free benefit but earn
it. We got to give them a work permit.
In my district, biggest employer, Disneyland, 22,000 direct
jobs, tourism, 40-, 50,000 jobs, a lot of immigrants, working.
That's what we need right now. We need workers in this country.
We need to figure out our immigration system so we get people
that contribute as taxpayers.
If I can, I only have a minute left to continue to talk
here. But, Mr. Awawdeh, do immigrants pay taxes?
Mr. Awawdeh. Of course.
Mr. Correa. Social Security tax?
Mr. Awawdeh. Social Security, Medicaid----
Mr. Correa. They're never going to get any benefits
associated with that.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. Federal taxes.
Mr. Correa. Mr. Ansbro, I want to say thank you for your
service as a firefighter. Nine-eleven, that day's etched into
my memory. Everybody running away from those burning buildings,
firefighters, police officers running into those buildings.
Thank you.
I used to be a California legislator. We passed 3 percent
at 50 because we know firefighters have a tough job. They've
got to retire early because those bodies can't take it.
I also passed, sponsored worker's compensation
presumptions. You get hurt, certain hurts, it's presumed it's
on the job, and we take care of you. So I, you know, I would
ask you to look at that in New York. I don't know what the
State of the local State legislature is, but those are the kind
of jobs that need protection from the State legislature, to
make sure we honor your good work.
Mr. Chairman, I yield. Thank you.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Correa.
I now recognize from Oklahoma Mr. Brecheen for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to the witnesses.
I think all of us know that we're experiencing a crisis at
our Southern Border. I think to pretend or to look at this and
not just see the common-sense reality is, as New York City
mayor said, you know, our compassion as a Nation is limitless
but our resources are not. We're running $2 trillion deficits.
I'm astounded that the answer from some is they believe,
well, let's just give New York City and these high-population
centers more money. From where? From where? Because the entire
discretionary budget right now for the Federal Government is
$1.7 trillion. If you look at last year, $1.7 trillion was our
entire 12 appropriation bill number. What was our deficit last
year? One-point-seven trillion dollars.
One hundred percent of what--everything that we're spending
money on, absent the mandatory side of Medicare and Social
Security and Medicaid and food stamps, on the mandatory side,
100 percent of everything we talk about up here, let's give
them more money, is borrowed money from our kids and our
grandkids.
Really what we're saying is, is we're going to give you
something that's going to come from our children. We're going
to lower their standard of living.
Mr. Blakeman, let me ask you a question, because I'm really
just--I'm going off my notes here because I just I'm astounded.
Can illegal immigrants in New York vote?
Mr. Blakeman. In New York City, I believe they passed a
law. Luckily we don't have that law in Nassau County. But in
the city council and mayoral races, I believe illegal aliens
recently have been given the right to vote.
Mr. Brecheen. Let me follow up with that.
So if you are of the persuasion we need more of them and
they're aligned with your politics, let's say on the Democrat
side, is it to your benefit if you live in those areas where
illegals are casting their vote for you politically, is it to
your benefit to have these ideologies and just let, allow more
to come in, regardless of the cost?
Mr. Blakeman. Well, absolutely not.
I think it's always to the benefit of Americans and to
America, whether it's a local race, a State race, or a Federal
race that you be a United States citizen.
Mr. Brecheen. Yes.
Mr. Blakeman. You actually be a citizen. You take the oath,
the oath that you pledge, to defend and support the
Constitution of the United States.
Mr. Brecheen. But do you see that there are some, we'll
say, you know, Democrats that would want this top policy
because it helps them stay in office because they have illegals
that vote for them?
Mr. Blakeman. It definitely changes the voting pool in
favor of those who would let anybody in. That's absolutely
correct.
Mr. Brecheen. Let me follow up with this just because I
want the people of New York, the characteristics that you all
are seeing, we know the numbers tell us it's costing the State
of New York $10 billion a year right now. It's costing
approximately $6 billion a year, Eric Adams said, the mayor of
New York City, just the cost to New York City, $10 billion to
the State. It's costing New Jersey $5 billion a year.
So the State of--annually, the State of New York's, it's
costing them 10. The State of New Jersey, it's costing them 5.
Do the simple math. That's $15 billion.
Under the Trump administration, by the way, which we had in
2017 a 45-year low of illegal immigration, 45-year low in 2017
of illegal immigration, no change in laws, just leadership, now
we have historic highs we've never seen in this country.
The $15 billion that the State of New York and New Jersey
have spent, that built 400 miles of border wall or systems
under the Trump administration, the same amount of dollars.
So here we--we're playing defense on an annual basis, the
cost to the taxpayer of New York and New Jersey. There's some
common-sense, glaring abilities to secure our Southern Border
that are a better spend of our taxpayer resources.
The police department, is it about a 4 percent cut to New
York, 4 to 10? You all are expecting anywhere from 4 to 10
percent cut to your police department because of the cost
that's going to be sent your way? Is that the expected cost----
Mr. Ansbro. Five percent cuts across the board in the first
round. The mayor's expecting them to implement a second round.
He said first responders will be immune for the second round,
but he has not committed to any third or fourth round. He
believes it's going to continue to have cuts another 5 percent.
Mr. Brecheen. So I'm reading right here. It says New York
Mayor Adams is expecting these cuts may be up to 15 percent.
May be as much as 15 percent.
Mr. Pekoske. Three rounds. We have first round and the
second round and----
Mr. Brecheen. So I'm going to end with this.
How many people are you taking off emergency first
responders, police--and whoever want to answer this question
because my time is limited--are we better prepared if a
security threat comes to New York City because of these
decisions or less prepared? Whoever wants to answer that
question.
Mr. Blakeman. Well, we are less prepared because we don't
know who's come into this country and they haven't been vetted.
There's a lot of people that have come into this country that
have nefarious intent.
I believe that we need a program where we know who's coming
into this country and we vet them before they come in and that
if someone wants asylum and they're entitled to it, they should
get it but they need to have a hearing and they need to be
properly vetted.
Otherwise, with open borders, it creates a terrible public
safety crisis.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Blakeman.
I yield.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Brecheen. I now recognize--
we are clearly Long Island strong here this morning--Mr.
Garbarino from New York.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes, we've got everybody who is currently in
Congress from Long Island here.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all the witnesses for coming.
Mr. Ansbro, I want to talk to you first, President Ansbro.
We've spoken about the cuts to manpower. You talked about it in
your opening testimony. I want you to--I want you to talk about
the fifth man, yes. Not every--not every firehouse has a fifth
firefighter. I believe 20, currently 20 of the 149 do. Why do
they have the fifth firefighter?
Mr. Ansbro. Well the fifth firefighter has traditionally
been on staff due to the nature of how long it would take to
get a hose line in place. As the fire service decreased during
the eighties, that kept dropping the amount of firefighters
down. But in the past 20 years, the population of New York City
has increased by a million people. The run totals have gone
through the roof. You know, when I got to Harlem, it was one of
the busiest companies in the city of New York that we had 4,000
runs a year. That company is now doing 6,000 runs a year.
So The fifth firefighter's traditionally been used in the
busiest areas to be--to work on the hose line, to get the hose
in place. Sometimes the fifth firefighter will be placed in an
engine company to assist because they know they wouldn't have a
truck company coming. So they would have the fifth firefighter
operate the forcible entry tools to get into the building.
By removing those, there are going to be areas in the city
that have high population, high population centers that are
going to be short on staffing before getting a hose line in
place.
As I mentioned, the Bronx fire where 17 people were killed
2 years ago, if 2 of the 4 engines in the first assign would
have an additional firefighter in them, it would have put the
fire out faster and probably assisted in getting people out of
that stairwell, where the 17 people died, would have assisted
in getting them out faster.
In areas where they have not as many engine companies
around, we'll lose out on the forceable entry aspect of it and
then will slow down operations.
Also by removing this--as I said, it's a manpower pool
where, if we do go down a person, one area, they can use that
person. They'll have to pull someone off the truck which is
basically they search for victims.
Mr. Garbarino. So they used--every firehouse used to have
it. Then that cuts--brought that down.
Mr. Ansbro. Absolutely.
Mr. Garbarino. Now the busiest and the most dangerous
firehouses still have it. But with these cuts, looks, sounds
like everybody--no one's going to have it anymore.
Mr. Ansbro. Absolutely. There's actually 2 of our houses in
midtown Manhattan that have them, and they have them because,
as you know, the traffic aspect, you know, the second engine
company may not be get there for 10 minutes. That's a long
time. You can't get anywhere in the city. So they're removing
that staff, as well, in midtown.
Mr. Garbarino. These cuts are actually going to put
people's life at risk because, like you said, the fire 2 years
ago where 17 people died, because 2 of the--probably could have
been put out faster if all these trucks had 5 firefighters,
we're now going to cut every fire department from having them.
It's just going to make----
Mr. Ansbro. Right.
Mr. Garbarino. Even put our firemen in harm's way.
Mr. Ansbro. Absolutely. It's an increased risk to us, as
well.
Mr. Garbarino. Gets rid of the buddy system, right?
Mr. Ansbro. Absolutely. But the longer a fire is allowed to
grow, the more difficult it is to fight. We see more injuries
with that.
But as of Saturday, 10 percent of the engine companies in
New York City have seen a 20 percent reduction in staffing.
Mr. Garbarino. Disaster. I'm sorry that you're dealing with
it, and we're going to try to do what we can to help. But, you
know, until they change the policies at the border, it's going
to make things just keep getting more and more difficult.
Thank you for your service.
Mr. Blakeman, I wanted to--good to see you down here. I
wanted to ask you a question. Can you talk a little bit more
about the increase in crime that you've seen in Nassau County?
Focus on the police force and what, you know, what they're
seeing and what they're dealing with.
Mr. Blakeman. Yes, like most large police departments, we
have a detective bureau that has what's known as a pattern
burglary squad. Some of the patterns that we've found on the
burglaries of residential and commercial properties have been
done by migrants who came here through the current migrant
policy. They've come here, owing the cartels a great deal of
money to transport them over the border. If they don't pay that
money, I've been told that their families would be seriously
harmed, if not killed, in their native country and, therefore,
they need quick money. They need to get it fast.
So they're engaging in all kinds of crimes--burglary,
shoplifting, and both commercial and residential burglaries. It
has become a burden on our police department.
I just want to supplement. You know, what happens in New
York City has an effect also on Nassau County. We send hundreds
of thousands of people into New York City each day from Nassau
County. So if there's a diminution in the ranks of the
firefighters or the police officers, it presents a safety
problem for Nassau County residents, and many of the
firefighters and cops live in Nassau County. So it's a problem
for us, as well, not just for New York City.
Mr. Garbarino. Yes, I just--one, quickly, can you talk
quickly about the fentanyl arrests you just had in Nassau
County?
Mr. Blakeman. There was enough pure fentanyl to kill close
to 3 million people which would have been the whole population
of Long Island. We know it came in through south of the border,
and we know it came in through this illegal migration policy.
Mr. Garbarino. The person arrested was----
Mr. Blakeman. Person arrested----
Mr. Garbarino [continuing]. Undocumented?
Mr. Blakeman. Yes. Migrated. They came from south of the
border, resided in the Bronx which is a sanctuary city, and did
a crossover crime here in Nassau County.
The distribution was also going to be in your county, Mr.
Garbarino, not just in Nassau County.
Mr. Garbarino. I got them both, Nassau and Suffolk.
But I'm out of time. So and I'm honored to be here as a
guest.
But thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Garbarino.
I now recognize, also from New York, Mr. Lawler for 5
minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Chairman.
County Executive Blakeman, in March of this year, County
Executive Ed Day from Rockland County, and I, held a press
conference about the migrant crisis in New York and its impact
on our county government, specifically on the cost for Health
and Human Services, the social safety net programs, the impacts
on nonprofit organizations.
A county like Rockland has about 340,000 residents. It's
the smallest geographic county outside the city of New York. So
it's densely populated, but we have no cities. We don't have a
shelter in the county.
So Eric Adams decided he was going to start sending
migrants to hotels in Rockland County and Orange County and
other counties across the State.
What has been the impact on Nassau County in terms of, you
know, its nonprofit organizations that the county does work
with, on, you know, housing, shelter, food? You know, what has
been the direct cost impact on Nassau County with the migrant
crisis?
Mr. Blakeman. Thank you, Mr. Lawler.
Well, the impact has not been nearly as great as other
areas because we are not a sanctuary county. We will not
participate in any migrant program.
What we have seen is an increase in crime. We've seen an
increase in social services. Basically our social services
right now are pretty stretched, and we have seen migrants who
have come over from New York City into Nassau County.
Obviously, if it's a humanitarian situation where someone needs
immediate assistance, we don't turn people away. We make sure
they're stabilized, but then we do not provide shelter, as does
New York City.
So our issues are not as profound only because we made the
choice not to be part of the sanctuary program.
So when you see what's going on in New York City and you
see what's going on in other cities around the United States
that have accepted this migrant program, they are all under
severe stress.
I talk with county executives from other parts of the
country, and they're all under this financial stress, as well
as the stress on their people who provide the services, who now
are having to work overtime and do double shifts.
As we talked about, as the sheriff here has mentioned,
we've heard a lot of situations like that.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you.
Mr. Awawdeh, is New York City a sanctuary city?
Mr. Awawdeh. New York City in theory is a sanctuary city
which means that it is--sanctuary I think is being misconstrued
here. It's actually a public safety measure----
Mr. Lawler. With all due respect, I just asked very simply:
Is New York City a sanctuary city?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. Lawler. Is that the policy that was enacted? Does New
York City refuse to cooperate with ICE and law enforcement when
it comes to immigrants?
Mr. Awawdeh. New York City cooperates with ICE----
Mr. Lawler. Do they?
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. USCIS, Border Patrol----
Mr. Lawler. What is their level of cooperation to your
knowledge?
Mr. Awawdeh. They have the joint task force that they work
together on. They also work together within the confines of the
NYPD.
They also have a list of, and what you're referring to is
what I think you're trying to get to, is the detainers policy
where there's a set list of low-level offenses that New York
City does not transfer ICE-requested administrative notices of
people who are in DOC custody to ICE without a judicial
warrant.
New York City does provide anyone with a--the ICE or
whoever from the Federal Government has a judicial warrant for
to said agency.
Mr. Lawler. Does New York City have a right-to-shelter law
that they----
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes. Today's it's birthday. It's 42 years old.
That has been--has kept most folks off of our streets, keeping
as many people as possible as healthy as possible in the winter
months, yes.
Mr. Lawler. So do you agree, on its 42nd anniversary, do
you agree with Mayor Adams when he says that this migrant
crisis is destroying New York City because of the cost to the
city to adhere to this right to shelter law?
Do you agree or disagree?
Mr. Awawdeh. Absolutely disagree. When the administration--
--
Mr. Lawler. Should the----
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. Came in----
Mr. Lawler. So----
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. They had----
Mr. Lawler. So----
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. Five million dollars that was----
Mr. Lawler. Thank you. Reclaiming my time.
When it comes to the decisions of New York City to be a
sanctuary city, to not cooperate with ICE to its fullest, to
interpret the right to shelter to mean that anyone who comes to
New York City, regardless of status, is entitled to housing, do
you think that should apply Nation-wide?
Mr. Awawdeh. Your question is should----
Mr. Lawler. Yes, do you think that's good policy? Do you
think that's something that should be applied Nation-wide?
Mr. Awawdeh. For cities that--cities, States, and counties
that want to provide the most care for their populations,
absolutely. If they want to ensure that when folks fall on hard
times or need a little bit of support, that they get from their
local governments, absolutely. Why not?
Mr. Lawler. So you think it's going well in New York City?
Mr. Awawdeh. I think that we can be doing better in New
York City, and we can be doing better with support from the
Federal Government and providing more resources to the city and
the State of New York.
Mr. Lawler. I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Lawler.
I now recognize from New York, Mr. Langworthy.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I appreciate the opportunity to join this subcommittee
hearing today to discuss the real-life consequences of open
border and sanctuary policies.
Under New York Governor Kathy Hochul and New York City
Mayor Eric Adams, our Democrat-run State has become a haven for
illegal immigration that has had a devastating impact on our
finances and put public safety and public health at risk.
I want to thank one of our panelists testifying here today,
Mr. Blakeman, for being a voice of common sense in a sea of
nonsense in New York State.
You have done a tremendous job since you were sworn in as
county executive, and I want to salute you for that.
Mr. Blakeman. Thank you.
Mr. Langworthy. The cost of New Yorkers is on pace to total
$12 billion by 2025. In New York City, tax-paying citizens,
they are now facing draconian cuts to public safety and
education to pay for this self-made crisis.
Though the Southern Border is 2,000 miles away from
leftist-run New York City, it is on the other end of the State
from my district in western New York and the southern tier.
This crisis has arrived on our doorstep, as well, and the
doorsteps of every county in the State of New York.
This year, 5 of my 7 counties within New York's 23rd
Congressional district have been forced to pass emergency
declarations as the influx of illegal migrants has overwhelmed
our communities and strained our resources.
Now prior to this influx of migrants, many upstate counties
were already struggling under these far-left policies that have
put an incredible economic strain on our local governments, our
property taxpayers, and our businesses.
The people of my district, they didn't want to pay for this
crisis. Yet they're being forced to shoulder the burden.
Sheriff Favro, your county, Clinton County in the north
country, has a lot of similarities to my district including
weather. Now let's say our climate's not quite what it is on
the Southern Border.
You mentioned that in your testimony that the struggle is
just to provide adequate clothing for migrants who are being
relocated to your county from the south. This is just one small
aspect of the cost. But can you elaborate any further on how
the influx of illegal migrants has strained your county's
resources, particularly on the law enforcement and first
responder end?
Mr. Favro. As we've heard from everybody, resources have
been dwindling. Costs that counties will dish out has been
dwindling. So, therefore, the staffing is shorter than it was 2
years ago, 3 years ago.
The mental health status on all emergency responders has
increased. I've seen nothing like it except for our 9/11
tragedy, and certainly hope that we don't have to wait for
something like that to happen again before we can open our eyes
and say what are we going to do about this.
What we're seeing is the responses from not just volunteer
firefighting services but all of our law enforcement. We're
seeing partnerships try and develop because we know there
should be no politics in law enforcement. We are here to
protect and serve every resident and guest of our respective
counties, and I say that on behalf all 3,000-plus sheriffs
across the country. That is our job. That is our sworn duty.
To enter politics into formulated opinion, even as was
insinuated earlier, I think I'm the only Democrat on this
board. It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter. The decisions I
make, the work I do is based upon what is best for the people
of my community and my fellow colleagues in all areas of law
enforcement.
Those are the decisions that we make, and we have to
continue to do that. We're just asking for support to be able
to get that component of our job done. I don't think that's a
lot to ask.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much for your
professionalism.
Law enforcement in my own district has spoken in very
similar fashion about how this crisis has impacted their
ability to operate and to keep our community safe on top of New
York's elimination of cash bail and discovery reform.
Now you mentioned in your testimony that the Federal
Government, particularly DHS, Department of Homeland Security,
has left communities like yours in Clinton County to their own
devices to operate using State and local resources to deal with
this crisis.
Are you seeing enough assistance coming from the State to
make up for the lack of help from DHS?
Mr. Favro. In short, I could say no. We do get State and
law enforcement terrorism prevention program funds. That--
these--the amounts that we get are very, very small, the little
bit of equipment that we can purchase.
We have a special response team that's a tri-county team
that we actually put together due to a lot of volunteer work
from the members of Clinton, Essex, and Franklin counties to be
able to respond to emergency situations. They end up doing
their own private fundraising and taking money out of their
pockets to provide lifesaving equipment for the teams.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you very much, and I appreciate your
testimony and being here today.
Finally, Mr. Chairman, I'd like to enter into the record
today a letter I led with my colleagues in the Northern Border
Security Caucus to Secretary Mayorkas, as well as the response
received to the letter from the Department of Homeland
Security.
Mr. D'Esposito. Without objection, Mr. Langworthy.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Langworthy. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. Langworthy. Thank you.
I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
I now recognize from New York, Mr. Molinaro.
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you for your leadership and certainly your service in
allowing me to waive onto the subcommittee today.
County Executive Blakeman, it's a pleasure to see you
again. As you know, I spent 12 years serving as a county
executive in the Mid-Hudson Valley.
Without question, over the course of the last several
years, but certainly most acutely over the last several months,
the issue of confronting the migrant crisis that New York City
has faced has become now a State-wide crisis. You've spoken to
this. All of our panelists have spoken to this. Despite
suggesting otherwise, it is a crisis. It's a crisis on a number
of levels.
Can I ask you, sir, just to reinforce--and I know you've
testified to this to some degree already. New York City's
designation as a sanctuary city, self-designation, do you feel
that that has had a significant impact on the migrant crisis as
Nassau County is experiencing it?
Mr. Blakeman. Yes, absolutely.
As I mentioned, one of the major problems that we have is
what we call cross-over crime, crime that comes from New York
City into our county. Much of it is due to the migrant policies
that allow people into this country that may be associated with
drug cartels, people who may be selling fentanyl.
As I indicated, we had an arrest in Nassau County with
fentanyl that could kill close to 3 million people. It has had
a deleterious effect on quality of life in New York City. Our
Nassau County residents who work in the city come back every
day and tell us that. The situation with the homeless, the
situation with crime in New York City is out of control.
We are just stemming the tide in Nassau County because
we're on the eastern border and we are ramping up our police
services so that we can meet that burden.
But the fact of the matter is it's a very misguided policy
and it's not well-thought-out and I think it's hurting our
country. It's definitely hurting local government.
When you have to house close to a thousand people in a
mental health facility on the border of Nassau County in
Queens, I mean, just think about it. Are we doing the right
thing by bringing people into this country? They're not vetted.
We don't who know they are. And we put them in a mental health
facility?
Mr. Molinaro. Well, certainly, Mr. County Executive, you
and I agree on that.
Sheriff Favro, would you suggest that New York City's
designation as a sanctuary city, and the State by extension,
adopting similar policies has had an effect certainly in your
home county?
Mr. Favro. Well, I think what we've seen pretty much in our
home county is we've seen a couple of busloads that have been
shipped from New York City up to Clinton County with some
McDonald's food certificates and telling them of promise of
jobs and opportunities of which every community I think across
the country has jobs that are available for qualified,
documented individuals.
Mr. Molinaro. So let me ask you this, sheriff. I apologize.
I want to try to keep to my time as best I can.
Does New York City's right-to-shelter law have enforcement
capacity in your home county, yes or no?
Mr. Favro. I couldn't speak to that directly.
Mr. Molinaro. County Executive, do you believe that New
York City's right-to-shelter law extends to Nassau County?
Mr. Blakeman. I do not believe it does.
Mr. Molinaro. So with that being said, knowing that the
city of New York continues to move undocumented migrants to
other communities, County Executive Blakeman, has the city of
New York adequately communicated its strategy to move
individuals into your home county?
Mr. Blakeman. We have been in contact with the city of New
York and the State of New York, officials of both
jurisdictions. We have told them that we are not a sanctuary
county and that we will not accept any migrant program that
they may be trying to initiate in Nassau County.
Mr. Molinaro. Sheriff, has the city of New York adequately
communicated with you their strategy to move migrants into your
community?
Mr. Favro. No, not at all.
Mr. Molinaro. Has the city of New York, Sheriff,
coordinated with you for the transport of migrants into your
home county?
Mr. Favro. Not with me.
Mr. Molinaro. County Executive Blakeman, has the city of
New York coordinated the movement of migrants into your home
county in an adequate fashion with you?
Mr. Blakeman. They have not.
Mr. Molinaro. Mr. Awawdeh, can I ask you a question? Do you
think that New York City's right-to-shelter law extends to
override local law in counties outside of the city of New York?
Mr. Awawdeh. Well, local----
Mr. Molinaro. Yes or no.
Mr. Awawdeh. Our----
Mr. Molinaro. Yes or no. I'm sorry? Yes or no?
Mr. Awawdeh. To answer your question----
Mr. Molinaro. Yes or no.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. The Office of Temporary OTDA,
which is the State agency----
Mr. Molinaro. Is that a yes?
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. Readily homeless shelters and
when a city or municipality or locality or county were to be--
--
Mr. Molinaro. I'm going to reclaim my time.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. Capacity----
Mr. Molinaro. I'm going to take that----
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. They are able to use other
jurisdictions as long as they're coordinating which in this
regard----
Mr. Molinaro. Thank you.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. I hear that the city had not
adequately done that.
Mr. Molinaro. OK.
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Molinaro, you've reclaimed your time.
Go ahead.
Mr. Molinaro. I appreciate that, Mr. Chairman.
I'd like to assert that the city of New York hasn't
communicated, hasn't coordinated, and has exasperated a
humanitarian crisis of its own making into communities all
across the State of New York without care or concern for the
well-being of the very individuals it suggests it's trying to
care for, and that is not legal in the State of New York and
should not be sustained.
I yield.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Molinaro.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I will comment on that, when you talk about communication,
just days after New York City had proposed moving or sheltering
migrants in a empty warehouse at JFK airport, I reached out to
the mayor's office and scheduled a meeting at JFK airport to
get an understanding of what this shelter would look like and
how it would play out.
You'd figure a Member of the Homeland Security Committee, a
Member of the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, two
of the committees with, you know, jurisdiction over one of the
largest transportation hubs in the country, you'd think it
would be a good idea to have an open line of communication, as
I do rarely agree with Mayor Adams. But I do agree that this
issue is going to destroy New York City. So his communication
has been terrible. The communication not only between the
mayor's office and other municipalities but I think one of the
biggest and the one most devastating and the one that we're
focusing on today is the fact that there's little communication
between law enforcement and public safety agencies. That's
where the problem is going to lie.
I've had this conversation with County Executive Blakeman
and Commissioner Ryder, and I know that Mr. LaLota and Mr.
Garbarino in Suffolk share the same concerns.
One of the biggest issues that we're facing right now are
the number of gotaways that are coming across our Southern
Border, individuals that are on that terror watch list. We
don't know where they are, what they're doing, or who they're
with. They without a doubt are causing a direct concern, and
they are a threat to our National security.
So I have some questions, Mr. Awawdeh, just of testimony
that you've made. So I don't know if it was in your opening
statement or one of the first questions, you said that
immigrants are not the problem.
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. D'Esposito. That's probably the only thing that we
agree on here today. Immigrants aren't the problem. The problem
that we're facing today is the failed policies of Joe Biden and
Secretary Mayorkas. It's the fact that they have been derelict
in their duty to protect this great homeland. That's where the
problem lies.
You mentioned that President Biden deserves--your words,
not mine--kudos. He deserves zero kudos. In fact, this country
is less safe under his failed leadership than ever before.
That's what we're seeing at our Southern Border.
Now you reside in the five boroughs, correct?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes, sir.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. You mentioned that we need more
policy--more policies, ones that are more fair, more equitable.
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes, and reforming our immigration----
Mr. D'Esposito. OK.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. System as a whole.
Mr. D'Esposito. But the problem is the policies that were
in place have been rescinded by the Biden administration.
They're not being followed by Secretary Mayorkas. They're not
fair. They're not equitable. He definitely doesn't deserve
kudos. That's the issue that we're facing here.
Today for this subcommittee hearing, what we're focused on
is how the failed policies, how our open border is affecting
public safety, how people like County Executive Blakeman
continues to wake up every morning and make sure that the 1.4
million people who reside in Nassau County are kept safe, how
he makes sure that the Nassau County Police Department, the 71
volunteer fire departments, emergency management, and others,
how they have all the resources that they need, how the sheriff
makes sure that the men and women who serve under them have
everything that they need to keep themselves safe, how Mr.
Ansbro goes to work each and every day, representing one of the
greatest fire departments in this world, but is dealing with
historic budget cuts because of those failed policies.
So I'm going to ask you, and it's a very simple yes-or-no
question. Do you believe that the city of New York and the
surrounding communities are safer in the situation that we're
in with the open border? It's a yes-or-no question.
Mr. Awawdeh. The city of New York is safer as crime stats
illustrate.
Mr. D'Esposito. You believe that the city of New York is
safer.
Mr. Awawdeh. That is what the NYPD says----
Mr. D'Esposito. OK.
Mr. Awawdeh. If you don't think that what the NYPD is
saying is true----
Mr. D'Esposito. I served in the NYPD. I wore that uniform.
I wore that shield on my chest every single day, and I will
that tell you New Yorkers and the people who wear that uniform
now do not think the city is safer.
Mr. Ansbro, I would like to ask you. We're not only talking
about safer in crime, we're talking about are they safer
because we have the resources and the public safety apparatus
to keep people safe.
Mr. Ansbro, do you think New Yorkers are safer today?
Mr. Ansbro. Absolutely not.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. They're not safer why?
Mr. Ansbro. Lack of resources, a lack of staffing.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right.
Mr. Ansbro. Staff police department, fire department
appropriately.
Mr. D'Esposito. Right. Just a couple of weeks ago, Mayor
Adams announced--I still have time. Mayor Adams announced a
couple of weeks ago that he is not putting NYPD police officer
academy classes in place because he can't afford them. We just
went through an entire 2 hours of talking about how minimum
staffing is being cut because of the budget cuts. We're talking
about city agencies up and down that are being cut.
There is no way possible that the city of New York and the
surrounding communities, like County Executive Blakeman
mentioned, dealing with people smuggling fentanyl and other
illegal drugs, people conducting burglary patterns--the sheriff
mentioned the issues that they're facing.
It is clear. This issue, the failed policies of Joe Biden
and Secretary Mayorkas, our open border, has caused chaos
amongst public safety, the public safety world in this country.
With that, my time has expired.
I recognize the Ranking Member.
Mr. Blakeman. Mr. Chairman, before you proceed, can I
excuse myself?
I have a police promotion ceremony back in Nassau County.
Mr. D'Esposito. Absolutely. Mr. County Executive, thank you
for being here. Safe home and God bless.
Mr. Blakeman. Thank you so much.
Mr. Carter Mr. Chairman----
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Carter.
Mr. Carter [continuing]. Respectfully, I would ask as a
matter of parliamentary procedure that we refrain from insults
to the President of the United States. I would say this if it
were a Republican or a Democrat. It's a matter of courtesy.
It's a matter of rule. It's a matter of our parliamentarian
practices.
Moving forward, Mr. Awawdeh, would you like to respond to
Representative Strong's questions as to where to put migrants?
Mr. Awawdeh. There has been a population----
Mr. Carter. I thought I'd start off and ask that question.
Mr. Awawdeh. There has been a population decrease in the
United States since 2010, and COVID only made it worse. This
country is going to need more people across this country.
There are thousands of businesses looking for workers. We
have a huge need of work force. Even in the State of New York,
we launched a website, asking, through the Department of Labor,
asking businesses who wanted to hire folks to sign up on the
website. Eighteen thousand jobs were listed on that website
within a matter of a few days. There's even more at this point
that are being listed there.
There was a number of things that your colleague mentioned
that were just not really founded in truth.
There is a huge need, if you speak to your partners in the
Midwest, if you speak to your colleagues across the country,
and actually speak to the needs that they're seeing on the
ground, they're going to tell you that there is a huge need for
population.
Mr. Carter. Or even the suggestion that all immigrants
somehow are thieves and robbers and unsavory, bad people, is
that a misnomer and a dangerously incorrect statement to make?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes, that's incredibly incorrect. Immigrants
make communities safer across the United States, not just in
New York. That's verified by data that you can even speak to,
you know, law enforcement in New York on.
Mr. Carter. On that, let me follow up. I want to start by
reiterating the fact that: Is it not a fact that every migrant
released into our communities, including New York City, is
vetted by a CBP? Every single one completes biometrics, and
it's run against our databases.
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes. As they arrived at port authority last
year when they were being bussed in most cases at that time in
the early days of the bussing from Texas, under misleading----
Mr. Carter. So these are not people that are just being
brought in, let in, and they're not checked.
Mr. Awawdeh. No, they are processed and are given a packet
of information with their immigration, pretty much registering
them through the immigration system at the border.
Mr. Carter. How would more Federal investments in our legal
pathways and the Shelter and Services Program better help local
communities? Are you aware that all the House Republicans voted
to slash the funding that's being sent to New York for this
purpose?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes, and that's a horrible mistake. As you
heard from your colleagues on the dais, everyone keeps talking
about cuts and cuts and cuts. But the folks on this dais can
actually stop those cuts by investing more resources into the
solutions that have been proven to work.
The FEMA program with the ESFP or the SSP program, those
programs are working. We need more resources in them so that we
don't have to have these conversations about cuts or not cuts.
Mr. Carter. Hence my insistence in every conversation we
have about exercising civility, exercising facts, and not
political brinksmanship to score points. Listen, this is a real
issue. This is a real issue, and I applaud my Members for
trying to find solutions. But I will likewise caution us to
avoid the just brinksmanship of gaining points.
Listen, I don't think you can blame any one particular
person for any of the issues that are here. These issues have
been around a long time. I think we all acknowledge that.
But I know one thing for a fact. As long as we continue to
have this tug-of-war and political gamesmanship, it makes it
more and more difficult for us to ever give the relief that I
think these gentlemen, every one of you at the table, is asking
for.
I implore our Members to get back on track, to finding
solutions and not pointing fingers.
New York City, we've heard Republicans state that New York
City is cutting parts of its city services budget due to the
migrant crisis. However, they have conveniently left out is
that Mayor Adams also attributes the cuts to the ending of
Federal pandemic aid. So it's my understanding that the cuts to
the budget and freezing police hiring do not fall solely on the
immigrants but also cuts to pandemic aid.
Can you put New York City's budget in context in that
response, in that regard?
Mr. Awawdeh. New York City's budget is over $110 billion.
It has an enormous amount of money that comes in from the State
and the Federal Government.
When the administration came in, back in 2022, they were
seeing that 5 years out there was going to be a deficit of $21
billion, of which--this was before there was an increase in
asylum seekers coming to New York--over $5 billion was COVID
relief efforts and then $16 billion were contracts that needed
to get secured labor contracts.
So in the grand context of this, the deficit that the city
of New York was facing had very little and currently right now
it's a very small fraction of the deficit.
Just to clarify one thing, the president of--my friend
sitting right next to me mentioned the five firefighters per
firehouse and not every firehouse has had that for a long time.
I think it's important that we talk about this in this context
because this has been a year's, many years' issue.
The city council of New York has been fighting to move that
forward but has not been successful in it because we need more
funding. If we were able to get more funding from the Feds and
the State to do that, that is important.
But I don't want us to be misleading in the sense of saying
because of this financial crunch that we're in.
Mr. Carter. Thank you. My time has expired.
As I yield back, Mr. Chairman, if you would just indulge me
for a second, to thank all of the committee Members. Whether we
agree philosophically or idealogically, it does not take away
from the fact we all love our country, we all love the strength
that our country brings and builds.
I thank each of you for your commitment, particularly our
police and law enforcement and firefighters who stand up every
day, notwithstanding party, race, or idealogical difference to
protect the people of our great country. So thank you for your
service.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Ranking Member.
I now recognize, from New York, Mr. LaLota.
Mr. LaLota. Border security used to not always be a
partisan thing. You could go back a couple of decades ago and
watch Democrat Presidents on their State of the Union addresses
speak about how we ought to secure our border. But somehow
we've devolved into this partisan rhetoric on this issue.
We look at our issues. Some Members in the House look at
the issues sometimes about why the border isn't secure. I'm
comfortable with where my party sits on this. It is fortunate
that Democrats and Republicans do agree at least on one thing
in this hearing, that New York City absolutely does have a
migrant crisis. But the way the two parties approach it today
is vastly different.
I'm a Navy man. So I can't resist but to use a couple of
nautical analogies as I approach a problem, and I think that
New York City's migrant crisis is like a ship taking on water.
The migrant crisis with 10,000 migrants coming to New York
City every month and without the resources to shelter them is
like a ship taking on water. To continue that analogy, and I
don't mean to editorialize. If the Ranking Member or anybody
else disagrees, I'm happy to debate that.
But the Democrat solution seems to be build a bigger boat.
That is to say, the Democrats want to throw more and more money
and resources at the migrant crisis, to take over park plan, to
build tent cities, and to have taxpayers rent hotels at
taxpayer costs. To pay for it, New York city officials are
cutting from some of their own services like fire department
services, like police department services, in shifts and
academy classes and whatnot.
The city officials who have adopted the sanctuary policies
who--that have caused this crisis, they won't repeal them.
Rather they want our Federal tax dollars to pay for their
policy choices.
I'd like to analyze my party's solution to this. Further
taking on that ship taking on water analogy, our solution is to
plug the hole through better policy choices and not to just
throw more and more money at the situation.
My colleagues and I who sit on this side of the aisle
assert that this is a crisis of policy choice, that President
Biden choosing to repeal the Remain in Mexico policy invites
migrants to our country who will feign asylum, that their
migrant, that their asylum claims won't ultimately be approved.
The number is somewhere between 60 and 80 percent, depending on
which source you look at. The overwhelming majority of asylum
claims ultimately will not be approved, and they'll be
adjudicated 2 years later. That's a problem, and that's a
policy choice.
We assert that reinstating the Remain in Mexico policy
would actually decrease the number of folks coming into our
country who will feign that asylum, who will take advantage of
those loopholes.
We also assert that repealing New York State's and New York
City's sanctuary city policies which prevent local law
enforcement from enforcing our immigration laws is a good thing
and would help our crisis, because those sanctuary policies act
as a magnet, drawing people across that border and to cities
who will not enforce Federal immigration law.
Mr. Awawdeh, thanks for being here today, sir.
In your opening statement you said that legislative
paralysis is the main reason for our Nation's border crisis and
New York City's migrant crisis.
Did I hear you correctly, sir?
Mr. Awawdeh. I said it was the main reason for
Congressional inaction, yes.
Mr. LaTurner. So legislative paralysis, is that the reason
or a significant reason in your opinion, sir, for this migrant
crisis?
Mr. Awawdeh. I think that it is part and parcel to the way
in which the true source of problems that we're facing becomes
Congressional paralysis.
Mr. LaLota. I appreciate the perspective. I obviously
disagree. House Republicans' solution, or at least one solution
to the migrant crisis and the border crisis, is H.R. 2.
Are you familiar with H.R. 2, sir?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. LaLota. OK. In general, it would do a bunch of
different things. It would help secure our border and
disincentivize illegal immigration. You're a bit familiar with
it?
Mr. Awawdeh. Slightly, yes.
Mr. LaLota. With respect to your term, legislative
paralysis, do you know when H.R. 2 passed, sir?
Mr. Awawdeh. I don't recall, but H.R.----
Mr. LaLota. May 12.
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. LaLota. About 180 days ago, House Republicans took
action with respect to policy on our border, about 180 days
ago, telling the world, this is where we stand on immigration
specifically, and the hallmark of it is reinstating Remain in
Mexico.
So using your term, legislative paralysis, has the U.S.
Senate undertaken either H.R. 2, or anything else policy-wise,
related to border security?
Mr. Awawdeh. Immigration reform is only going to be done--
--
Mr. LaLota. Yes or no, sir?
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. By a bipartisan way----
Mr. LaLota. Yes or no, sir?
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. And H.R. 2----
Mr. LaLota. Reclaiming my time. I'll answer it for you.
No----
Mr. Awawdeh. No, they haven't.
Mr. LaLota [continuing]. The Senate, controlled by
Democrats, has not done anything policy-wise. So if you're
offering that legislative paralysis is part of the problem, I'd
agree with that aspect, but maybe you go across the hall and
tell those folks, undertake H.R. 2, at least debate it--maybe
it doesn't have the votes there, maybe it does--debate it and
specifically address the Remain in Mexico policy that we
believe will help secure our border.
Mr. Chairman, I think we've made some progress here today.
We obviously disagree on a lot, but having this conversation,
bringing out the local officials is productive and informative
to us so we can assert the right policy and budget choices. I
yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. LaLota.
I now recognize, from Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen, for 5
minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
So if you are under the limitations of a mayor of New York
City who said, prepare for 15 percent cuts--Eric Adams said,
prepare for 15 percent cuts--because of the cost of illegal
immigrants in this city, the same mayor who made national news,
saying, this is going to destroy New York City.
So you know that what we've already seen, a 4 percent cut
to, to police departments within New York. We know what you
said, you've got fire departments right now that are seeing up
to 10 percent cuts where, instead of 4 men trying to----
Mr. Ansbro. Twenty percent.
Mr. Brecheen. I'm sorry?
Mr. Ansbro. Twenty percent.
Mr. Brecheen. Up to 20 percent? I'm sorry.
Mr. Ansbro. Twenty percent reduction in staffing.
Mr. Brecheen. So you've got some fire departments that were
at 4 members trying to run a hose, and, you know, unlike rural
Oklahoma, these are having to go in multiple stories. The
difference between 4 men bringing that system of connection of
hoses to be able to put out a fire, versus 5, you saw how big
of a difference that is, in being able to put out fires and
just the preparedness and the protection of life, protection of
property. I'm assuming insurance rates also play into that.
So I'm going to get your name wrong--Mr. Awawdeh, did I do
it correctly?
Mr. Awawdeh. Close.
Mr. Brecheen. Close. So you were citing the taxpayer input
from New York.
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. Brecheen. You went through multiple billions of dollars
that you said these amount of taxes are paid. You were in the
neighborhood of $15 billion approximately. Is that fair?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. Brecheen. $15 billion.
Mr. Awawdeh. For the 3 Congressional districts that--of the
Members from New York who sit on this committee, yes.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. Do you realize that the costs we're
seeing as high as anywhere from $450 billion a year? When
you're saying, Well, New York provides this amount of taxpayer
monies, you do take into consideration, that's to fund
everything, correct, on the Federal level? It's not just to
fund illegal immigration.
Mr. Awawdeh. I'm sorry. What's your question?
Mr. Brecheen. So the tax earnings that are paid in at the
Federal level, they support all expenditures on the Federal
level. They're disbursed among all general accounts.
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. So--but you're using $15 billion and
trying to justify up to $450 billion is what illegal
immigration is costing this country. It's a minimal amount. The
point I'm trying to make is, they're not paying for themselves.
Mr. Awawdeh. No, they're paying more than--for themselves
in the city of New York.
Mr. Brecheen. Not the statistics I've seen, not even close
to a third of the tax dollars that are accrued, not even a
third. So I think you need to check your statistics on that.
Mr. Awawdeh. We can agree to disagree on that.
Mr. Brecheen. Okay. So--but my point is, at what place will
you concur that this is insanity? From 19---from 1892 to 1954,
we had 12 million illegal (sic) immigrants that came into this
country legally. Give us your tired, your poor, your huddled
masses, those longing to breathe free. Legally. Sixty-year time
span, 12 million.
Under this administration, we have already seen almost that
number within 2\1/2\ years--illegally--come into this country.
Are we a Nation of laws?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. Brecheen. Is anybody above the law?
Mr. Awawdeh. No, no one----
Mr. Brecheen. Are illegal immigrants above the law?
Mr. Awawdeh. No one's saying that they are above the law.
What we are saying is that we have to have better systems.
You're referencing time periods from industrialization up to
the post-1965 immigration era which is in, in some of your
numbers, inaccurate, but the system has----
Mr. Brecheen. No. Anybody can look this up, 12 million from
1892 to 1954.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. The system has changed, where in
the early 1900's all you had to do is just show up and go
through Ellis Island, and no papers, no visa.
After World War II, there were embassies that were created,
and then there was a slight processing process outside of the
United States, but people can still show up to Ellis Island.
So this is--it was not a--that was how the system was, and
the system continues to allow for folks----
Mr. Brecheen. Let me ask you, did we fear nuclear
detonation from 1892 up 'til 1940? No. We live in a different
environment now. Somebody can come into the United States and
with a small amount of armament, can do a massive amount of
destruction. We live in a different world today, and so
heightened levels of scrutiny are so important.
I'll end with this. Gang members from Chile were caught in
New York City. Because of lawlessness, because we're not
deporting--we're down 85 percent under the Obama administration
and this administration--because of lawlessness we're not
deporting these gang members, picked up on charges, were not
deported. They're somewhere in the country right now, and we
don't know where. Lawlessness compounds lawlessness like
dominoes.
I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Brecheen.
I now recognize, from New York, Mr. Lawler.
Mr. Lawler. My wife is an immigrant. I've been through this
process. It is a fundamentally broken system. Would you agree
that our current immigration system is not working?
Mr. Awawdeh. Our current immigration system has been broken
for decades and needs updating, yes.
Mr. Lawler. OK. I was born in 1986. The last major
immigration reform was 1986. It's been tried. Both sides have
tried to find compromise.
When you say we need more immigrants, I agree, we do need
more immigrants in our country. Immigrants enrich our economy,
they enrich our culture, our communities. Our Nation is built
on immigration, and the reality of our population is that if we
stopped all immigration, our population would decline over the
next 60 years. So immigration is critically important--but
legal immigration.
That is the challenge here. Since Joe Biden took office,
between those who have crossed the Southern Border, many of
them illegally, and the got-aways, we're talking about nearly
10 million migrants. That is unsustainable, if you don't have a
process that works. The asylum system is totally broken.
So the way that I have looked at this is three-fold. You
have to deal with the border crisis, you have to deal with the
undocumented, and you have to deal with the legal immigration
system. It's three-pronged.
So my question to you is, do you believe that the border
needs to be secured and we need to stop allowing this massive
influx--roughly 10,000 a week--to cross the Southern Border,
many of them illegally? Do you think that we should stop that
influx and secure the border?
Mr. Awawdeh. The U.S. border has never had the level of
funding that it has for a militarized border. This is--it
receives the most funding----
Mr. Lawler. OK. Wait.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. From the interior----
Mr. Lawler. Reclaiming my time.
Do you think we should have a border, I guess, is--let's
start there. Do you think we should have a border?
Mr. Awawdeh. We have borders----
Mr. Lawler. OK. So if we have a border--if we have a
border----
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. States, districts.
Mr. Lawler [continuing]. If we have a border, do you think
we should secure the border and actually have a process by
which people cross the border?
Mr. Awawdeh. When there are pathways for entry for people
to make it through, people will take those entries. Similarly
when you're looking at--I think you're trying to to make
reference to----
Mr. Lawler. My point is, there should be a legal process
and pathway for people to come, not just flood the border.
Mr. Awawdeh. And people a legal process.
Mr. Lawler. But you would agree that right now there's
chaos at the border, correct?
Mr. Awawdeh. We need more resources at the Southern Border
to allow for more processing of individuals to get into the
United States.
Mr. Lawler. Well, you just said we've had the most
resources we've ever had at the border and now you're saying we
need more.
Mr. Awawdeh. Militarizing the Southern Border, yes.
Mr. Lawler. So we need more Border Patrol, we need more
court personnel to hear these asylum cases expeditiously,
correct?
Mr. Awawdeh. Yes.
Mr. Lawler. You would agree with that?
Mr. Awawdeh. USCIS staff----
Mr. Lawler. Right. We need more personnel to handle the
influx that is coming.
Mr. Awawdeh [continuing]. Processing centers.
Mr. Lawler. But right now, this is absolutely out of
control.
Now I supported H.R. 2, the Secure the Border Act. Chuck
Schumer, the Senate Majority leader from New York,
Representative of New York, has done zero, ungatz, on the
border, nothing on immigration. It's been an abject failure.
The Dignity Act I was an original cosponsor of. It would
deal with the border, it would deal with the undocumented, and
it would reform our legal immigration system.
We need a merit-based system, because we do have shortages
of employment among doctors, nurses, home health aides, ag
workers, hospitality workers. We need immigrants, but there has
to be a process. This is not working.
While I appreciate the fact that you are advocating for
immigrants in this country and in New York, I can't imagine
that you think this process is working well for them. I can't
imagine that you think having over 100,000 migrants living in
hotels, shelters, in New York City is a good thing, that not
having work authorization is a good thing.
So if the system is not working, why would we continue to
allow this system to go uninterrupted? Why would we continue to
allow our Southern Border to have no controls?
Why would we continue to allow fentanyl to pour into our
communities? Last year, fentanyl killed 70,000 Americans, most
of it coming from Mexico. That's not good.
So if we know it's not good, if we know the system's not
working, if we know New York City is buckling under the
pressure, if we know Eric Adams is saying it's going to cost us
$12 billion over the next 3 years, if we know Kathy Hochul is
saying we can't sustain this, if we know New York City is now
saying we need to cut services, we need to cut the NYPD, we
need to cut the FDNY, why, in God's name, are we continuing
like this?
You should be chanting from the rooftops of New York City,
demanding changes, and it starts with securing our border. I
don't know why, if you want to fix the immigration system in
this country, you wouldn't advocate for stopping this system
that is so fundamentally broken.
Mr. Awawdeh. It's not about advocating for stopping the
system. It's about fixing the systems that we have been living
in since you were born and have not been changed significantly.
The problem here is that there isn't any bipartisan solutions
being put forward.
Mr. Lawler. I put one forward. The Dignity Act is a
bipartisan bill, introduced by Republicans and Democrats, the
first bipartisan immigration bill in over a decade.
Have you endorsed it?
Mr. Awawdeh. No.
Mr. Lawler. Why?
Mr. Awawdeh. It is moving away from what has been already
agreed to in past reform conversations and instead creating a
second-class----
Mr. Lawler. So the reality is, you don't want--you don't
want immigration reform. You want open borders.
Mr. Awawdeh. No, we want immigration reform that is fair.
Mr. Lawler. You want open borders, and you just want to----
Mr. Awawdeh. No, that is absolutely not the case.
Mr. Lawler [continuing]. Keep on trucking, and that's the
problem here.
Mr. Awawdeh. We want immigration----
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Lawler, thank you. Your time is
expired.
I want to thank everyone for being here today on this
hearing, ``Protecting Our Preparedness and Assessing the Impact
of the Border Crisis on Emergency Management.'' I want to thank
our witnesses, thank you all for being here, both this morning
and now this afternoon. We appreciate the work that you all do.
Perhaps we don't agree on everything, but to those of you
out there on the front lines protecting and serving, I thank
you very much, and I hope that you remain safe.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witnesses, and we would ask the witnesses to
respond to those in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be held open for 10 days.
I want to thank Ranking Member Carter for being here.
Without objection, the subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 12:27 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
