- THE FUTURE OF FEMA: AGENCY PERSPECTIVES WITH ADMINISTRATOR CRISWELL

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

THE FUTURE OF FEMA: AGENCY PERSPECTIVES
WITH ADMINISTRATOR CRISWELL

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JULY 13, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-22

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov/

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

54-300 PDF                WASHINGTON : 2023

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman

Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona

Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY

Anthony D'Esposito, New York, Chairman

Nick LaLota, New York                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana, Ranking
Dale W. Strong, Alabama                  Member
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee         Daniel S. Goldman, New York
(ex officio)                      Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)

Diana Bergwin, Subcommittee Staff Director
Lauren McClain, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witness

Ms. Deanne Criswell, Administrator, Federal Emergency Management
Agency:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11

For the Record

The Honorable Troy A. Carter, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Louisiana, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Emergency Management and Technology:
GAO, National Security Snapshot................................    31
Letter.........................................................    37

THE FUTURE OF FEMA: AGENCY PERSPECTIVES
WITH ADMINISTRATOR CRISWELL

----------

Thursday, July 13, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology,
Washington, DC.

The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:05 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Anthony D'Esposito
(Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives D'Esposito, LaLota, Strong,
Brecheen, Green (ex officio), Carter, and Goldman.
Also present: Representatives Lawler, Moylan, and
Moskowitz.
Mr. D'Esposito. The Committee on Homeland Security
Subcommittee on Emergency Management and Technology will come
to order. Without objection, the subcommittee may recess at any
point.
The purpose of this hearing is to hear from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency's Administrator Deanne Criswell,
regarding her vision of FEMA moving forward and to receive an
overview of the President's fiscal year 2024 budget request for
FEMA.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
First, I want to thank you for being here this morning. As
someone who has spent his entire adult life as an emergency
manager, as a chief of the fire department and NYPD detective,
I want to thank you for participating in this hearing and for
accommodating the schedule change.
I look forward to hearing your perspective on the future of
FEMA, and I appreciate this opportunity to review FEMA's work
throughout the country.
As we all know, our Nation has faced historic wildfire
seasons, costly hurricanes, and unprecedented emergencies in
recent years, which currently includes extensive flooding in
New York and Vermont.
When Superstorm Sandy devastated New York, I proudly served
as chief of the Island Park Fire Department and distinctly
remember the overwhelming damage and immense recovery efforts.
With an estimated 100,000 homes damaged or destroyed on Long
Island alone, I truly appreciate FEMA's partnership and
assistance in helping my community and many communities from
sea to shining sea to rebuild and recover.
I know that thousands of Americans are grateful for FEMA's
help in their time of need. However, I also know that FEMA has
had its share of challenges while carrying out its mission to
help people before, during, and after disasters.
And as Members of this subcommittee, we are tasked with
ensuring that taxpayer dollars are used wisely to carry out
this mission and that these challenges are properly addressed.
One such challenge is that FEMA has experienced growing
responsibilities and expanding mission sets amid severe
staffing shortages and existing response and recovery
operations.
Since 2020, FEMA has responded to 247 major disaster
declarations across the United States of America, all while
continuing to manage COVID-19-related assistance whose incident
period just closed on May 11 of this year.
Further, FEMA has been tasked with alleviating the impact
of President Biden's failures. From resettling Afghan refugees
in 2021 to now housing and feeding illegal immigrants, I am
worried that FEMA is becoming a de facto ``damage control''
agency.
Will these added responsibilities hinder FEMA's ability to
help disaster survivors in their time of need? That is a
question that hopefully we will answer today.
Thanks to Secretary Mayorkas' complacency at the Southern
Border, humanitarian crises have taken a toll on cities across
this country--and not just in border cities like El Paso, but
also in cities like New York and Chicago, where they have asked
FEMA to help cover the cost of feeding and housing illegal
immigrants.
Even New York City Mayor Eric Adams recently said that the
financial burden is ``decimating''--decimating--``the
foundation of our city.''
New York received over $104.6 million in FEMA funding to
help cover the cost of housing thousands upon thousands of
migrants in this city because of the dereliction of duty of
Secretary Mayorkas and President Biden.
Administrator, I recently sent you a letter outlining
concerns with the Emergency Food and Shelter Program--
Humanitarian, EFSP-H. As noted in the letter, I requested FEMA
provide a briefing to this subcommittee to discuss the issues I
highlighted in the letter. I hope our staffs are able to get
something on the books soon to accommodate this request.
Unfortunately, it seems that this migrant crisis has no end
in sight, and cities will likely continue to ask FEMA for help,
further adding to the agency's very full plate.
However, FEMA's focus should be on helping communities with
building resiliency to natural disasters, improving recovery
programs, and completing existing reconstruction projects.
As our communities prepare for the 2023 hurricane season,
how can FEMA simplify the application process for survivors of
natural disasters? When will recovery be complete in Puerto
Rico? Are we better off today than we were at the time of our
last disaster?
These are questions that FEMA and this subcommittee should
be and will be tackling.
I sent you a letter on May 31 expressing concerns regarding
continued reconstruction projects in Puerto Rico, the
vulnerability of communities in Puerto Rico during this current
hurricane season, and the concerns outlined in the report by
the DHS Office of the Inspector General that FEMA has not
safeguarded Federal dollars from fraud by not complying with
the agency's own internal guidelines.
I appreciate the response I received this week and welcome
further conversation on those concerns that I'm sure we both
have during this hearing.
As we look ahead, it is important that we address these
questions to help FEMA stay on course and to prioritize the
mission that Congress gave FEMA in the Homeland Security Act of
2002, which is to reduce the loss of life and property and to
protect this great Nation from all hazards, including natural
disasters, acts of terrorism, and other man-made disasters.
Administrator, I look forward to hearing from you on these
issues, and once again thank you for your service to this
country and for being here today. I hope that this hearing
today will bring clarity on the future of FEMA and how the
agency will continue to carry on its mission.
[The statement of Chairman D'Esposito follows:]
Statement of the Chairman Anthony D'Esposito
July 13, 2023
I first want to begin by thanking Administrator Criswell for
participating in this hearing. I look forward to hearing your
perspective on the future of FEMA and I appreciate this opportunity to
review FEMA's work throughout the country.
As we all know, our Nation has faced historic wildfire seasons,
costly hurricanes, and unprecedented emergencies in recent years. When
Superstorm Sandy devestated New York, I was serving as chief of the
Island Park Fire Department, and distinctly remember the overwhelming
damage and immense recovery efforts. With an estimated 100,000 homes
damaged or destroyed on Long Island alone, I truly appreciate FEMA's
partnership and assistance in helping my community to rebuild and
recover.
I know that thousands of Americans are grateful for FEMA's help in
their time of need. However, I also know that FEMA has had its fair
share of challenges while carrying out its mission to help people
before, during, and after disasters. And as Members of this
subcommittee, we are tasked with ensuring that taxpayer dollars are
used wisely to carry out this mission, and that these challenges are
properly addressed.
One such challenge is that FEMA has experienced growing
responsibilities and expanding mission sets amid severe staffing
shortages and existing response and recovery operations. Since 2020,
FEMA has responded to 244 Major Disaster Declarations across the United
States--all while continuing to manage COVID-19-related assistance,
whose incident period just closed on May 11 of this year.
Further, FEMA has been tasked with alleviating the impact of
President Biden's failures. From resettling Afghan refugees in 2021, to
now housing and feeding illegal immigrants, I am worried that FEMA is
becoming a defacto `damage control' agency. Will these added
responsibilities hinder FEMA's ability to help disaster survivors in
their time of need?
Thanks to Secretary Mayorkas' complacency at the Southern Border,
humanitarian crises have taken a toll on cities across the country--and
not just in border cities like El Paso, but also in cities like New
York and Chicago, where they have asked FEMA to help cover the costs of
feeding and housing illegal immigrants.
Even New York City Mayor, Eric Adams, recently said that the
financial burden is ``decimating the foundation of our city.'' New York
received over $104.6 million in FEMA funding to help cover the costs of
housing thousands upon thousands of migrants in the city.
Administrator Criswell, I recently sent you a letter outlining
concerns with the Emergency Food and Shelter Program--Humanitarian
(EFSP-H). As noted in the letter, I've requested that FEMA provide a
briefing to this subcommittee to discuss the issues I highlighted in
the letter. I hope that we will be able to find a time to receive this
briefing.
Unfortunately, it seems that this migrant crisis has no end in
sight, and cities will likely continue to ask FEMA for help, further
adding to the agency's very full plate.
However, FEMA's focus should be on helping communities with
building resiliency to natural disasters, improving recovery programs,
and completing existing reconstruction projects. Are communities
prepared for the 2023 hurricane season? How can FEMA simplify the
application process for survivors of natural disasters? When will
recovery be complete in Puerto Rico? These are the questions that FEMA
should be tackling.
For instance, Administrator Criswell, I would like to know FEMA's
time line for completing reconstruction projects in Puerto Rico and the
vulnerabilities that remain due to lengthy delays for these projects. I
appreciated the response I received from Associate Administrator Anne
Binke from the Office of Response and Recovery; and I was grateful to
read her updates on the island's remaining vulnerabilities, such as
Puerto Rico's emergency management staff shortages and power grid
instability. However, I hope to hear more about FEMA's plan to
safeguard Federal funds and to ensure that recovery projects are
completed effeciently--especially since much of the funding has already
been obligated and 95 percent of the projects presented by the
government of Puerto Rico have already revieved funding. My hope is
that FEMA will coordinate with the government of Puerto Rico to see
that these projects are completed.
As we look ahead, it is important that we address these questions
to help FEMA stay on course and prioritize the mission that Congress
gave FEMA in the Homeland Security Act of 2002--which is to reduce the
loss of life and property and to protect the Nation from all hazards,
including natural disasters, acts of terrorism, and other man-made
disasters. Administrator Criswell--I look forward to hearing from you
on these issues. I hope that this hearing today will bring clarity on
the future of FEMA and how the agency will continue to carry out its
mission.

Mr. D'Esposito. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Carter, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Before I begin, Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent that
Mr. Moskowitz be permitted to sit in the subcommittee and
question today's witness.
Mr. D'Esposito. Without objection.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning,
everyone.
I want to start by thanking Administrator Criswell for
appearing before the subcommittee today and extending my
gratitude to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA,
work force for all the work that you do to help disaster
survivors in our communities.
I do not think we can overstate the role of FEMA in the
last few years. With its on-going work of COVID-19 and managing
increasingly complex, frequent, and intense disasters, one
thing I hope we can all agree on today is that, while there's
many challenges left at FEMA, we need to support FEMA and its
work force to be reliable partners and to help address the many
challenges facing our communities.
I'm eager to hear from you today, Administrator Criswell,
about the agency's effort in supporting the growth and success
of this remarkable work force to ensure that they are prepared
for disasters.
Hurricane season began June 1. We've already had three
named storms. Although the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration projected a near-normal Atlantic hurricane
season, we've already seen 38 major disaster declarations this
year, and the hurricane season just started days ago.
As I reflect upon the start of hurricane season, I am
concerned about the Disaster Relief Fund, DRF, which, as I
understand, could be exhausted before the end of the fiscal
year, and even before the traditionally more active portions of
the hurricane season.
For this issue, administrator, we need to know how to help
so you can do your job--how we can help so you can do your job
more effectively. We know these resources are critical.
While FEMA's work force is preparing for emerging
disasters, including those brought on by hurricane season, it
should not be forgotten that the work force is managing a very,
very large portfolio of nearly 1,000 open past disasters,
including providing on-going support for Hurricanes Maria,
Michael, Ida, Ian, Fiona, and COVID-19.
In New Orleans, we've experienced the extreme weather
events of late. Of the 301 hurricanes that have hit the United
States since 1851, 62 of them hit my home State of Louisiana,
the third-most of any State in the Union.
A grave concern that has arisen due to extreme weather
events is flooding and the increasing cost in flood insurance
policies.
Louisianians depend on the National Flood Insurance
Program, NFIP, to provide affordable insurance coverage.
However, FEMA recently established a new Risk Rating 2.0, which
prices people out of the program instead of continuing to
provide affordable insurance.
For flood insurance costs, Louisiana is expected to see an
increase of as much as 130 percent on average to a single
family home, phased in over years.
This policy would ensure that hundreds, if not thousands,
of Louisianians will be vulnerable during extreme weather
occurrences because they simply cannot afford to pay flood
insurance.
Families should not have to choose between food on the
table and paying a ridiculously high flood insurance premium to
a program that is governed by the Federal Government.
Administrator Criswell, I have raised these questions with
you, and since our last conversation my concerns on flood
insurance cost increases in Louisiana have not changed. I'm
disappointed that since our last conversation there's not been
any improvements, nor follow-up, from you or your team on this
issue.
I hope to hear from you today about how you're working to
make flood insurance more affordable, more accessible, and not
just become a luxury that only the wealthy can afford.
In addition to managing disasters and flood insurance, FEMA
administers the Department of Homeland Security's preparedness
grants State and local, which include the Urban Areas Security
Initiative and the State Homeland Security Program. These
programs assist State and local jurisdictions build and
maintain Homeland Security's capabilities to prepare and
respond for threats.
As an advocate of UASI and the United States Homeland
Security Program, I'm concerned about the agency's budget
request for fiscal year 2024, which proposes cuts to UASI and
the State Homeland Security Program.
I look forward to speaking with you more on this issue
today as we go through testimony.
One area I am pleased with the administration's progress is
that we see more of an issue of equity in disaster. The
disaster recovery process impacts individuals differently and
should be handled as such, but equally across the board for all
constituencies regardless of their ability to be organized or
prepared to access these resources.
I commend Administrator Criswell and the Biden
administration for incorporating principles of equity in
initiatives such as the 2022 to 2026 FEMA Strategic Plan. The
Strategic Plan prioritizes equity as a fundamental aspect of
emergency management.
Furthermore, I am proud to co-chair Ranking Member
Thompson's Congressional Disaster Equity and Building
Resilience Caucus, which aims to promote equity in disaster
preparedness and response and provide a valuable forum to
discuss Federal policies that impact underserved communities in
disasters.
While some of my colleagues on the other side consider
FEMA's equity work to be racial discrimination or take away
from the culture of preparedness, those of us working and
watching know that storms do not know socioeconomic status,
age, race, rural, urban, et cetera.
However, we must take and make sure that Federal policies
do not push people further into poverty or limit access to key
disaster assistance programs.
I wish equity had been a top conversation during Hurricane
Katrina. Undoubtedly, promoting equity in emergency management
prior to Katrina would have saved lives and property.
So let me reiterate that I am grateful for FEMA's work on
equity and hope to see more done with it in the future. I look
forward to hearing from the administrator about how FEMA is
addressing the overgrowing threats we face as a Nation and what
can Congress do to assist you to do your job better.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Carter follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Troy A. Carter
July 13, 2023
I want to start by thanking you, Administrator Criswell, for
appearing before the subcommittee today and extending my gratitude to
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) workforce for all the
work you do to help disaster survivors and communities.
I do not think you can overstate the role of FEMA the last few
years, with its on-going work on COVID-19 and managing increasingly
complex, frequent, and intense disasters. One thing I hope we can all
agree on today is that while there have been challenges at FEMA, we
need to support the FEMA workforce and be a reliable partner to help
you address challenges.
I am eager to hear from you, Administrator Criswell, about the
agency's efforts in supporting the growth and success of this
remarkable workforce to ensure that they are prepared for disasters.
Hurricane Season began on June 1, and we have already had three named
storms. Although the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) projected a ``near-normal'' Atlantic hurricane season, we have
already seen 38 major disaster declarations this year, and the
hurricane season started just days ago.
As I reflect upon the start of hurricane season, I am concerned
about the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF), which as I understand could be
exhausted before the end of the fiscal year and even before the
traditionally more active portion of hurricane season. For this issue,
Administrator, we need to know how to help so you can do your job
effectively. While the FEMA workforce is preparing for emerging
disasters, including those brought on by hurricane season, it should
not be forgotten that the workforce is managing a very large portfolio
of nearly 1,000 (968 to be precise) open past disasters, including
providing on-going support for Hurricanes Maria, Michael, Ida, Ian,
Fiona, and COVID-19.
In New Orleans, we have experience with extreme weather events. Of
the 301 hurricanes that have hit the United States since 1851, 62 have
hit Louisiana--the third-most of any State. A grave concern that has
arisen due to extreme weather events is flooding and increasing costs
in flood insurance policies.
Louisianians depend on the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)
to provide affordable insurance coverage. However, FEMA recently
established the new Risk Rating 2.0 system, which prices people out of
the program instead of continuing to provide affordable insurance.
For flood insurance costs, Louisiana is expected ``to see an
increase of 134 percent on average single-family homes, phased in over
years.'' This policy would ensure that hundreds, if not thousands, of
Louisianians, will be vulnerable during extreme weather occurrences
because they cannot afford to pay for flood insurance. Families should
not have to choose between food on the table and paying a ridiculously
high flood insurance premiums.
Administrator Criswell, I have raised these concerns with you and
since our last conversation, my concerns on flood insurance cost
increases for Louisianans have not changed. I am disappointed that
since our last conversation, there has not been any improvement nor
follow-up from you on this issue. I hope to hear from you today about
how you are working to make sure that flood insurance does not become a
luxury that only few can afford.
In addition to managing disasters and flood insurance, FEMA
administers the Department of Homeland Security's preparedness grants
to States and locals, which include the Urban Area Security Initiative
(UASI) and the State Homeland Security Program. These funds assist
State and local jurisdictions build and maintain homeland security
capabilities to prepare for and respond to threats. As an advocate for
the UASI and the State Homeland Security Program, I am concerned about
the agency's budget request for fiscal year 2024, which proposes cuts
to UASI and the State Homeland Security Program. I look forward to
speaking more about this issue today.
One area where I am pleased with the administration's progress and
hope to see more is the issue of equity in disasters. Disasters and the
recovery process impacts individuals differently. I commend
Administrator Criswell and the Biden administration for incorporating
principles of equity in initiatives such as the 2022-2026 FEMA
Strategic Plan. The strategic plan prioritizes equity as a fundamental
aspect of emergency management. Furthermore, I am a proud co-chair of
Ranking Member Thompson's Congressional Disaster Equity and Building
Resilience Caucus, which aims to promote equity in disaster
preparedness and response and provide a valuable forum to discuss
Federal policies that impact underserved communities in disasters.
While some of my colleagues on the other side consider FEMA's
equity work to be ``racial discrimination'' or takeaway from the
culture of preparedness, those of us watching know that storms do not
know socio-economic status, age, race, rural, urban, etc.; however, we
must make sure that Federal policies do not push people further into
poverty or limit access to key disaster assistance programs.
I wish equity had been a topic of conversation during Hurricane
Katrina. Undoubtedly, promoting equity in emergency management prior to
Katrina would have saved lives and property. So let me reiterate that I
am grateful for FEMA's work on equity and hope to see you do more.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Ranking Member Carter.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
July 13, 2023
I want to thank the FEMA workforce for working so hard to achieve
their mission of helping people before, during, and after disasters.
FEMA has been particularly active in Mississippi over the last year--
helping with the Jackson water crisis and the devastating March 24
tornadoes, which killed 22 people in the State and left catastrophic
damage throughout my District. The FEMA workforce has been there, ready
to help at every step since the tornado, and we appreciate it.
Unfortunately, these kinds of disasters are becoming more frequent
and severe due to climate change. While some of my colleagues on the
other side may not believe in climate change, the hard truth is that
climate change is worsening disasters, causing death and destruction,
and destabilizing markets. Last Monday, the world experienced the
hottest day ever recorded globally. I hope that we can have an honest
conversation about the role of climate change in our collective
preparedness and response efforts.
These disasters are even affecting Americans' ability to buy
insurance. In recent weeks, State Farm, AllState, and Farmers have
announced they are leaving the home insurance market in California and
have cited ``growing catastrophe exposure'' as a reason. In Florida,
homeowners are struggling to buy storm coverage because several
insurers have already pulled out of the State. Unlike insurance
companies, FEMA cannot pack up and leave a market when storms get to be
too much. With all its responsibilities, the FEMA workforce faces its
own challenges including low morale, low retention, harassment, and a
lack of diversity. According to a report by the U.S. Government
Accountability Office (GAO), while FEMA has increased its workforce
over the years, it remains nearly 6,000 employees short of its staffing
goals. I hope we can discuss how Congress can be more helpful as the
agency works to resolve its workforce challenges.
On a positive note, I am pleased that the Biden administration has
made equity a priority in disasters. Those of us knowledgeable about
disaster response are familiar with the inequitable response to
Hurricanes Katrina, Harvey, Sandy, and Maria, where marginalized
communities were left vulnerable, often with tragic consequences. Low-
income communities, rural areas, racial minorities, Tribes, individuals
with disabilities, seniors, and children experience the most
devastating impacts of disasters.
Ensuring equity in disasters is critical to helping all of our
constituents when disasters strike.
That is why in May, Representatives Carter, Titus, Higgins, and I
formed the Disaster Equity and Building Resilience Caucus along with 19
other Members. The Caucus aims to examine how disasters exacerbate
existing inequities and how disaster response often amplifies and
entrenches long-standing social and economic disparities. And we want
to be engaged on how to address those problems. While aiming to build
equity within emergency management, we must not forget about building
equity within contracting services, which is crucial during the
recovery process.
Throughout the years, I have witnessed first-hand how small, local,
minority-owned businesses are left out of the contracting process. I
look forward to hearing from Administrator Criswell about the progress
FEMA has made on this issue and what more can be done.
I also look forward to hearing how FEMA is enhancing public safety
by administering critical Department of Homeland Security Grants, which
includes the Nonprofit Security Grant Program (NSGP). As a strong
supporter of the NSGP, I am thankful that the President's budget
request for fiscal year 2024 includes $360 million for the program,
which is a $55 million increase.
The NSGP is integral to securing nonprofit organizations at high
risk of terrorist attack, and it deserves our strong support.
Additionally, FEMA improving its execution of the program is critical
to the program's growth and ability to address threats.

Mr. D'Esposito. Without objection, the gentleman from New
York, Mr. Lawler, and the gentleman from Guam, Mr. Moylan, are
permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions of the witnesses
for this subcommittee hearing.
I am pleased to have a very distinguished witness before us
today, and I ask that the administrator please rise and raise
her right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much.
Let the record reflect that the witness has answered in the
affirmative.
Thank you again for being here.
I would now like to formally introduce our witness.
Ms. Deanne Criswell is the 12th administrator of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. In this position,
Administrator Criswell manages a work force of more than 22,000
individuals and oversees FEMA's mission of helping people
before, during, and after disasters.
This is not a small feat, considering since the
administrator's confirmation in April 2021 there have been over
120 major disaster declarations.
Prior to becoming the FEMA administrator, Ms. Criswell
served as the commissioner of the New York City Emergency
Management Department where she led New York City's response to
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Additionally, Ms. Criswell served for over 20 years in the
Colorado Air National Guard.
Thank you for your service to our country, and as a proud
New Yorker, thank you for you and your service to the great
State of New York.
I thank the witness for being here today.
I now recognize Administrator Criswell for 5 minutes to
summarize her opening statement.

STATEMENT OF DEANNE CRISWELL, ADMINISTRATOR, FEDERAL EMERGENCY
MANAGEMENT AGENCY

Ms. Criswell. Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter,
and the Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the
opportunity to join you today to discuss the future of FEMA.
FEMA has a powerful mission statement spelled out in just
seven words: Helping people before, during, and after
disasters.
There is no question that this mission has grown more
challenging over the last decade, and I saw this first-hand
from the vantage point of my previous position as the
commissioner of New York City Emergency Management, and I see
it with crystal clarity from the vantage point of my current
role.
From atmospheric rivers in January, to tornadoes and
wildfires in December, we can no longer speak of a disaster
season. We now face intensified natural disasters throughout
the year, often in places that are not used to experiencing
them.
In December 2021, we announced a Strategic Plan that has
three cross-cutting objectives.
Our first goal is to instill equity as a foundation of
emergency management, to ensure that all disaster survivors
receive the assistance for which they qualify for under the
law.
This requires recognizing that vulnerable communities,
vulnerable individuals in our country, can have more difficulty
accessing this assistance.
For example, we took a hard look at our Individuals and
Households Assistance Program and implemented several
improvements through a ``people first'' approach.
In some rural areas of the country, homeowners have handed
down their property to their heirs informally over the
generations, and there may not be recorded deeds to their
homes.
Under our previous policy, a flood survivor in Appalachia
or a tornado survivor in Mississippi would have faced
difficulty accessing FEMA assistance without formal proof of
ownership. We changed our policy and now accept alternative
forms of documentation.
Since we implemented these changes in August 2021, tens of
thousands of homeowners and renters have received FEMA
assistance that might have been denied previously.
We also changed how we calculate the threshold for property
losses to qualify for our Direct Housing Program, which ensures
more precise damage evaluations regardless of size or the
damage of the home.
The old rules disadvantaged homeowners with more modest
homes. The new calculation methodology is more accurate in
providing assistance that is proportionate to the damage that
is sustained.
Our second strategic goal is to lead the whole of community
in climate resilience. FEMA is not just a response and recovery
agency. What we do to prepare for disasters is often as
important, or more important, than what we do after disaster
strikes.
Congress' investment in mitigation programs to make our
Nation more resilient has been robust. We have seen this
through your support of the development of our BRIC Program,
Building Resilient Infrastructure and Communities. To date, for
BRIC alone we have announced nearly $4 billion in grants for
hazard mitigation projects.
We also appreciate the strong bipartisan support for the
STORM Act Revolving Loan Fund through which FEMA is providing
seed funding to States and Tribes to establish hazard
mitigation revolving loan funds.
In implementing these and other mitigation programs, we are
also providing technical assistance to knock down the barriers
that communities with limited capacity face when seeking this
mitigation funding.
Our third strategic goal is to promote and sustain a ready
FEMA and a prepared Nation.
On the work force front, between 2015 and 2021 alone FEMA
experienced a 165 percent increase in the number of staff who
deployed to disaster operations for over 30 days.
Our FEMA Reservists are the majority of our disaster
response work force, and we are very grateful that Congress
approved the CREW Act last year, which now extends USERRA labor
protections, greatly improving our ability to recruit and
retain these efforts.
Readiness also requires we preposition resources to ensure
we can respond more quickly and effectively. For example, in
preparation for the 2023 hurricane season, FEMA has 11 times
the amount of water, 12 times the amount of meals, 8 times the
number of tarps, and more than twice the number of generators
staged on Puerto Rico compared to when Hurricane Maria hit in
2017.
Just as we must be prepared for natural disasters, we must
also be prepared for terrorist attacks. For our fiscal year
2024 budget, our budget request includes a $55 million increase
in the Nonprofit Security Grant Program.
I look forward to discussing more our suite of preparedness
grant programs with you.
From my time as commissioner of New York City Emergency
Management, I understand, as all of you do, what disasters mean
from the local stakeholder perspective.
From my current position, I see the unwavering dedication
of our FEMA work force to supporting people across our Nation
before, during, and after disasters, facing what is for many of
them the worst day of their lives.
Our FEMA work force demonstrates the best of our country,
and I am committed to supporting the work force in every way
possible, and I ask for continued support from each of you in
this effort.
Thank you again, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Criswell follows:]
Prepared Statement of Deanne Criswell
June 13, 2023
Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to discuss the future of
the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). We value this
committee's support and oversight of our agency, and I look forward to
our conversation today.
FEMA has a powerful mission statement, spelled out in just seven
words: helping people before, during, and after disasters. That mission
statement is our North Star, and it reflects a deep and abiding
commitment to our Nation, its people, and public service by our FEMA
workforce.
There is no question that the field of emergency management has
grown more challenging over the last decade. I saw it from the vantage
point of my previous position as commissioner of New York City
Emergency Management--and I see it with crystal clarity from the
vantage point of my current role. Emergency Managers--at every level of
government--are being asked to do more, respond more, and solve more
complex problems.
In 2010, there were 108 declared disasters for FEMA to support.
Just 10 years later, that number increased to 315--including the
response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We can no longer speak of a
``disaster season''--we now face intensified natural disasters
throughout the year, often in places that are not used to experiencing
them. Our mission has not changed, but our operating environment has.
With that, comes the challenge of ensuring that everyone who qualifies
for FEMA assistance is able to access that help.
In December 2021, we announced a strategic plan that has three
crosscutting objectives to help us meet FEMA's mission. Our first
strategic goal is to instill equity as a foundation of emergency
management, to ensure that all disaster survivors receive the
assistance for which they qualify under the law. This requires
recognizing that vulnerable individuals and communities in our country
could have more difficulty accessing that assistance. As an agency, we
must have a ``people first'' focus, and eliminate the barriers to
individuals and communities accessing our programs.
For example, we took a hard look at our Individuals and Households
Assistance program (IHP) and implemented several improvements through a
people-first lens. In some rural areas of the country, homeowners have
handed down their property to their heirs informally over generations,
and there may not be recorded deeds to their homes. Under our previous
policy, a flood survivor in Appalachia or a tornado survivor in
Mississippi would have faced difficulty accessing FEMA assistance
without formal proof of ownership. We changed our policy, and now
accept alternative forms of documentation such as Department of Motor
Vehicles registration and utility bills, while still taking steps to
guard against potentially fraudulent claims. Since we implemented these
changes in August 2021, FEMA has helped tens of thousands of homeowners
and renters receive assistance they might have been denied under the
old system simply because they lacked traditional documentation.
We also changed how we calculate the threshold for property losses
to qualify for Direct Housing, which ensures more precise damage
evaluations regardless of the size of the damaged home. The old rules
disadvantaged homeowners with more modest homes, who might have
suffered comparable damage to larger homes, but were receiving less
assistance. The new calculation methodology is more accurate in
providing assistance that is proportionate to the damage sustained.
Bottom line, our priority is to make sure all survivors get the
assistance for which they qualify under the law.
Our second strategic goal is to enhance the Nation's ability to
anticipate, prepare for, and adapt to future climate conditions. FEMA
is not just a response and recovery agency. Through close collaboration
with Federal, State, local, Tribal, and territory governments,
community-based organizations, and the private sector, FEMA is
positioning itself as a true resilience agency. We must recognize the
changing climate and ensure that we are prepared for the challenges it
brings us and will continue to bring. What we do to prepare for all
hazards is often as important as what we do after disaster strikes.
Congress' investment in mitigation programs to make our Nation more
resilient has been robust. We have seen this through your support of
the development of the Building Resilient Infrastructure and
Communities or ``BRIC'' grant program in 2018, and through the
appropriation of $6.8 billion in funds to FEMA in the Bipartisan
Infrastructure Law (BIL) in 2021. To date, for BRIC alone, the
administration has announced nearly $4 billion in available funding to
States, local communities, Tribal Nations, and territories to undertake
hazard mitigation projects and reduce the risks they face from
disasters and other natural hazards.
We also appreciate the strong bipartisan support for the
Safeguarding Tomorrow through Ongoing Risk Mitigation (STORM) Act
Revolving Loan Fund, which authorizes FEMA to provide seed funding to
States and Tribes to establish hazard mitigation revolving loan funds.
These revolving loan funds will give local governments another tool to
finance projects to reduce their risks from natural hazards and
disasters. In implementing these and other mitigation programs, we are
working to eliminate the barriers that small, rural, and other
communities with limited capacity face when seeking mitigation funding.
By providing technical assistance, we are helping these communities
better understand the requirements of the program and the application
process.
Additionally, FEMA is implementing a national strategy to
incentivize the adoption of disaster-resistant building codes to
strengthen buildings against intensifying disaster impacts. For
example, in Florida, buildings built to newer codes consistently fared
better during Hurricane Ian than older buildings. Investments in hazard
resistant building codes over the last 20 years have saved lives,
reduced property losses, and been shown to save $11 for every dollar
invested.
Our third strategic goal is to promote and sustain a ready FEMA and
a prepared Nation. Between 2015 and 2021 alone, FEMA experienced a 165
percent increase in the number of staff who deployed to support
disaster operations for more than 30 days, and an unprecedented 346
percent increase in the number of days FEMA personnel were deployed to
disaster operations annually.
We are very grateful to Congress for passing the Civilian Reservist
Emergency Workforce (CREW) Act last fall. Our FEMA reservists are the
vast majority of our disaster response workforce, and the CREW Act
extends Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act
(USERRA) protections to them, which will improve our recruitment and
retention efforts. I've been to many disasters since that bill was
signed into law and I continually run into reservists who are already
benefiting from this legislation.
We must also expand our approach to agency readiness and to
national preparedness. To effectively manage disasters and administer
recovery programs, we must first understand the environment in which we
are working. With $1.3 million appropriated by Congress for fiscal year
2023, FEMA is creating a steady-state disaster response analytics
division, which will help build our geospatial capabilities, improve
our ability to characterize incidents, and conduct analysis that
enables us to provide a more effective and efficient response.
FEMA is taking proactive steps to make sure we are well-positioned
to respond to the 2023 Atlantic Hurricane Season. We have made
tremendous progress over the last few years in our ability to
preposition resources to ensure we can work with our State, local,
Tribal, and territorial partners quickly and effectively. For example,
FEMA had 9 times the amount of water, 10 times the number of meals, 8
times the number of tarps, and 3 times the number of generators staged
on Puerto Rico ahead of the 2022 Atlantic Hurricane Season as compared
to when Hurricane Maria hit the island in 2017. A more forward-leaning
posture to support immediate critical needs after a disaster is a key
progression toward a more ready FEMA and a more prepared Nation.
Just as FEMA must be ready to respond to natural disasters through
our preparedness efforts, we must equally be ready and equipped to
respond when terrorist attacks occur. Last year, the Congregation Beth
Israel synagogue in Colleyville, Texas, experienced a horrific incident
of targeted violence, which reminds us that threats to the homeland no
longer occur only in high-population areas. During my visit to
Colleyville, I met with the Rabbi and the congregants and saw first-
hand how this devasting event impacted not only the community but their
individual lives as well. They also shared how the funding they
received from the Nonprofit Security Grant Program greatly benefited
their efforts to recover and to protect themselves from future attacks.
In fiscal year 2024, our budget request includes a $55 million increase
in the Nonprofit Security Grant Program. This vital grant supports
local communities through target hardening, physical security
enhancements, and other activities for nonprofit organizations that are
at high risk of a terrorist or other extremist attack.
This subcommittee has oversight of this and other FEMA preparedness
grant programs, and I look forward to discussing the suite of those
grant programs with you today.
From my time as commissioner of New York City Emergency Management,
I understand--as you do--what disasters mean from the local stakeholder
perspective. From my current position, I see the unwavering dedication
of our FEMA workforce to supporting people across our Nation before,
during, and after disasters, facing what is, in many cases, the worst
tragedy of people's lives. Our FEMA workforce demonstrates the very
best of the United States of America, and I am committed to supporting
the FEMA workforce in every way possible. I ask for continued support
from each of you.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today, and I look forward
to your questions.

Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Administrator Criswell.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
Administrator, last year the Department of Homeland
Security established the Southwest Border Coordination Center
to, ``coordinate planning, operations, engagement, and
interagency support.''
The President's fiscal year 2024 budget request includes
$4.7 billion, with a ``b'', for the Southwest Border
Contingency Fund to respond to migration surges along the
Southwest Border.
Given that Secretary Mayorkas has repeatedly stated that
there is not a crisis at the Southwest Border, why is FEMA
being included in the Southwest Border Contingency Fund?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, Chairman, first, I just want to
clarify for the record that FEMA is not an immigration agency.
We do follow Congressional direction in the program that we do
have that supports the Emergency Food and Shelter Program for
humanitarian efforts and now the Shelter and Services Program,
SSP.
We do support the President's budget, and we did
participate in the development of that request, which does
include, as you stated, $4.7 billion for the DHS Border
Contingency Fund.
Depending on the conditions and the dynamic nature of the
border, what that contingency fund also provides is up to $800
million that could be available to FEMA to support our Shelter
and Services Program. This would be the same level as fiscal
year 2023.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Thank you.
On to sort-of a different topic. On May 15, a bipartisan
group of 51 Members of Congress, including myself and Majority
Leader Steve Scalise, sent a letter requesting a briefing and
documents related to the National Flood Insurance Program's
Risk Ratings 2.0.
To date, your agency has not produced any responsive
documents, and even though we anticipated receiving a briefing
last month, your staff now indicates they may not provide the
briefing, citing on-going litigation.
On-going litigation is not a basis for refusing to provide
a briefing to Congress.
When can you anticipate that your staff will provide the
responsive documents and the requested briefing?
Ms. Criswell. Chairman, I will certainly follow up with my
staff when we return back to the office.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you.
Ms. Criswell. I need to understand their point, but it's
not acceptable that we haven't gotten back to you, and I'll
make sure that we take care of that when we get back there.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. I appreciate that.
During the prior Congress, when Democrats controlled the
House, FEMA produced documents at least 27 times to the Select
COVID Subcommittee. Many of those productions had multiple
subparts and were produced on a regular basis.
Really the question is, we need to make sure that that May
15 request receives the same attention that it did for requests
prior. So I just ask that when you get back to the office, if
you could follow up with that, we'd really appreciate it.
Ms. Criswell. You have my commitment on that, Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you very much.
I have a couple minutes left.
So I also serve on Transportation and Infrastructure, and
we had a hearing in May when I asked Deputy Administrator Hooks
about the dwindling Disaster Relief Fund.
Mr. Hooks estimated that the DRF would be facing a
shortfall by the end of this summer, so just really, I guess, a
month or a month-and-a-half away.
In your estimation, when will the DRF run out of money?
Ms. Criswell. Chairman, we recently submitted our report to
Congress on the balance of the funds for the end of June, or
through the end of June, and right now we anticipate a
shortfall toward the mid and end of August.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Now what are the plans moving forward
with that shortfall to still protect vulnerable coastal
communities like Long Island?
Ms. Criswell. The Disaster Relief Fund, as we continue to
go into the last quarter, is always a very dynamic situation,
and the balances continue to change.
We are monitoring it very closely and working with the
administration on a very continuous basis so we can understand
when we are going to approach a potential deficit and what
tools we might have to implement to ensure that we will always
have the funding available to respond to events like we just
saw in Vermont.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Thank you.
I'm going to yield back my time. I now recognize Ranking
Member Carter for 5 minutes for any questions that he may have.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Criswell, under Risk Rating 2.0, FEMA said
its goal is to build equity and to ensure that rates are based
on individual risk. However, this methodology is not building
equity in Louisiana.
In April in this committee, Secretary Mayorkas testified
before the full committee. I mentioned to the Secretary my
concerns with Risk Rating 2.0 methodology, and he stated, and I
quote: ``We're reviewing our grants program to ensure that,
again, that they leave no community disenfranchised. We are
reviewing and need to continue to review Risk Rating 2.0, given
the concerns that you have expressed.''
Administrator Criswell, can you explain where FEMA is in
reviewing Risk Rating 2.0, which is flawed and will devastate
families, in Louisiana at least? Many others will likewise be
devastated.
What steps are you taking to ensure that the flaws within
the methodology are fixed and thoroughly explained to the
public?
Ms. Criswell. Ranking Member Carter, I really appreciate
the opportunity to have a more in-depth discussion with you on
this that we had recently, and I appreciate the concerns that
you raise.
I think, again, the most important thing that I want to get
across about Risk Rating 2.0 is that it now bases the flood
insurance premiums on what each individual's unique flood risk
is.
As we talk about our approach to disaster response and
recovery and equity, we want to recognize that each individual
has their own unique experience. We're taking that same
approach with Risk Rating 2.0 and recognizing that every
homeowner has a unique risk with their home.
We've already had at least 20 percent across the Nation of
individuals that their risk rating--their risk premium has gone
down. This demonstrates that they were subsidizing higher-
value, higher-risk homes across the country.
Ranking Member, I have committed to you and I will continue
to commit to you on how we can better communicate what these
risks are, and also the work that we have started to try to
incorporate what an affordability framework would look like for
those individuals that are kind-of caught in the middle, as you
and I discussed, where they have a lower-risk home but a high--
a lower-value home but high risk and their rates are exceeding
what their capacity is.
We continue to work with you on solutions to help that
group of individuals.
Mr. Carter. I appreciate that, Administrator. I will double
down and push just a little bit at the sense of urgency.
Every day that goes by, people are having to make a very
tough decision: Can I afford to stay in the home that I own,
that I have purchased, and now I find myself in a retirement
situation where my dollars are fixed?
Now potentially individuals are finding themselves in a
situation where they have an insurance premium for flood
insurance that's greater than their house note was when they
had a mortgage.
What ends up happening in the absence of a mortgage where a
person is forced to have insurance, people go without it. The
risk that is involved with a person potentially meeting a peril
and not having coverage in the twilight of their lives--you
know where this is going.
Ms. Criswell. Yes.
Mr. Carter. So the sense of urgency.
I appreciate that you guys are looking at it. I appreciated
that Secretary Mayorkas said that they were looking at it and
recognize that there needs to be some tweaks. I would just
hasten that we really, really push up the time frame.
This is real life. People's lives are at risk. People's
ability to maintain their homesteads are at risk. I would just
implore that you guys continue pushing but push a little
faster, a little harder, to give some relief, not just to
recognize but to have a plan of relief for the community.
I've got one last question. I'm sorry, I'm blowing through
my time.
Last week the world recorded its hottest 3 days on record.
This week the world has seen flooding in New York's Hudson
Valley, Vermont, Japan, China, and India.
It's hard to deny that there is such a thing as climate
change. Yet just in April this year, April 26 border mark-up,
one of my colleagues at a mark-up described climate change as a
hoax.
Administrator Criswell, is climate change a hoax, as one of
my colleagues described it, or is it a considerable threat to
our Nation and our environment?
Ms. Criswell. Ranking Member Carter, I consider climate
change one of our most significant threats in the future and
the crisis of the generation that we're living in right now.
As I spoke in my testimony, we have seen atmospheric rivers
batter the coast of California in January, wildfires, tornadoes
hit communities in December. We no longer have a disaster
season.
Our focus at FEMA is to make sure that we can help people
better understand what their risks are going to be, not just
today but 5 or 10 years from now, and how we can help them with
our mitigation programs to reduce the impacts of those risks.
Mr. Carter. My time has expired. I yield back, Mr.
Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize my good friend, fellow Long Islander,
fellow New Yorker, Mr. LaLota, for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. I want to thank my good friend, NYPD
veteran and Chairman of this committee D'Esposito, for hosting
this important meeting today.
And for you, ma'am, for being here. I understand you
deployed a couple times to the Middle East post-9/11, and I
want to thank you for your service as well.
I represent the First Congressional District of New York,
the east end of Long Island. We're surrounded by water on three
sides, and we're no stranger to natural disasters.
We've experienced some of the most significant storms over
the past couple of decades, including Hurricanes Sandy, Irene,
Maria, Ida, Michael, and Tropical Storm Isaias, just to name a
few.
These storms have done immense damage to my constituents'
property, whether it was flooding in their homes, a tree that
maybe fell on top of their car, losing power for a few weeks at
a time, or the worst-case scenario, loss of life.
Historically, the United States has invested far too little
in the Federal disaster mitigation efforts. As recently as
fiscal year 2015, under President Obama, the Federal Government
spent just $30 million across the entire country for pre-
disaster mitigation purposes, despite spending billions in
emergency post-disaster funds.
That changed several years later in 2018 under President
Trump when he signed the Disaster Recovery Reform Act, which
created FEMA's new and enhanced Pre-Disaster Mitigation
Program--the BRIC Program--that was set to disburse billions
across the country for pre-disaster mitigation for communities.
So my question, administrator, is there's been three rounds
of funding so far totaling over $4 billion. Where is the money?
How much of that has gone directly to affected communities?
What's the hold-up over at FEMA?
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, thank you for the question. The
BRIC Program is truly one of our hallmark programs that allows
us to help these communities reduce the impact that we're
seeing from severe weather events.
I think one of the best things about this program is, in
its legacy program, the Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program, we had
a Federal limit of $5 million. We can't do much with mitigation
for $5 million.
This program gives us a $50 million Federal cost share,
which gives us the ability to do community-wide projects.
As for specifically on where the money is going, I'd be
happy to schedule a briefing with you on the projects that we
have already approved and where funding will go and to help
these communities.
We continue to release our Notice of Funding Opportunities
every year, we'll have another one coming out later this year,
to continue to get this critical funding into the hands of
these jurisdictions so they can make the needed improvements
ahead of these disasters.
Mr. LaLota. I'd welcome the opportunity for my office to
work with yours on ways that Congress can be helpful to that
end. My understanding is, the money invested earlier on
typically gets a larger ROI than the things that we spend--the
money we spend to react to disasters.
Ms. Criswell. Yes.
Mr. LaLota. So this is a great endeavor that taxpayers,
property owners, and everybody in between should want to have
happen, and I'd welcome the opportunity to work with you.
Switching gears just a little bit with a minute or 2 left.
I appreciate that FEMA has been receptive to the concerns
raised by the New York delegation throughout the COVID-19
pandemic. However, while the public health emergency has ended,
hospitals in my district and across New York are still
expending tremendous time and scarce resources to see they are
fully and fairly reimbursed by FEMA for COVID-19-related
expenses.
My question is, as the agency's focus shifts to preparing
for natural disasters and other potential threats, what is your
agency doing to ensure that outstanding applications for
reimbursement of COVID-19-related expenses are indeed
addressed?
Ms. Criswell. Yes. The COVID-19 incident period is the
longest incident period in our agency's history, again, just
closing on May 11.
We continue to prioritize the reimbursement requests from
hospitals, and, in fact, in New York, we have created a task
force to work specifically with them so we can continue to
support the costs that they incurred to help make sure that
they were keeping people safe throughout the pandemic.
We treat all of our disasters the same, and COVID-19 is the
same as all of our other major disaster declarations. We have
dedicated personnel working across the country to make sure
that we're treating all of the requests for reimbursement that
come in equally.
Mr. LaLota. So the money has been laid out. The money has
been spent. FEMA has generally said that they will reimburse.
Now the task force for it. What expectation can I tell my
constituents to have with respect to the timeliness of all that
work?
You have a task force on hand. That's good. We appreciate
that attention. What can I tell them as far as when they can
get the reimbursement they were told they were going to get?
Ms. Criswell. I think the best thing would be, if they're
having struggles with getting reimbursement, let us work with
them. It requires documentation, and sometimes we just have to
work with them to get the appropriate paperwork to submit so we
can do the reimbursement. If you have a jurisdiction that's
having a specific issue, we'd be happy to work with them
directly.
Mr. LaLota. My understanding is they've submitted most if
not all of the paperwork and that they're merely waiting on the
bureaucracy in Washington, which I understand isn't specific
just to your agency.
But, nevertheless, can you tell me, a week, a month, 6
months, a year? What can I tell them is the appropriate amount
of time to wait for an application that is complete and in
order that is in your agency's hands?
Ms. Criswell. Yes. If they have submitted everything and we
didn't have any additional questions, it shouldn't take that
much time. So, again, I'd have to understand the unique
situation or their specific instance. I'm happy to work through
that with them.
Mr. LaLota. Thanks. I appreciate it, and I look forward to
working with you.
I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Strong from Alabama.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Criswell, thank you for being here with us
today.
You know as well as I do that Alabama is no stranger to
natural disasters and FEMA.
I want to thank you for your attention to the recovery
efforts and for making the trip to Alabama to survey the damage
first-hand. Thank you.
Administrator Criswell, since 2021 we have seen FEMA divert
precious time, resources, and manpower to deal with this
administration's border crisis. This includes by diverting
funds intended for American families struggling with hunger and
homelessness to illegal aliens and by developing FEMA's
personnel to quickly expand safe and appropriate shelter and
provide food, water, and basic medical care for migrants
illegally arriving in the United States.
This all comes at a time when the agency is severely
understaffed. A May 2023 GAO report found that FEMA faces a
staffing shortfall of approximately 6,200 employees.
In the report, FEMA officials attributed this staffing
deficiency to additional responsibilities the agency has been
saddled with.
One can conclude that the border mission is one such
responsibility that you have been saddled with. It could all be
alleviated if this administration would just secure the
Southern Border.
I understand that DHS as a whole is facing staffing
shortages, but pulling FEMA and other agencies away from their
primary mission isn't a solution, especially when the mission
is a vital resource for those in my district.
My question for you is, when Alabamians are working to
recover from a natural disaster--hurricane, tornado--and
desperately are waiting for FEMA trucks to roll in and give
them some relief, when they're wondering when help is coming,
what do you want me to tell them?
Because I'm having to tell them that FEMA's limited staff
is busy serving illegal aliens and will get to them later just
doesn't cut it.
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, again, FEMA does not have an
immigration mission. Our mission is to help people before,
during, and after these severe weather events that we continue
to see. That is our focus.
As the GAO report pointed out, some of the staffing
shortfalls, the majority of that is within our Reservist work
force.
Again, I really appreciate the bipartisan support of
passing the CREW Act, which gives us the opportunity to recruit
and retain similar to our Department of Defense counterparts
that have USERRA protection. This is a critical tool for us to
make sure we can build up that Reservist work force.
I can assure you, Congressman, that our focus is always on
helping people that have been impacted by these severe weather
events. It will remain our focus. They will not see a shortfall
in our ability to come in and help them.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. I thank you for your commitment.
I also want to recognize that this oversight committee has
Members with a large background in law enforcement. We've got
police officers here, homicide investigators, 39 years as a
firefighter, serving in every position from a ranger to
assistant fire chief. I think that offers a lot in this
committee.
I want to thank those that serve here on both sides of the
aisle. We've got folks that were 9-1-1 dispatchers,
firefighters. I worked for Huntsville Med Flight. You just go
down that list.
I've also worked 4 or 5 natural disasters, including the
tornadoes of 2011 where 350 homes were totally destroyed
practically in my backyard, thousands of homes with major
damage, 9 of my neighbors lost their life. In record time we
removed more than 500,000 cubic yards of debris.
It was a great relationship with FEMA. The Southeast was
totally destroyed in a matter of days. But I'll tell you this
right here: We learned from every event.
The one thing that I do want to say is that FEMA cannot--
we've got to focus on readiness. I think that it's at a great
point, because our next natural disaster is a matter of days
away.
I thank you for your service.
I'd like to yield back any remaining time that I've got to
Representative Moylan.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize another fellow New Yorker, Mr. Goldman.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator Criswell, thank you for being here today.
I want to focus, as the Representative from New York City
in the district that includes the Statue of Liberty and Ellis
Island, we in New York City are incredibly proud of the efforts
that the city is making to welcome and support migrants who are
escaping horrific conditions in their own countries to seek the
American Dream as so many have done throughout our history.
We, of course, are a country of immigrants. I certainly am
a descendant of a grandmother who escaped anti-Semitism in
Russia and came through Ellis Island. So this is something that
most of us who represent New York feel great pride in.
It is incredibly burdensome on the city right now, and I
want to focus a little bit on what FEMA can do not only to
alleviate the financial burden on New York City and New York,
which has in recent months, since the rolling off of Title 42,
seen an increase in the number of newly-arrived migrants as the
influx of migrants crossing the Southern Border has
dramatically been reduced.
To me, there seem to be two issues that FEMA has direct
oversight over.
The first is an emergency declaration, and I want to
discuss that with you in a minute.
The second, of course, is the Shelter and Services Program.
New York has received a little over $100 million from that
program. I would just make a strong, strong plea to recognize
that those cities who have welcomed, supported, provided
shelter, housing, health care, vaccines, shots, and assistance
in making sure that those seeking a better life are able to do
that, and, in fact, quite importantly, contribute significantly
to our economy.
What is the process that FEMA is going through right now to
evaluate how to distribute the Shelter and Services Program
money?
Ms. Criswell. Thank you for the question, Congressman.
Just to give a little background on the program, we had the
Emergency Food and Shelter Program for humanitarian efforts
that Congress directed funding toward a few years ago. Over
this past year, that program has now transitioned into what is
called a Shelter and Services Program.
Under the EFSP--Humanitarian program, the funding was given
to FEMA and then transferred to a board because it's part of an
existing program we have that supports some of the homeless
efforts across the country.
That board made the determination on the funding that would
be eligible for reimbursement, mostly at that point in time
from jurisdictions at the Southern Border that were taking care
of migrants.
As we transition into the Shelter and Services Program, we
are moving into a grant-directed program versus a board-
distributed program. With that, we are using existing data and
giving an allocation to jurisdictions based on the data we have
on the encounters that they're experiencing, the costs that
they've stated that they're experiencing, I mean, doing a
direct allocation.
The purpose behind the direct allocation is so we can
expedite the amount of money going out there, instead of going
through a longer grant program like some of our other programs.
This was the first iteration of this when New York received
just over $100 million in June, and that's the direction that
we'll continue to go with the Shelter and Services Program.
Mr. Goldman. My understanding is that there has been
significant reimbursement from the Shelter and Services Program
to localities on the border, and there continues to be.
But I am concerned that FEMA is reimbursing cities, towns,
localities on the Southern Border who are shipping migrants to
New York City against--potentially against their will.
There are many that are coming into New York because they
want to be there, but there still remain about 20 percent who
are being bussed to New York and to other northern cities
against their will.
I would ask you, as the administrator for FEMA, to stop
reimbursing those towns who are bussing migrants against their
will. I believe that is money that should be better spent
elsewhere and they should not be incentivized to do so.
I hope we have another round. I see my time is up. I yield
back to the Chairman.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Brecheen from Oklahoma for 5 minutes.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Administrator, thank you very much for being here.
FEMA is well known to Oklahomans. We just had 560,000 homes
hit with a severe weather event. Then last winter I was on the
ground in McCurtain County where we had a tremendous impact of
a tornado.
[Chart.]
Mr. Brecheen. In the chart behind me, over the last decade
FEMA has increased disaster-related spending in a manner that
is quite significant. It's like year over year from 2013, like
a 9 percent increase, way above most other agencies.
So for someone that is very concerned with our runaway
deficits and the fact that we'll overspend by $1.5 trillion
this year, which was the size of our gross national debt in
1983, just 40 years ago, we'll overspend by in 1 year what it
took us 200 years to get to just 40 years ago, in 1983, trying
to make our dollars go farther.
The larger graphic--it may be hard for you to see this. I
may be blocking your line of sight. But this is something you
know well. It's the normal budget. Then we have to come in and
backfill to the blue. That's the supplemental.
But over here in the smaller graphic what you'll see is
that's kind-of the historic look of FEMA on this very small
chart. So where these arrows point to the top here, we can't--
the numbers are so high, we can't get above for a good visual.
So it really showcases that in the last decade-plus we
have--FEMA's budget has really been tremendous. That makes me
want to transition to something, that someone might go to the
thought of what President Biden said in 2023 where he said that
extreme weather caused by climate change leads to stronger,
more frequent storms, more intense droughts, longer wildfire
seasons.
You had said a minute ago: I see climate change as one of
our most significant threats. So I think it's important for us
to look at the science. I'm going to disagree with you, but I
don't want to disagree based upon an opinion.
Let's look at the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, because I want to push back on the thought that
climate change is causing this, because then it gets to the
point of maybe we need to look at efficiency to a greater
level.
So if you look at the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, what you'll actually find is, if you look at what the
United Nations, not often seen as very conservative, the United
Nations--I'm quoting from them--their Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, in regard to hurricanes, came to a
conclusion.
It states: There's no consensus on the role of human
activity on changes of Atlantic hurricane activity. The IPCC
also determined since 1900 there's been no trend in the amount
of landfall events in the United States.
Tornadoes. Scientists have incredibly low confidence in
understanding their capability to attribute climate change to
conductive storms, thunderstorms, which produce tornadoes.
That's the National Academy of Science.
Floods. The IPCC, the United Nations committee tasked with
looking at climate change, estimates the total amount of
flooding around the world. No clear picture on whether flooding
is getting more or less frequent, much less if human activity
is involved.
Regarding inland flooding, they say there is a, ``lack of
evidence and low confidence regarding the sign of a trend in
magnitude or frequency of floods on a global scale.''
Extreme temperatures. Wildfires. I want to go back to what
the President was referencing. Just a few years ago, climate
alarmists claimed that continuing ``business as usual,''
presumingly meaning humans continuing to engage in activities
that emit greenhouse gases, would warm the world 4 to 5 degrees
Celsius.
They are now admitting that new reports support the
prediction that the world's temperature may rise only half as
much, which would mean 2 or 3 degrees over the next century.
In regard to human influence, a large temperature increase
from about 1 degree Fahrenheit occurred from 1880 to 1940, long
before human influence had that type of impact, before
mechanization to a great level.
Some consider this temperature increase to be recovered
from the Little Ice Age, spanning from 1600 to 1850, and the
U.N. panel I keep referencing admitted the plausibility of
this, and if true, this indicates there has been no net warming
at all in the past century due to greenhouse gases.
So I just--we have to look at the science and the
international community who's saying--there's this constant
messaging and theme. The United Nations is saying it's not
there. There's no consensus world climate change in this
regard.
So I just respectfully challenge--and I know you serve this
President--I respectfully challenge, with limited funds, with a
budget request that wants $3.9 billion more for climate
resiliency programs, for us to look at ways to be much more
efficient with our taxpayer monies.
I've got one--if you'll just indulge me--I've got one quick
question for you.
In your opinion, does the removal of AM radio in some
cars--it's kind-of been a topic of discussion in the recent
time frame--weaken your ability, through the national public
warning system, to reach Americans in times of crisis?
Ms. Criswell. It's a very good question, Congressman. AM
radio is one of the most dependable ways that we can reach
individuals across this country to get warnings out there. I do
believe that if we remove AM radio from our vehicles, we're
just taking away a very stable and reliable source for us to
get that information out there.
AM radio is integrated into our emergency alert and warning
system, and I think it would have a significant impact.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you for your time. I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. Mr. Brecheen's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Moylan from Guam for 5 minutes.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to thank also
the Members of the subcommittee for giving me this chance today
to participate.
Administrator Criswell, I represent Guam, and my home was
recently rampaged by Super Typhoon Mawar. FEMA was on the
ground prior to the storm hitting Guam, and thanks to your
agency's efforts, no one died as a result of the devastating
typhoon. So thank you, FEMA, for helping in my community
recovery in this process. Thank you.
Administrator Criswell, we were talking earlier, but what's
the status, again, please remind me, what is the status of
FEMA's Disaster Relief Fund? We're being told that the fund
runs empty as early as next month. Is that the case?
Ms. Criswell. Our current projections on the Disaster
Relief Fund is that we will go into a deficit at some time mid-
to late August.
Mr. Moylan. OK. So if the Disaster Relief Funds were to run
out, what would that mean for those in my community who have
already been approved for certain disaster programs and
families waiting to hear about the status of their applications
for relief?
Ms. Criswell. We have many tools that we can implement to
ensure that we always have enough funding to be able to support
the life-saving and life-sustaining activities.
We are closely monitoring the balance within the Disaster
Relief Fund, and my goal is to make sure that we have enough to
continue to support the life-saving efforts that are on-going
in Guam, as well as support any new incidents that might arise
between now and the end of the fiscal year.
Mr. Moylan. All right. Thank you.
Administrator Criswell, S. 2029 has been introduced in the
Senate by Senators Rubio, Scott, and Wicker, and I'm co-leading
H.R. 4295 with Rep. Moskowitz, which is the House companion,
that aims to replenish the Disaster Relief Funds in the tune of
$11.5 billion.
Can we count on you for your support of these measures?
What efforts have you been pursuing to replenish these funds?
Ms. Criswell. We appreciate the interest of Congress in the
ability to continue to support our efforts to respond and
recover from disasters. Throughout this, the last several
months, we have been having an increased focus on recouping
dollars that have been obligated but have not been needed.
So we've been able to make sure that we are pushing, as far
as we can, the impact that these disasters are having on the
balance within the Disaster Relief Fund.
It's a very dynamic process. Some of the costs that are
coming in from some of the disasters that we had anticipated
aren't as high, which has reduced what we think the total
deficit will be from what we thought it might have been a few
months ago.
It's a very dynamic situation based on the current needs--
needs in Guam, current needs that are going on in Vermont,
other disasters.
So we're working very close with the administration to make
sure that we have enough funding to make sure we can support
those life-saving and life-sustaining operations.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you.
Also Guam's population includes migrants from the Compact
of Free Association, or COFA, nations. Unfortunately, many of
these families were not only adversely impacted by the recent
storm, but many also don't qualify for FEMA's disaster
programs.
Assisting these families will soon be the responsibility of
the local government, and FEMA provides some options to assist
these families, especially those who continue to reside in
shelters 50 days after the storm hit the island.
Ms. Criswell. FEMA is just one part of the team that
supports disaster recovery, and we do know that there are
individuals that are eligible for our programs based on their
citizen status.
But we are committed to bringing in our nonprofit partners
and other agencies to make sure we can work with individuals'
unique needs and help them find the resources and develop a
path to their recovery.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you.
For my final question, I've been hearing from some of my
constituents that there were a large number of denials for
FEMA's claims made by Guam residents.
Can you confirm that this has nothing to do with the
current funding levels of the agency? By that, also, what are
the most common causes of denials?
Ms. Criswell. Yes, it absolutely has nothing to do with the
current funding levels of the agency. The most common cause--
and typically they're not denials. They're more of a request
for additional information. Maybe we need some documentation
about their occupancy, their--the residence where they live,
paperwork that demonstrates and proves that they either own or
live in a place. Oftentimes it's just getting that
documentation.
We're happy to make sure that we can continue to reach out.
Again, all individuals have unique circumstances.
We have started since my time in this position to perform
what we're calling enhanced applicant services, where we do
proactive outreach to those that we have asked for more
information or have been denied, so we can help better
understand what their unique situation is. I'll make sure that
my team is doing that in Guam.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Administrator Criswell.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
I now recognize a friend from Florida, no stranger to
emergency management, Mr. Moskowitz.
Mr. Moskowitz. Mr. Chairman, thank you. Thank you for
allowing me to waive on to the committee.
Madam Administrator, thank you for joining us today.
As the only former emergency management director in
Congress, I can tell you, I thoroughly appreciate not just what
you do, but the 20,000-plus people at FEMA do.
Lord knows, based on all of the events that we have had
over the last several years, COVID or excluding COVID, the
burnout rate at FEMA, because it just--it never stops for these
people. Whether it was people in my EOC or folks that you
deploy around the country, they're away from their families,
serving the country, helping communities respond, and then
helping communities recover.
So one of the things that--and I've talked to previous
administrators about this, and you don't have to comment--is
that I think, Mr. Chairman, it's time actually that the FEMA
administrator go back to being a Cabinet position.
I think that it's time that we put back what was there
before
9/11 and that the FEMA administrator have a direct report to
the President of the United States.
Because, as we've seen, whether it's on the West Coast, on
the East Coast, in the middle of the country, on the Gulf of
Mexico, FEMA is busier and busier than ever, and that's going
to continue.
So one of the things I want to first talk about is how the
DRF is running out of money. So I filed a bill with my
colleagues across the aisle, bicameral, with Senator Scott and
Senator Rubio, to make sure that we can replenish the DRF,
because we shouldn't have to wait for the money to run out in
the middle of hurricane season. We should be proactive.
One of the things I want to talk about where I think FEMA
can improve is in temporary housing. I think--and I'd love to
hear your comments on this, Madam Administrator--I think FEMA
has struggled for a long time how to run a housing program.
So I'd love to hear your thoughts on should we be block
granting that to the States and letting the States run those
housing programs, similar to block grants that happened with
citrus or timber in Florida after Hurricane Michael and
Hurricane Irma.
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, I think that we see across the
country that there are housing challenges in our blue sky days,
and these housing challenges are only exasperated during the
time of a disaster.
I think one of the best things that we can do is work with
our communities where we know that they're going to have these
challenges and help them with pre-disaster housing plans and
how we're going to be able to work together as a Federal,
State, and local government to support these housing
initiatives.
I'm happy to say that we currently have an initiative under
way in partnership with HUD with four States, with New Jersey,
Louisiana, Montana, and Washington, to do just that, to work
with these communities and help them build these plans so we
can implement housing faster.
I don't disagree, there is a lot of improvement that needs
to be made within the way that we can help these communities
get back on their feet and into homes faster.
I'm very hopeful that this program is going to give us some
ways forward and some best practices, as we've seen some of the
creative ways that they have been implementing already to the
different disasters that we've had over the last couple of
years.
Mr. Moskowitz. Yes, and potentially less expensive. I mean,
look, you work with all 50 State emergency management
directors. You know their programs. You know who they are.
There's a question of whether or not FEMA could deploy the
dollars and let the States run some of those programs, because
I think some of the States can do it faster.
I want to talk about COVID really quickly, Mr. Chairman,
because FEMA really came in and saved the day.
As someone who ran a COVID operation, ran it for someone
across the aisle--so we did it on a bipartisan basis, as I was
the emergency manager for Governor DeSantis--I can tell you
that FEMA's efforts in both administrations, in the Trump
administration and in the Biden administration, I mean, without
FEMA's logistical support of the other agencies, I don't know
that the Federal response from a logistical standpoint would've
been as good.
Because, look, they have the experience in fires and
tornados and hurricanes. So when we were opening up testing
sites and vaccine sites, how to run that logistical operation,
how to get those resources deployed, how to do all that.
I just want to thank FEMA. I want to thank all the people
who work at your agency. I always believe people in emergency
management, quite frankly, are taken for granted, because
during blue skies no one cares about us. They don't want to
invest in us. But when gray skies happen and they need us, then
all of a sudden they expect us to perform.
That's another thing that I think that the Federal
Government can do better in. I think it's time that we invest
more dollars into FEMA on a proactive basis to be working on
better mitigation programs. It's shown that mitigation dollars
save us money on the back end.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me to
waive on to the committee, and I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Moskowitz. Thank you for
your service to so many first responders and others.
I now want to recognize another fellow New Yorker who's had
boots on the ground with flooding in his district, Mr. Lawler,
for 5 minutes.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you, Chairman D'Esposito, for allowing me
to waive on to committee, and to address you, Administrator, on
the serious and, unfortunately, timely hearing.
This past weekend the Hudson Valley was hit with horrific
flash flooding, homes were destroyed, residents had to be
evacuated. Unfortunately, one woman lost her life in Orange
County. Roads and bridges and culverts were washed away, brand-
new businesses destroyed.
So I spent Monday, all day, touring the damage with local
and State officials, and it's clear to all of us that the
recovery effort will take a great deal of time and resources.
On first glance, we're talking about tens of millions of
dollars worth of damage across the Hudson Valley, including
Rockland County, Westchester County, Putnam County, Dutchess
County, and Orange County.
Governor Hochul has declared a state of emergency for those
counties, so the entirety of my Congressional district is part
of the state of emergency that was declared. However, she has
not yet asked for a major disaster emergency declaration as far
as I know. Is that correct?
Ms. Criswell. Not to my knowledge yet.
Mr. Lawler. OK. Can you walk me through the process? She
has declared a state of emergency. What are the next steps to
get FEMA's aid?
Ms. Criswell. Great question.
I spoke with Governor Hochul as they were going through the
immediate impacts that they were seeing from this flooding
event. Their first focus is always on, are there any immediate
life-saving needs that we need to move resources in?
Fortunately, even though there is the unfortunate loss of life,
there were no other immediate life-saving needs.
So the next step is to assess the damage. I committed to
her that we would have teams out there quickly to begin
assessing damage. I mean, we also have----
Mr. Lawler. Are the teams out there now?
Ms. Criswell. I'd have to get back to you to see if she has
actually requested them. I don't know.
Mr. Lawler. OK.
Ms. Criswell. But we also have started to use geospatial
imagery. So we're already gathering imagery to expedite our
assessment process. We're finding that we can get a lot of the
data that we need to support a request if the Governor asks for
one through some of this imagery.
So we'll continue to work with her to understand what the
damages are.
Mr. Lawler. What is the dollar threshold that New York
needs to meet to get the major disaster emergency declaration?
Ms. Criswell. There definitely is a dollar threshold. I
don't know it off the top of my head. My team can certainly
get----
Mr. Lawler. Is it roughly about $36 million, to your
knowledge?
Ms. Criswell. I'm just not--I'm just not sure.
Mr. Lawler. OK.
Ms. Criswell. But that's the part that we have to validate.
We have to validate that it exceeds the capacity of the State
and local jurisdictions. We will work with her to get all of
the data that we need to support any requests that she might
have.
Mr. Lawler. OK.
First and foremost, our first responders did a phenomenal
job. Obviously it's tragic that there was the loss of one life.
It could've been a lot worse. I was out during--in district
when the flash floods were coming, and it came on quickly. I
mean, we're talking 9-plus inches in a very short period of
time and a lot of damage of which the following day, after the
rain had stopped, I mean, was still a lot of standing water,
flowing water. So it was a real impact across the district.
I would obviously strongly encourage that if the Governor
has not requested the teams yet that you please follow up with
her expeditiously so that we can get the teams out there to
survey all of the damage. My understanding is roughly about $36
million State-wide. Each county has specific thresholds.
Rockland County is about $1.5 million; Putnam County is about
$400,000; Westchester County is over $4 million.
So certainly from my preliminary view, we have tens of
millions of dollars worth of damage. We had a municipal town
hall got flooded. So there is a lot of damage both to municipal
property as well as personal property, homes, cars, et cetera.
I would just ask that FEMA move as expeditiously as
possible when the Governor does make the request, and that
President Biden approve the major disaster emergency
declaration once the Governor makes that request, and FEMA do
everything they can to help all of our residents recover
quickly.
Unfortunately, in New York, we've been through this many
times. We have a lot of rivers, lakes, ocean that certainly
impacts us any time there's a storm. So anything that you can
do to expedite this process is greatly appreciated.
Ms. Criswell. We'll continue to partner with the Governor's
team.
Mr. Lawler. Thank you. I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. The gentleman's time has
expired.
Ms. Criswell, I just ask that if your office and your team
can keep an open line of communication with Congressman
Lawler----
Ms. Criswell. Yes.
Mr. D'Esposito [continuing]. That would be extremely
helpful.
We're going to begin a second round of questioning, so if
anybody wants to stick around. I recognize myself for 5
minutes.
We've recently been made aware of meetings that have been
taking place at the White House about Federal long-term
recovery efforts. According to what I have heard, there's a
desire by some in the White House to consolidate and coordinate
Federal post-disaster recovery efforts out of the National
Security Council.
Although I am open to hearing more about the plan, I am
skeptical about the approach and have serious concerns about
how this could be effective.
Can you confirm that these discussions have been taking
place?
Ms. Criswell. Mr. Chairman, recovery is a very complicated
process, and we are always looking for ways that we can improve
that process.
We have been in conversations with the National Security
Council about ways that the recovery process can be improved. I
would say that it really relies on two things: the capacity of
State and local jurisdictions, those that have the longest and
hardest recoveries are those that have the least capacity, and
how can we continue to improve that capacity; but also the
ability of our Federal partners to make sure that they have the
ability to stay engaged and support these communities
throughout their process.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. Now, are you in favor of taking
recovery functions from FEMA and giving it to other Federal
agencies?
Ms. Criswell. FEMA's core mission is and will always be
recovery. We were founded on the principles of helping these
communities' recovery. We've evolved into a response agency,
and we're really approaching our ability to do resilience more
than ever.
I think creating any opportunity to improve recovery is
something that we have to better understand what the needs and
the issues are from those that we are helping at the State and
local level.
Mr. D'Esposito. I just think that we need to keep an eye on
creating more Federal layers of bureaucracy. Obviously, many of
the questions that we've had here today falls into that exact
situation, and it seems by adding more layers only makes some
people's jobs more difficult, probably including yours.
Ms. Criswell. There are lots of layers of bureaucracy at
times.
Mr. D'Esposito. So just one last question about this.
Are you aware of any outreach by the White House or the
administration to groups such as the National Emergency
Management Association or the National Governors Association on
this proposal?
Ms. Criswell. I do know that during our last National
Emergency Management Association meeting that was here in the
Washington, DC, area, we had an opportunity to provide--members
of the National Security Council--to provide an update. They
have since followed up with a letter requesting further
coordination. FEMA's happy to continue to support that level of
coordination.
Mr. D'Esposito. Great.
Just moving on to sort-of grant programs for a second,
because I know that's important to many of us sitting up here.
I think one of the focuses that we've had on this
subcommittee is to make sure that FEMA grant funding makes its
way to smaller entities. You take a district like mine, and I
know many of us up here are serviced by either many first
responder agencies, sometimes volunteer. Sometimes those groups
don't have the ability or the resources that they need to even
understand how to apply for such grant funding.
What is FEMA doing currently to help with outreach, to make
sure that we can reach those communities, those institutions
that are smaller?
I mean, we'll take the New York area, for example. When you
hear of FEMA funding you hear--and, listen, I'm a proud alum,
and I've had a great career in the NYPD, but you hear money
going toward there when there are so many smaller police
departments, law enforcement agencies, first responder agencies
that perhaps aren't getting what they need or don't even have--
meet the threshold to get that funding because they haven't
gotten it before.
Ms. Criswell. Yes. Our grant programs have done such an
amazing job of increasing the capacity and the capability and
the level of preparedness across the Nation. But I do still see
challenges in making sure that we're building capacity across
the Nation as our threats are changing post-9/11.
We are really increasing our level of stakeholder
engagement and outreach and streamlining the way that our
communities can apply for this assistance.
I think a great example is our Nonprofit Security Grant
Program that goes to those institutions that face this new
threat of domestic terrorism upon them.
We did an incredible amount of outreach to let them know
that these programs were available. We streamlined the process
for them to apply. We saw significant increase in the number of
applicants.
There's still need out there, and we're reaching those
people that have that need. We're committed to continuing to
get out into these communities so we can understand where the
gaps are and build capacity.
Mr. D'Esposito. Yes. This committee has really tried to
become a partner in that. I know at the beginning of the 118th
Congress we did an on-line meeting with all of our colleagues
to talk about the Nonprofit Security Grant Program, how they
can push it out to their communities.
I know in my district and others up here have utilized on-
line presentations to speak to stakeholders and let them
understand exactly how it is that they could prepare themselves
and apply for these grant programs.
But, like Mr. Strong said, you have a lot of different
people up here from a lot of different backgrounds, whether
it's the military, whether it's the fire service, whether it's
law enforcement, whether it's finance and private work. There
are so many individuals up here that want to reach their
community.
Let us be a partner with you, please. I mean that with
complete sincerity. Let's make sure that those lines of
communications are open, because it's some of those smaller
communities, some of the ones that are in need the most that
really could use the help, and we want to make sure that we
deliver what we have to them.
Ms. Criswell. Mr. Chairman, I really appreciate that
support and that partnership. It takes all of us to make a
difference.
Mr. D'Esposito. Let's do it together.
My time is expired. I now recognize Mr. Carter for 5
minutes.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, thank you.
I would ask unanimous consent to enter into the record
these bipartisan reports on climate change, which speak to the
reality and the risk that exist.
Mr. D'Esposito. Without objection, Mr. Ranking Member.
Thank you.
[The information follows:*]
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The Department of Defense Climate Risk Analysis has been retained
in committee files and is available at https://media.defense.gov/2021/
Oct/21/2002877353/-1/-1/0/DOD-CLIMATE-RISK-ANALYSIS-FINAL.PDF.

[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Mr. Carter. Thank you.
FEMA has increased its staffing since 2017. However, even
with the increase in staffing, FEMA still has some 6,000 people
short of its staffing goal of 17,670, which FEMA hopes to
achieve by 2026.
Can you speak to how FEMA plans to increase hiring and
retention to meet the staffing goals? How are you working with
FEMA to make it more desirable that people will want to come
and work for the agency?
Ms. Criswell. Ranking Member Carter, our staff are amazing.
We are responding to disasters year round in a way that we
haven't before, and we are asking a lot of them.
We are really focused on what we can do, first, to retain
the work force that we have, and that includes rolling out new
ways to help them map a career progression so they can see
where they can go and how they can continue to advance.
Updating our National Response Coordination Center so it
has more utility for them, so they have the resources and the
tools to do their jobs better.
Doing exit interviews, but also stay interviews, to
understand why people are actually staying at the agency, so we
can implement those measures and help make an environment that
people want to stay and continue to work at FEMA.
I think those are some of the key areas that are really
going to make a difference.
As we continue to recruit, we took a hard look recently at
the shape of our organization and where we can perhaps change
our shape so we can get more entry level personnel into our
agency and grow them through the emergency management
enterprise, and I think that will also make a big difference.
But, again, the majority of those vacancies really lie
within our Reservist work force and using the CREW Act as a way
to have a recruitment tool to go out and get specialized
individuals that just want to come out and work for a couple of
weeks or a month.
I think this is going to be a really powerful tool for us
to increase the numbers that we have, specialized in certain
areas that can go into communities and help those communities
as they start their road to recovery.
Mr. Carter. Let me add to the chorus of appreciation from
the Members that's been expressed today for the great work that
the men and women of FEMA do. We know that it's far better than
it used to be. We know that there's a lot of work yet to be
done. But we should always pause and recognize progress.
So I want to publicly thank you and your team for the
yeoman's effort in the incredible task that you have at hand as
we continue to make it better, more accessible, easier for
people to utilize and have boots on the ground in advance of,
during, and after the storm to make sure all those needs are
addressed.
Finally, contracting questions.
FEMA has faced long-standing contracting challenges for
disaster response goods and services. Small and minority-owned
businesses have the capabilities in almost every disaster to
rebuild their communities, but they're consistently left out of
the conversation or considered as a last resort at least.
By the time the tier system works down from the top tier
prime to the lowest tier actual worker, there's very little
opportunity that's left on the bone.
How are you ensuring that minority-owned businesses and
other disadvantaged businesses are getting a fair shake at
being a part of the rebuild with the skill sets that they have
in their own communities?
It's painful to watch trucks drive away with surrounding
license plates knowing that in the very community that's been
impacted resources are there to provide services.
Ms. Criswell. I really appreciate that question, and I
think that there is a lot of area for growth for FEMA in this
respect.
One of the conversations that we've had are about creating
more industry days to help more minority-owned institutions,
minority-owned businesses come in and understand what the
requirements are going to be and how to work through the
process.
You have my commitment to continue to find ways and
strategize with you on ways we can bring those types of
organizations, these small businesses, and really the heartbeat
of America, to help us accomplish our mission.
Mr. Carter. Administrator Criswell, we do in LA-O2, in my
district in Louisiana, we do a series of what we call curbside
pop-ups where we take government to the people throughout my
entire State, throughout my entire district, to demonstrate
that government can come to the people, that government can be
a part of the solution and not sitting in an ivory tower
somewhere far away.
I would love to partner with FEMA to do doing business with
FEMA, for small businesses to figure out how to access
resources, how to become a vendor or supplier of goods or
services to the Agency.
Equally as important is to have job fairs. I know in
Louisiana there are a lot of people that would like a good
Federal job. If there are openings, we'd love to figure out how
we can help you vet to bring more quality people into the work
force.
My time has expired, so I will yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. LaLota from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Chairman.
Administrator, I have served in elected and appointed
positions in village, county, and State government, and I
personally appreciate that FEMA has been an essential partner
in providing assistance to local governments and Long Island
residents in their greatest time of need. I very much
appreciate what FEMA has done and continues to do for affected
communities across the United States.
However, I'm concerned that FEMA might be stretched too
thin, that effectiveness may wane as their mission sets have
significantly increased over the past several decades,
especially during and after the pandemic.
As you mentioned in your testimony, Administrator, the
number of declared disasters which FEMA has supported in the
last 10 years has increased by 191 percent.
Also in your testimony you stressed how FEMA is positioning
itself as a resilience agency, which I believe will be
extremely valuable and important in responding to and preparing
for disasters in the future.
Administrator, I know you mentioned in your testimony a few
programs which bridge the gap between responding to disasters
and creating resilient communities, and I'd like you to go into
greater detail on those points.
How does FEMA plan on balancing becoming a ``resilience
agency'' while also responding to a number of--record number of
disasters over the past decades? To that point, are there
better ways which States and local governments can work with
FEMA to maximize those resilience objectives?
Ms. Criswell. That's a really great question, and I
appreciate the opportunity to talk about what we're doing
there.
We are responding to more events, which means the
recoveries themselves also are more complex. We have to get
ahead of that curve. We have to start working with communities
before disasters and blue sky days to better understand what we
can do to reduce the impact but also build their readiness and
their resilience.
Through our resilience part of our organization we're
taking a place-based approach, where we're bringing in all of
the services that FEMA has and bringing it to communities that
we have identified through our own data that have the greatest
needs, have the greatest capability gaps, to help them start to
build those resilient programs and plans.
One example is through our BRIC Program where I directed
the team to do direct technical assistance. In the first year,
we only had 8 communities apply. We're going to have over 46
this year. It's through the outreach that we have done to
communities that are the most underresourced but the most
vulnerable to help them develop plans and apply for this pre-
disaster mitigation funding to help them build more resilience.
We're also in the process of implementing a program called
Community Disaster Resilience Zones--this is directed by
Congress--to also give us the opportunity to increase the
Federal cost share for these communities, but we think it's
going to be much bigger than that. It's going to give us the
opportunity to partner with all of our other Federal agencies
to really focus a whole-of-government approach into some of
these most vulnerable communities.
Mr. LaLota. Great. Thanks. Thanks for being with us here
today. But more importantly, thank you for your work, before,
during, and after our communities' most trying times.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize Mr. Goldman from New York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you again, Mr. Chairman.
I want to briefly address some of the comments that you did
not have an opportunity to respond to from my distinguished
colleague from Oklahoma about the impact of climate change on
natural disasters around the country and around the world.
You have stated in your opening remarks that in 2010 there
were 108 declared disasters for FEMA to support, and just 10
years later that number had tripled to 315, including response
to the COVID pandemic.
I just want to give you an opportunity to respond to some
of the, I think, distorted statements that my colleague made
about climate change and the impact it's had on FEMA and
natural disasters.
Ms. Criswell. Congressman, what I can say is what I've seen
over the 2 and a little bit, few months, years that I've been
in this role. We are responding to more events. We're working
with our communities that are having more impacts and longer
recoveries, more complex recoveries, from the nature of these
events.
We're seeing the dynamics of them change. Hurricanes are
not just wind events like they used to be; they're significant
water events with excessive rainfall and storm surge that's
causing destruction that we didn't see from a hurricane that
might have hit the same area a decade previously.
We're seeing atmospherics rivers where you then merge an
atmospheric river with decades of drought and then wildfires
that create damages that any of those incidents on their own
wouldn't have created.
So we're seeing this convergence of different climate
events come together and cause damage that we would have never
anticipated.
We have to continue to work and model what we think the
potential impacts are of the convergence of all of these
different events--what is it going to be in 10 years?--so we
can put the right measures in place to help communities
understand their risk, but more importantly, begin to reduce
the impacts of that risk through mitigation programs.
Mr. Goldman. Well, and I would note that over the past
couple weeks we've had several of the hottest days on record
for Earth. So the notion that our climate is not burning up
seems very far fetched given the actual data.
As my colleague Mr. Lawler pointed out, with tremendous
flash flooding in the Hudson Valley, from 10 inches of rain in
a very short amount of time to wildfires in Canada, whose
polluted air drifted down all the way to Washington, DC, and
made New York City with the worst air quality in the world that
we had never experienced before.
So it is quite clear when you look on the ground that this
is an issue, and I appreciate that you are addressing it.
I want to turn back to New York City and the migrant crisis
that we were talking about before.
The Stafford Act defines an emergency as any occasion or
instance for which Federal assistance is needed to supplement
State and local efforts to save lives and to protect property
and public health and safety.
It is my view, as a former lawyer, I guess current lawyer,
that the migrant crisis is a threat to public health and safety
in New York City and that an emergency declaration--that it
would qualify for an emergency declaration under the Stafford
Act, which is different than the major disaster declaration
that Mr. Lawler was referring to.
I would like to understand what benefits FEMA could provide
to New York City if an emergency declaration is declared by the
administration.
Ms. Criswell. The way the Stafford Act is implemented and
the emergency declarations, they are designed to support that
imminent threat to life-safety and life-sustaining operations.
When I look at Vermont, Vermont received an emergency
declaration because they were in active life-saving mode. It
allows us to move resources in quickly to make sure that there
is no loss of life.
As we look at the support that New York continues to
provide to support migrants, it does not meet that immediate
and imminent threat to save lives. That is why the Shelter and
Services Program is suited specifically to support those on-
going needs that these communities have to provide that on-
going shelter.
Mr. Goldman. I would point out that there are instances in
the past where emergency declarations have been declared when
there is not the type of natural disaster that is occurring in
Vermont, and I would urge you and the Department to review
those other precedents that I believe would apply.
I guess the last question--if you'll indulge me, Mr.
Chairman--is whether you have had any discussions with the
White House or further up in the Department about New York and
the possibility of approving an emergency declaration.
Ms. Criswell. We have not had a request for an emergency
declaration. I have spoken with Mayor Adams about what his
needs are, and our conversations with the Department and the
Secretary have strictly focused around the program that we do
implement, which is the Shelter and Services Program.
Mr. Goldman. Well, once again, I'd urge you to continue to
have those conversations. I do think it can apply, and I think
that the crisis is very real, and it is very important to get
the administration's support beyond the Shelter and Services
Program on a going-forward basis.
I thank you for your indulgence, Mr. Chairman, and I yield
back.
Mr. D'Esposito. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Carter. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to also ask unanimous
consent to enter into the record this letter from the American
Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, relative to the
Government employees and work shortage.
Mr. D'Esposito. Without objection, it will be entered into
the record.
[The information follows:]
Letter Submitted For the Record by Honorable Troy A. Carter
July 13, 2023.
The Honorable Anthony D'Esposito,
Chairman, House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Emergency Management
and Technology, House of Representatives, Washington, DC 20515.
The Honorable Troy Carter,
Ranking Member, House Homeland Security Subcommittee on Emergency
Management and Technology, House of Representatives,
Washington, DC 20515.
Dear Subcommittee Chairman D'Esposito, Ranking Member Carter and
Members of the Subcommittee: On behalf of the American Federation of
Government Employees, which represents over 750,000 Federal and D.C.
government employees including employees at the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, I write to provide AFGE's perspectives for the
``Future of FEMA'' hearing in the House Homeland Security Subcommittee
on Emergency Management and Technology. To reinforce strong recruitment
and retention of FEMA employees and ensure the agency can succeed at
its mission, FEMA must prioritize hiring of full-time employees under
Title 5 authority. The emergency workforce at FEMA should primarily be
hired and work under Title 5 authorities so that the public receives
well-trained, qualified, and accountable emergency workers.
AFGE National Local 4060 continues to work in collaboration with
Administrator Criswell on a variety of issues. The FEMA workforce
serves and protects the American public during national disasters,
including floods, tornadoes, hurricanes and fires. With the consistent
nature of national disasters, FEMA employees work significantly longer
hours and endure taxing workplace conditions. The FEMA workforce is too
small and therefore the employees who work at FEMA are strained.
Recruitment and retention could be improved if FEMA prioritized hiring
more full-time equivalent employees to support the current workforce
for what has become a non-stop disaster season. An increase in FEMA's
permanent workforce under Title 5 would improve working conditions for
all employees. It is essential for Congress to allocate resources for
more Full-time Equivalent (FTE) positions at FEMA to ensure the agency
can provide the best possible service to the American public.
FEMA hires some employees under Title 5 authority and others as
temporary or term employees. Title 5 authority employees are hired
after a rigorous and competitive merit-based examination process. FEMA
employees who are covered under Title 5 are afforded full civil service
protections. One of the protections includes being represented by a
union and the ability to raise grievances and concerns about working
conditions. Employees hired under Title 5 authority can appeal adverse
actions either through grievance and arbitration procedures in their
collective bargaining agreements (where applicable) or through access
to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB). The union can support
them in instances of mistreatment in the workplace to ensure these
employees can swiftly return to the important work of serving the
American public and making victims of national disasters whole again.
Stafford Act employees, on the other hand, are hired for temporary
or term appointments and make up a significant portion of the FEMA
workforce. They are employed ``at will'' which means they risk being
terminated at any time for any reason. They have no due process
protections if they experience mistreatment at work. In a 2017 study by
GAO Stafford Act employees were described as ``having poorly defined or
nonexistent disciplinary processes and no rights of appeal for adverse
actions.'' ``At will'' workers lack the protection of a union contract
and the right to appeal adverse actions such suspensions and
terminations. Stafford Act employees who are harassed, discriminated
against, or mistreated by a manager, are not able to seek help from the
union and are often afraid to report incidents of harassment and
discrimination.
AFGE recommends that Congress authorize FEMA to hire more full-time
employees under Title 5 authority to ensure more FEMA employees are
properly supported by their union, well-trained, and can adequately
protect the public from national disasters. For questions or more
information please contact Fiona Kohrman at
[emailprotected]
.
Sincerely,
Julie N. Tippens,
Legislative Director.

Mr. D'Esposito. I want to thank you for being here this
morning. I mean what I said sincerely. You have a great group.
We may disagree on many policies, but I think we all agree that
the focus of emergency management is to be better off today
than you were the last time that emergency took place. I will
wholeheartedly agree that, regardless of the political
affiliation of anyone up here, we all believe in that.
So please use our subcommittee as a resource. Let us help
you. Let us be a vehicle to get your information out and to
really help those that are in need. Whether they're in the big
cities or the smallest of communities, we all represent
individuals that need help, want help, and are looking for
help. So I hope that we can work together in the future.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for the witness, and we would ask the witness to
respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record will
remain held open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:37 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
