- SURVEYING CIRCIA: SECTOR PERSPECTIVES ON THE NOTICE OF PROPOSED RULEMAKING

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

SURVEYING CIRCIA: SECTOR PERSPECTIVES ON THE NOTICE OF PROPOSED
RULEMAKING

=======================================================================

HEARING

before the

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PROTECTION

of the

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

MAY 1, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-60

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

_______

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-946 PDF           WASHINGTON : 2025

__________

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Eric Swalwell, California
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           J. Luis Correa, California
August Pfluger, Texas                Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Nick LaLota, New York                Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Robert Garcia, California
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk
------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON CYBERSECURITY AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION

Andrew R. Garbarino, New York, Chairman
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California, Ranking
Mike Ezell, Mississippi                  Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Menendez,  New Jersey
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Cara Mumford, Subcommittee Staff Director
Moira Bergin, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director
C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Andrew R. Garbarino, a Representative in Congress
From the State of New York, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     2
The Honorable Eric Swalwell, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection::
Oral Statement.................................................     3
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     6
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Mr. Scott Aaronson, Senior Vice President, Security and
Preparedness, Edison Electric Institute:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11
Ms. Heather Hogsett, Senior Vice President, Technology and Risk
Strategy for Bits, Bank Policy Institute:
Oral Statement.................................................    16
Prepared Statement.............................................    17
Mr. Robert Mayer, Senior Vice President, Cybersecurity and
Innovation, USTelecom, The Broadband Association:
Oral Statement.................................................    23
Prepared Statement.............................................    25
Ms. Amit Elazari, Co-Founder and CEO, OpenPolicy Group:
Oral Statement.................................................    26
Prepared Statement.............................................    28

SURVEYING CIRCIA: SECTOR PERSPECTIVES ON THE NOTICE OF PROPOSED
RULEMAKING

----------

Wednesday, May 1, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Protection,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 2:05 p.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office building, Hon. Andrew R.
Garbarino (Chairman of the subcommittee) presiding.
Present: Representatives Garbarino, Ezell, Lee, Green (ex
officio), Swalwell, Menendez, and Clarke.
Mr. Garbarino. The Committee on Homeland Security's
Subcommittee on Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Protection
will come to order.
The purpose of this hearing is to receive testimony from a
panel of experts and industry leaders who provide their
perspectives on CISA's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking relating
to the implementation of the Cyber Incident Reporting for
Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022, commonly referred to as
CIRCIA.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
About 2 years ago, Congress woke up to gaps in cyber
incident reporting. Public and private-sector entities have
long complied with a patchwork of disparate niche cyber
incident reporting requirements managed by an array of
regulators.
As stated in the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking that we will
discuss today, there are currently more than 3 dozen different
Federal cyber incident reporting requirements in effect, 3
dozen.
In an age of increasingly sophisticated cyber attacks on
our critical infrastructure, our fragmented approach to
incident reporting has proven anything but nimble and useful.
It is cumbersome and oftentimes redundant, creating a
compliance burden on private-sector partners who could be
spending their resources on security rather than fulfilling
multiple reporting requirements. A confusing and reactive,
rather than proactive, reporting regime increases the risk of
the security of our homeland.
After significant national attacks on Colonial Pipeline and
solar winds, Congress recognized an urgent need for better and
more coordinated cyber incident reporting for our critical
infrastructure. This included a need to develop a process for
reporting ransom payments which didn't exist, despite the rise
impact of ransomware attacks.
As a result, in March 2022, Congress passed the bipartisan
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act, or
CIRCIA. This landmark legislation tasked the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency to develop regulations to set
the standard for cyber incident reporting across critical
infrastructure sectors.
As the Nation's risk manager, CISA must be empowered to
identify cross-sector points of vulnerability and share
information to mitigate such risks. As the lifeline of our
national security, economic security, and public health and
safety, critical infrastructure entities must be supported as
they adapt to a world where cyber attacks are not an ``if'' but
a ``when.''
Since CIRCIA was signed into law, the American people have
continued to feel the impacts of numerous costly intrusions
into critical infrastructure sectors by cyber threat actors
from the water sector to the health care sector. This cannot
continue.
It is imperative that we get the CIRCIA rule right. CIRCIA
should serve as the standard, not another regulation standing
in the way of effective cyber defense. Because it is so
important we get this right, I'm encouraged to hear that CISA
is granting a 30-day extension for submitting comments.
Members of this subcommittee have eagerly awaited the draft
rule that we are going to discuss in depth, especially
considering conflicting rules such as the SEC's public cyber
disclosure rule. Therefore, we are devoting this hearing to
CIRCIA because we know this is an opportunity, one to ensure
regulatory effectiveness and harmonization.
I want to thank our witnesses, Scott Aaronson from Edison
Electric Institute, Heather Hogsett from Bank Policy Institute,
Robert Mayer from the USTelecom, and Amit Elazari from
OpenPolicy Group for being here today to help us understand how
specific sectors will be impacted.
We cannot effectively implement CIRCIA without private-
sector perspective. So thank you for your partnership.
Implementation of CIRCIA's more important than ever for our
cyber preparedness. The final CIRCIA rule, expected late next
year, will mark a pivotal turning point for America's ability
to mitigate cyber risks and protect our national security,
economy, and way of life.
I look forward to our witness' testimony and discussing how
the proposed CIRCIA rule can ensure a more capable and ready
national cyber defense.
[The statement of Chairman Garbarino follows:]
Statement of Chairman Andrew R. Garbarino
May 1, 2024
About 2 years ago, Congress woke up to the gaps in cyber incident
reporting. Public and private-sector entities have long complied with a
patchwork of disparate, niche cyber incident reporting requirements
managed by an array of regulators. As stated in the Notice of Proposed
Rulemaking that we will discuss today, there are currently more than 3
dozen different Federal cyber incident reporting requirements in
effect.
In an age of increasingly sophisticated cyber attacks on our
critical infrastructure, our fragmented approach to incident reporting
has proven anything but nimble and useful. It is cumbersome and
oftentimes redundant, creating a compliance burden on private-sector
partners who could be spending their resources on security rather than
fulfilling multiple reporting requirements. A confusing and reactive,
rather than proactive, reporting regime increases the risks to the
security of our homeland.
After significant national attacks on Colonial Pipeline and
SolarWinds, Congress recognized an urgent need for better and more
coordinated cyber incident reporting for our critical infrastructure.
This included a need to develop a process for reporting ransom
payments, which didn't exist despite the rise and impact ransomware
attacks.
As a result, in March 2022, Congress passed the bipartisan Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act, or CIRCIA. This
landmark legislation tasked the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, or CISA, to develop regulations to set the standard
for cyber incident reporting across critical infrastructure sectors. As
the Nation's risk manager, CISA must be empowered to identify cross-
sector points of vulnerability and share information to mitigate such
risks. As the lifeline of our national security, economic security, and
public health and safety, critical infrastructure entities must be
supported as they adapt to a world where cyber attacks are not an
``if'' but a ``when.''
Since CIRCIA was signed into law, the American people have
continued to feel the impacts of numerous costly intrusions into
critical infrastructure sectors by cyber threat actors, from the water
sector to the health care sector. This cannot continue.
It is imperative that we get the CIRCIA rule right. CIRCIA should
serve as the standard, not another regulation standing in the way of
effective cyber defense. Because it is so important we get this right,
I'm encouraged to hear that CISA is granting a 30-day extension for
submitting comments.
Members of this subcommittee have eagerly awaited the draft rule
that we are going to discuss in depth, especially considering
conflicting rules, such as the SEC's public cyber disclosure rule.
Therefore, we are devoting this hearing to CIRCIA because we know this
is an opportunity: one to ensure regulatory effectiveness and
harmonization.
I want to thank our witnesses--Scott Aaronson from Edison Electric
Institute, Heather Hogsett from the Bank Policy Institute, Robert Mayer
from USTelecom, and Amit Elazari from OpenPolicy Group--for being here
today to help us understand how specific sectors will be impacted. We
cannot effectively implement CIRCIA without the private-sector
perspective, so thank you for your partnership.
Implementation of CIRCIA is more important than ever for our cyber
preparedness. The final CIRCIA rule, expected late next year, will mark
a pivotal turning point for America's ability to mitigate cyber risks
and protect our national security, economy, and way of life.
I look forward to our witnesses' testimony and discussing how the
proposed CIRCIA rule can ensure a more capable and ready national cyber
defense.

Mr. Garbarino. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from California, Mr. Swalwell, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Swalwell. I thank the Chairman for giving our
subcommittee an opportunity to hear from the private sector on
CISA's proposed cyber incident reporting rule which is the
agency's, frankly, most significant undertaking since it was
established.
I told the witnesses, before we began, you'll see a lot of
fireworks in this room. You'll see both sides battle it out.
But on this issue of cybersecurity, we are aligned. There's
really no daylight between us on making sure that we give
America's businesses and Government agencies the resources they
need to defend against attacks from abroad and from within.
Before I begin, Chairman, if it's OK, I would like to just
take a moment to acknowledge the passing of Congressman Donald
Payne, Jr. Congressman Payne had an important impact on CISA,
the agency we oversee. Because of his advocacy, CISA has a
standing school security mission within the Infrastructure
Security Division which works to make schools K-12 and
universities safer and more secure.
Personally, Congressman Payne and I were both elected in
the class of 2012. I sat next to him on this committee for all
of my going-on-12 years in Congress. He will be greatly missed
by Members of this committee, as we send out our most sincere
condolences to his family and constituents.
Turning to CIRCIA, CIRCIA was born out of crisis. A series
of high-profile cyber incidents occurred in 2020 and 2021 like
solar wind supply chain attack, the Kaseya compromise, and the
Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack. They revealed unacceptable
blind spots in the Federal Government's awareness of malicious
cyber activity on U.S. networks.
The Federal Government was forced to rely on voluntary
cyber incident reporting. So we will never know the full extent
of who was impacted by the Solar Winds attack. Reporting from
the Colonial Pipeline was initially delayed.
Incomplete information frustrates our ability to understand
the motives and goals of our adversaries and delays information
sharing, limiting our ability to prevent additional attacks.
Congress passed CIRCIA so CISA and its partners could
detect and quickly disrupt malicious actors as soon as possible
and identified the evolving tactics of our adversaries so that
we could strategically reduce risk.
CIRCIA's success rests on getting this final rule right. I
appreciate CISA's work to engage with the private sector early
in the rulemaking process and to extend the comment period.
Moving forward, it's imperative that CISA strongly consider
and incorporate feedback from the private sector, particularly
as it refines key definitions including covered entity and
covered cyber incident and the required components of cyber
incident reports.
I also urge CISA to apply lessons learned from programs
like Automated Indicator Sharing, also known as AIS. When
Congress authorized AIS nearly a decade ago, we hoped it would
achieve some of the same goals we have for CIRCIA today. But
AIS never achieved its potential in part because it focused too
often on quantity over quality.
New technology may enable CISA to draw insights from a
higher volume of CIRCIA reports more quickly, particularly the
advancements in AI. But I question whether it will be able to
adequately overcome complications from the kind of
overreporting that is likely to occur, given the breadth of
current definitions.
Implementation of CIRCIA will be expensive for both the
Government and private sector, and we must ensure that it
yields real value. To just specify more plainly and frankly, we
have to make sure that we don't wrap up nonrelevant small and
medium-sized businesses in recording requirements that can both
be cumbersome and expensive to the businesses and provide
worthless data to CISA.
I understand, again, that CISA plans to grant an extension.
We're pleased that they're doing so. I also share Chairman
Garbarino's frustration with duplicative cyber incident
reporting requirements, particularly with the SEC's unworkable
rule and unrealistic rule.
Now that NPRM is public, I hope the Cyber Incident
Reporting Council will redouble its efforts to promote
harmonization and that my colleagues in Congress will refrain
from passing additional redundant reporting requirements.
Again, I commend my colleagues, especially Ms. Clarke on
this committee, and the witnesses here today for the work
they're putting in to getting CIRCIA across the finish line.
CIRCIA showed that improving the Nation's cybersecurity posture
is a bipartisan goal and one that the private sector was
willing to work with us to accomplish.
I hope we can continue to work together with the private
sector and on this committee to do big things like passing
important legislation that will improve how the Federal
Government collaborates with the private sectors by authorizing
the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, JCDC.
I'd also like to congratulate CISA on the publication of
the NPRM. It's an important milestone and an enormous
undertaking, and I look forward to working with CISA to clarify
reporting requirements and to build out the analytical capacity
necessary to derive actionable insights from CIRCIA reporting.
Again before I close, I'd like to ask unanimous consent
that the Congresswoman from New York, Yvette Clarke, be
permitted to participate in today's hearing.
Mr. Garbarino. Agreed.
Mr. Swalwell. Yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Swalwell follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Eric Swalwell
May 1, 2024
I would like to thank the Chairman for giving the subcommittee the
opportunity to hear from the private sector on CISA's proposed cyber
incident reporting rule--the agency's most significant undertaking
since it was established. But before I begin, I would like to take a
moment to acknowledge the passing of Congressman Donald Payne, Jr.
Although Congressman Payne did not sit on this subcommittee, he had
an important impact on CISA, the agency we oversee. Because of
Congressman Payne's advocacy, CISA has a standing school security
mission within the Infrastructure Security Division, which works to
make K-12 schools and universities safer and more secure. He will be
greatly missed by Members of this committee, and we send our most
sincere condolences to his family and constituents.
Turning to the subject of today's hearing: Implementation of the
Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA).
CIRCIA was borne out of crisis. A series of high-profile cyber
incidents in 2020 and 2021--like the SolarWinds supply chain attack,
the Kaseya compromise, and the Colonial Pipeline ransomware attack--
revealed unacceptable blind spots in the Federal Government's awareness
of malicious cyber activity on U.S. networks. The Federal Government
was forced to rely on voluntary cyber incident reporting, so we never
knew the full extent of who was impacted by the SolarWinds attack, and
reporting from Colonial Pipeline was initially delayed. Incomplete
information frustrates our ability to understand the motives and goals
of our adversaries and delays information sharing--limiting our ability
to prevent additional attacks.
Congress passed CIRCIA so CISA and its partners could detect and
disrupt malicious cyber campaigns sooner and identify the evolving
tactics of our adversaries to more strategically reduce risk. CIRCIA's
success rests on getting the final rule right. I appreciate CISA's work
to engage with the private sector early in the rulemaking process
through the Request for Information and for the thorough NPRM published
earlier this month.
Moving forward, it is imperative that CISA strongly consider and
incorporate feedback from the private sector, particularly as it
refines key definitions--including ``covered entity'' and ``covered
cyber incident''--and the required components of cyber incident
reports. I also urge CISA to apply lessons learned from programs like
Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS).
When Congress authorized AIS nearly a decade ago, we hoped it would
achieve some of the same goals we have for CIRCIA today. But AIS never
achieved its potential, in part, because it focused on quantity over
quality and produced too many reports that lacked value. New technology
may enable CISA to draw insights from a higher volume of CIRCIA reports
more quickly, but I question whether it will be able to adequately
overcome complications from the kind of overreporting that is likely to
occur given the breadth of current definitions.
Implementation of CIRCIA will be expensive for both the Government
and private sector, and we must ensure that it yields real security
value. Toward that end, I understand many stakeholders, including some
of our witnesses, have requested CISA extend the public comment period
by 30 days. I understand that CISA plans to grant that extension and am
pleased they are doing so. I also share Chairman Garbarino's
frustration with duplicative cyber incident reporting requirements--
particularly the SEC rule.
Now that the NPRM is public, I hope the Cyber Incident Reporting
Council will redouble its efforts to promote harmonization and that my
colleagues in Congress will refrain from passing additional redundant
reporting requirements.
I commend my colleagues, especially Ms. Clarke, and the witnesses
here today for the work they put into getting CIRCIA across the finish
line. CIRCIA showed that improving the Nation's cybersecurity posture
is a bipartisan goal, and one that the private sector was willing to
work with us to accomplish.
Moving forward, I hope we can continue to work together to do big
things, like passing important legislation that will improve how the
Federal Government collaborates with its private-sectors partners by
authorizing the Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative, JCDC.
I would also like to congratulate CISA on the publication of the
NPRM--it is an important milestone in an enormous undertaking, and I
look forward to working with CISA to clarify reporting requirements and
to build out the analytical capacity necessary to derive actionable
insights from CIRCIA reporting.

Mr. Garbarino. I now--thank you, Ranking Member Swalwell.
I now recognize the Chairman of the full Committee on
Homeland Security, Chairman Green, for an opening statement.
Mr. Green. Well, thank you to our witnesses for being here
today and to give us your perspective and your expertise. It's
deeply appreciated.
It's--you know, as we pass legislation, getting feedback on
that legislation is always helpful and in future endeavors to
pass laws that work, particularly as it relates to cyber and
fighting against nation-states and criminals who use the cyber
space for their advantages. So thank you for coming here and
providing your thoughts.
I also want to thank Chairman Garbarino and the Ranking
Member, Mr. Swalwell, for their bipartisanship. They do a great
job in working together to advance not only legislation but
oversight that shines light on some challenges that we have. I
appreciate both of them and the way they work together.
I, too, want to say something about the tragic passing of
Congressman Payne. You know, up here when you're--as Ranking
Member Swalwell said, it sometimes gets contentious between the
two sides as we vie for ideologies, quite frankly, that have
less and less overlap over the years. But there are a few
things that really overlap, cyber being one of them.
But in the case of Mr. Payne, you know, despite our
differences, he was a friend. He longed for the unity and
opportunity for when we can get together and work together on
issues. I worked very closely with him on the Colorectal Cancer
Caucus because he lost his father and I had, myself, colon
cancer 8 years ago. So we worked very closely together on that.
To his family, I know you're going to miss him. We miss
him. Our deepest condolences go out to you at this time.
You know, when we passed the act, our goal was to ensure
shared visibility and, of course, substantial--all of the
substantial incidents impacting our homeland's critical
infrastructure. With nation-state actors such as China and
Russia continuing to target us, we knew that we needed a better
understanding and to better understand and defend against
increasingly fraught cyber threats. However, we knew we needed
to do this without imposing undue regulatory burden on our
companies that are already stretched very thin.
Duplicative efforts tend to wind up costing businesses
money that they could actually use on real cybersecurity, and
so getting to the bottom of those is one of our priorities.
It's imperative that we strike the balance, of course, and
ensure that the rule is harmonized with regulations.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today. Again,
I want to thank you for being here and for being in this fight
with us and for the future of the country.
Thank you.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, MD
May 1, 2024
When we passed CIRCIA, our goal was to ensure shared visibility of
substantial cyber incidents impacting our homeland's critical
infrastructure.
With nation-state actors such as China and Russia continuing to
target us, we knew that we needed to better understand and defend
against increasingly fraught cyber threats. However, we knew we needed
to do this without imposing undue regulatory burden on our companies
that are already stretched very thin. Duplicative efforts tend to wind
up costing businesses money that they could actually use on real
cybersecurity, and so getting to the bottom of those is one of our
priorities.
It is imperative that we strike this balance and ensure the rule is
harmonized with regulations.
I look forward to hearing from our witnesses today.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Chairman Green.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted to the record.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
May 1, 2024
Four years ago, this committee began work on developing a mandatory
cyber incident reporting framework to address the Federal Government's
lack of visibility into the cyber incidents that impact all critical
infrastructure sectors.
Last Congress, then-Subcommittee Chairwoman Clarke conducted an
extensive process to introduce CIRCIA, consider and address stakeholder
feedback, and ultimately negotiate the final enacted bill. Thanks to
Congresswoman Clarke's leadership, a policy concept that cybersecurity
experts had been suggesting for years finally became a reality.
In the 2 years since enactment, CISA has undertaken the significant
work necessary to turn statutory text into a proposed rule. For an
agency that generally relies on voluntary partnerships rather than
regulation, that is no easy task, and I acknowledge the hard work by
CISA staff to get this done.
In particular, I appreciate CISA's efforts to engage with
stakeholders early and to draft a detailed rule that considers the
input CISA received. This proposed rule, however, is only one step in
the implementation process. Now, CISA must consider additional
stakeholder feedback as it works to develop a Final Rule. I encourage
CISA to ensure stakeholders have sufficient time to develop thoughtful
comments on the many complicated issues that will need to be resolved.
Getting this right will be essential to achieving the benefits Congress
sought when enacting this legislation.
The goal of CIRCIA is to increase the Federal Government's
visibility into the cybersecurity incidents impacting critical
infrastructure, helping CISA improve its analysis of the cyber threats
facing our Nation and ultimately develop better tools, products, and
services to help strengthen our national cyber defenses. As we evaluate
this proposed rule, we must consider how it helps further these goals
while minimizing unnecessary burdens on the victims of cyber attacks.
One key aspect of reducing the burden on critical infrastructure will
not just be determined by the final CIRCIA Rule, but on the willingness
of other Federal agencies to work with CISA to improve the
harmonization of cyber incident reporting mandates.
As more Federal regulators have sought cyber incident information,
many entities are currently subject to duplicative and inconsistent
requirements, and it was this committee's expectation in passing CIRCIA
that creating a mandatory reporting requirement across critical
infrastructure would help relieve that regulatory burden, so entities
can focus on preventing and responding to cyber intrusions.
I appreciate the work of the Cyber Incident Reporting Council to
issue its initial report last year, which helped inform this proposed
rule, and encourage the Council and all Federal agencies with current
or proposed cyber incident reporting mandates to increase their
engagement with CISA on regulatory harmonization now that the proposed
rule has been released.
We also must ensure that CISA has the resources and tools necessary
to turn incident reports into meaningful information that can be used
to drive down cyber risk. I look forward to continuing to oversee
CISA's plans for how to operationalize the large amounts of data the
agency will receive and to work with our colleagues to provide CISA the
necessary funding. CIRCIA is a demonstration of how this committee can
enact significant national security legislation when we work together
in a bipartisan way and engage in the hard work of considering
stakeholder feedback and negotiating with our colleagues.
I hope this hearing today reminds us all of how important our work
is and how productive we can be when we prioritize finding common
ground. Our witnesses here today represent a range of critical
infrastructure sectors and have worked with the committee on cyber
incident reporting for years. Their feedback will be valuable as the
committee continues its CIRCIA oversight, and I thank them for being
here today.
Before I close, I would also like to take a moment to acknowledge
the loss of a Member of the full committee, Congressman Donald Payne
Jr., who got things done by working across the aisle and with
stakeholders. I send the committee's condolences to his wife, Bea, and
their triplets.

Mr. Garbarino. I'm pleased to have a distinguished panel of
witnesses before us today on this very important topic.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right
hand.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
Thank you. Please be seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Mr. Scott Aronson currently serves as the senior vice
president for security and preparedness for the Edison Electric
Institute. In this role he focuses on industry security and
resilience initiatives, establishing collaborative partnerships
between Government and electric companies and across critical
infrastructure structure sectors that enhance security for the
energy sector.
In addition to his role at EEI, Scott also serves as the
secretary for the Electricity Subsector Coordinating Council,
ESCC.
They also stole Emily from me on this committee, but that's
OK. I will forgive you.
Ms. Heather Hogsett is the--yes--Ms. Heather Hogsett is the
senior vice president for technology and risk strategy for B-I-
T-S, BITS, the technology policy division of the Bank Policy
Institute.
In this position, she develops and leads initiatives on
emerging technology, security, and resilience matters facing
the Nation's largest financial firms. Ms. Hogsett also chairs
the Policy Committee of Financial Services Sector for
Coordinating Council and is a board member of the FTD--FTLD
Registry Services.
She's been a witness before and always gives me some great
talking points. So I'm happy to have her back.
Mr. Robert Mayer is the senior vice president of
cybersecurity with USTelecom Association. He's responsible for
leading cyber and national security policy and strategic
initiatives.
In addition to his role, he serves as chairman of the
Communications Sector Coordinating Council which represents the
broadcast, cable, satellite, wireless, and wireline industries
in connection with DHS and public-private partnership
activities across the U.S. Government. He also serves as co-
chair to the Council to Secure the Digital Economy.
Ms. Amit Elazari is cofounder and CEO of OpenPolicy, the
world's first policy intelligence and engagement technology
platform providing government affairs value to entities of all
sizes. She also teaches at the University of California,
Berkeley School of Information, mass--Master in Information and
Cybersecurity and serves as an advisor to the U.C. Berkeley
Center of Long-Term Cybersecurity.
Prior to OpenPolicy, she served as head of cybersecurity
policy for Intel Corp. where she was responsible for shaping
and executing Intel's global security policy engagement across
all of Intel's products and technologies.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today. I now
recognize Mr. Aaronson for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF SCOTT I. AARONSON, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, SECURITY
AND PREPAREDNESS, EDISON ELECTRIC INSTITUTE

Mr. Aaronson. Thank you, Chairman Garbarino.
Before I get started, thank you for sharing Emily with us.
Still fighting the good fight, just from a different address.
As Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, Members of
the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify
today on cyber incident reporting requirements, specifically in
the context of CISA's proposed rule pursuant to the Cyber
Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022. I'm
just going say CIRCIA.
My name is Scott Aaronson. I am senior vice president for
security and preparedness at the Edison Electric Institute. EEI
is the trade association that represents all of the Nation's
investor-owned electric companies. These companies provide
electricity to nearly 250 million Americans and operate in all
50 States and the District of Columbia.
EEI and its members appreciate Congress passing CIRCIA.
Critical infrastructure security is a shared responsibility,
and cyber incident report can go help Government and industry
identify trends across sectors, leading to more effective
policy making, information sharing, resource allocation, and
mitigation strategies.
That said, details matter when it comes to how CIRCIA or
any mandatory cyber incident reporting regime is implemented.
Both my written testimony and comments today focus on three
related themes that will help ensure cyber reporting
requirements generate meaningful information without
unnecessary compliance burdens: First, the need to harmonize
Federal mandates to ensure consistency and avoid duplication of
efforts; second, the importance of leveraging sector risk
management agencies, both as existing collectors of incident
reports, as well as venues for effective information sharing
and operational collaboration between industry and government;
and, third, narrowing the scope of reporting requirements to
truly impactful incidents so that we can separate signal from
noise and glean meaningful insights that address real risks.
With respect to harmonization, as you are well aware,
CIRCIA is being developed among an existing patchwork of
Federal and State incident reporting requirements. While
President Biden's National Cybersecurity Strategy highlighted
the importance of harmonizing incident reporting, there are
many definitions, time lines, and expectations for reporting
across the Federal Government including new requirements from
the Securities and Exchange Commission's cyber reporting rule.
We hope CIRCIA does not create additional burdens.
Specifically we would like to see CISA referral existing
reporting regimes from Federal counterparts to limit
duplicative reporting through the substantially similar
exception in CIRCIA, and we would like to see sector risk
management agencies utilized as entry points for critical
sectors rather than CISA trying to be all things to all
sectors.
While CIRCIA is the first Federal cybersecurity requirement
focused specifically on reporting across all critical sectors,
the electricity subsector has been subject to similar reporting
for years through NERC's CIP 008-6 and the DOE OE-417 form.
EEI appreciate your leadership, Chairman Garbarino, on this
issue and is prepared to support future committee efforts to
advance our shared harmonization goals.
In addition to harmonizing Federal mandates, we believe
there are aspects of CISA's proposed rule that remain overly
broad and may add extraordinary compliance burdens with little
to no benefit. As I testified before you alongside the banking
and telecommunication sectors representing some of the most
sophisticated critical infrastructure operators, there's a real
concern that even the most mature sectors will be overburdened
by the proposed rule if it were finalized as is.
The committee should work with CISA to reduce the burden by
focusing on a few areas for improvement. For example, the scope
of substantial cyber incident definition will result in CISA
receiving more reports than they are capable of triaging.
CISA's estimate of 210,525 reports through 2033 seems extremely
low. In fact, based on the current criteria, just one of EEI's
larger members estimates at least 600 reports per month, which
would be about 65,000 reports from a single electric company
through 2033.
Ingesting, parsing, triaging, protecting, and synthesizing
this data is a monumental task, not only for CISA but for the
companies responsible for providing these reports. Coupled with
the 2-year data preservation requirements, CIRCIA will be
utilizing resources that instead could be used for actual
security mitigation measures rather than compliance.
Instead, CISA should consider reviewing the type of
information requested by NERC's CIP 008-6 and OE-417 to help
guide the energy sector specific information required under
CIRCIA.
Finally, protection of this information is paramount. CISA
must ensure FOIA and Critical Electric Infrastructure
Information, or CEII, protections for these reports. As the
committee knows, no entity, public or private, is immune to
cyber risk. A treasure trove of incident reporting data will be
a prime target.
Mandatory incident reporting--report and volunteer
information sharing both are valuable tools in ensuring the
cybersecurity of critical infrastructure operators. EEI and its
members are committed to working with both public and private
partners across all sectors to comply with incident reporting
requirements in a way that prioritizes and enhances critical
infrastructure security.
We look forward to working with you and CISA to develop a
rule that leverages existing regimes, provides meaningful
insights to government and industry, and protects sensitive
information.
CIRCIA is an important law with an important goal of
identifying cyber risk across all sectors of the economy. We
appreciate the committee's work to this point and your interest
in making sure CISA gets it right.
I genuinely appreciate the opportunity to testify today,
and I look forward to the questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Aaronson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Scott I. Aaronson
May 1, 2024
introduction
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Members of the
subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify. My name is
Scott Aaronson, and I am senior vice president for security and
preparedness at the Edison Electric Institute (EEI). EEI is the
association that represents all U.S. investor-owned electric companies.
EEI's member companies provide electricity for nearly 250 million
Americans and operate in all 50 States and the District of Columbia.
The electric power industry supports more than 7 million jobs in
communities across the United States. EEI's member companies invest
more than $150 billion annually to make the energy grid stronger,
smarter, cleaner, more dynamic, more flexible, and more secure against
all hazards, including cyber threats. I appreciate your invitation to
discuss this important topic on their behalf.
The energy grid powers our way of life and is critical to America's
security and economic competitiveness. Today, demand for electricity is
growing dramatically across the economy to support evolving customer
needs, as well as critical technologies like artificial intelligence
and the proliferation of data centers that connect our digital lives.
Ensuring a secure, reliable, resilient energy grid is a responsibility
that EEI's member companies and the electricity subsector take
extremely seriously.
threat landscape
For years, the U.S. intelligence community has warned of the
potential for malicious nation-state exploitation of U.S. critical
infrastructure. Today, we know from our Federal partners that People's
Republic of China state-sponsored cyber actors known as Volt Typhoon
have compromised multiple U.S. critical infrastructure providers with
the intent of disrupting operational controls, including in the energy
sector.\1\ With the increasingly complex geopolitical threat landscape
and the sophistication of ransomware operations by transnational
organized criminals, we have seen an uptick in threats to critical
infrastructure organizations across all sectors. These threats are a
stark reminder of the need to continue to harden U.S. critical
infrastructure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ CISA and Partners Release Advisory on PRC-sponsored Volt
Typhoon Activity and Supplemental Living Off the Land Guidance,
CISA.GOV, https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/alerts/2024/02/07/cisa-and-
partners-release-advisory-prc-sponsored-volt-typhoon-activity-and-
supplemental-living-land (February 7, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Critical infrastructure security is a shared responsibility and a
national imperative. While most critical infrastructure is owned by the
private sector, Government at all levels can and must play a role in
protecting it, especially when it comes to defending against nation-
state actors. Cyber incident reporting may support Government efforts
to protect U.S. critical infrastructure by creating visibility into
cross-sector cyber risk, but reporting also should be supplemented with
Federal support to mitigate risk and harden the critical infrastructure
assets that are vital to national security.
harmonization of federal cyber incident reporting
EEI recognizes the committee's intent in passing the Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act of 2022 (CIRCIA) was to
enhance and to standardize cyber incident reporting to improve the
Federal Government's visibility into cyber threats and to allow the
Government to share information quickly with critical infrastructure
owners and operators across all 16 sectors. According to the Cyberspace
Solarium Commission, prior to the passage of CIRCIA, the Federal
Government lacked a mandate to collect cyber incident information
reliably, systemically, and at the scale necessary to differentiate
campaigns from isolated incidents and to support the development of
more generalized conclusions.\2\ However, it is important to note that
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency's (CISA's) new
cyber incident reporting requirements are being developed among an
existing patchwork of Federal and State incident reporting
requirements. Harmonization is paramount.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ Cyberspace Solarium Commission Report, CYBERSOLARIUM.ORG,
https://cybersolarium.org/march-2020-csc-report/march-2020-csc-report/
(March 2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As part of CIRCIA's mandate, the Department of Homeland Security's
(DHS's) Cyber Incident Reporting Council (CIRC) issued a report on
harmonization of cyber incident reporting to the Federal Government.
That report identified several key findings, including that there are
currently 45 different Federal cyber incident reporting requirements
administered by 22 Federal agencies.\3\ Given this context, CISA should
thoroughly explore opportunities with Federal counterparts to limit
duplicative reporting through the ``substantially similar'' exception
of CIRCIA. This exception includes ``when a covered entity reports
substantially similar information in a substantially similar time frame
to another Federal agency pursuant to an existing law, regulation, or
contract when a CIRCIA Agreement is in place between CISA and the other
Federal agency.''\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Harmonization of Cyber Incident Reporting to the Federal
Government, DHS.GOV, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2023-09/
Harmonization%20of%20Cyber%20Incident%20-
Reporting%20to%20the%20Federal%20Government.pdf (September 19, 2023).
\4\ Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act
(CIRCIA) Reporting Requirements Proposed Rule, GOVINFO.GOV, https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-04-04/pdf/2024-06526.pdf (April 4,
2024). Accounting for and leveraging these existing incident reporting
requirements should be a priority for CISA.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
electricity subsector cyber incident reporting
While the CIRCIA proposed regulations are the first Federal
cybersecurity requirements focused specifically on reporting across all
critical infrastructure sectors, the electricity subsector has been
subject to similar reporting to other Federal entities for years,
including through the North American Electric Reliability Corporation
(NERC) Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP) Reliability Standards
and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Electric Emergency Incident and
Disturbance Report OE-417 form. EEI appreciates CISA's commitment to
working with DOE, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), and
NERC to explore the applicability of the proposed rules' substantially
similar reporting exception to enable entities subject to CIRCIA and
either or both the CIP Reliability Standards or Form OE-417
requirements to be able to comply through the submission of a single
report to the Federal Government.
Pursuant to the Federal Power Act and through FERC oversight, the
electricity subsector is subject to NERC's CIP Reliability Standards
that cover cyber and physical security requirements, including CIP-008-
6: Cyber Security--Incident Reporting and Response Planning. Entities
found in violation of CIP standards face penalties that can exceed $1
million per violation per day. These mandatory standards continue to
evolve using the process created by Congress to allow for input from
subject-matter experts across the industry and government.
DOE's Office of Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency
Response also requires certain energy sector entities to report certain
cybersecurity incidents to DOE pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 772(b). As the
energy sector's sector risk management agency (SRMA), DOE uses Form OE-
417 to collect information from the electricity subsector relevant to
DOE's overall national security and National Response Framework
responsibilities.
In July 2023, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) adopted
rules on Cybersecurity Risk Management, Strategy, Governance, and
Incident Disclosure by Public Companies. In addition to cyber incident
reporting through NERC, DOE, and the SEC, EEI member companies now also
will be subject to CIRCIA's reporting requirements once implemented
through CISA's final rule. EEI has expressed concerns with the public
disclosure of a cyber incident through the SEC rules, especially before
the incident is mitigated, and we value Chairman Garbarino's leadership
on this issue. Public reporting provides details on vulnerabilities and
attack vectors that may become a useful roadmap for malicious actors.
This may make the entity, and others, a target for on-going or similar
attacks.
The SEC, CISA, and all other Federal regulators must recognize the
inherent sensitivity of and the need for protection of information
regarding cybersecurity, including the risks associated with
cybersecurity incident disclosure, and must allow reasonable
flexibility regarding the governance of cybersecurity.\5\ EEI
appreciates the SEC's willingness to include a national security or
public safety delay for disclosure, but more must be done to harmonize
Federal reporting requirements and to limit disclosure of sensitive
cyber incidents that may provide insights to adversaries. While the
introduction of public reporting through the SEC rules following the
passage of CIRCIA runs counter to the CIRC harmonization report's
recommendations and the National Cybersecurity Strategy's intent, EEI
remains committed to working with Government partners to streamline and
to harmonize Federal cyber incident reporting.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Edison Electric Institute Comments on Cybersecurity Risk
Management, Strategy, Governance, and Incident Disclosure, SEC.GOV,
https://www.sec.gov/comments/s7-09-22/s70922-20128366-291140.pdf (May
9, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to these mandatory incident reporting requirements, the
industry also uses voluntary cybersecurity standards, including the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Cybersecurity
Framework, DOE's Cybersecurity Capability Maturity Model (C2M2), and,
most recently, DOE's Cybersecurity Baselines for Electric Distribution
Systems and Distributed Energy Resources (DER) that are being developed
in partnership with State regulatory bodies through the National
Association of Regulatory Utility Commissioners (NARUC).
Through these standards and voluntary regimes, the U.S. energy grid
benefits from a baseline level of security. While these standards are
important, regulations alone are insufficient given the dynamic threat
environment, and they must be supplemented by industry-Government
partnerships and coordinated response and recovery efforts. The
electric power industry appreciated the chance to contribute to the
drafting of the proposed rule through sector-specific listening
sessions and through comments to CISA's request for information. The
industry aims to continue this collaborative partnership to harmonize
reporting requirements and to reduce the burden on covered entities in
the energy sector.
areas for improvement in the proposed rule
This committee left the definitions of a covered entity, cyber
incident, covered cyber incident, and substantial cyber incident up to
the rulemaking process to allow for industry input on the definitions
included in the proposed rule. The electric power sector is grateful
for the chance to partner with CISA and DOE as our SRMA to focus the
scope and scale of these definitions in a way that prioritizes both
security and operational continuity, as well as transparency for the
public, policy makers, and other sectors.
EEI joined several other critical infrastructure organizations in
requesting an additional 30 days to analyze the lengthy proposal
sufficiently, to determine the potential impacts to the energy sector,
and to ensure harmonization between existing and other developing
reporting requirements.\6\ Additional time will allow our industry to
develop thoughts on areas for improvement in the proposed rule. EEI is
presently working closely with its member companies in this regard, but
we preliminarily have identified the following opportunities for
enhancement:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Joint Trades Letter Requesting an Extension on CIRCIA Comments,
USCHAMBER.COM, https://www.uschamber.com/security/cybersecurity/joint-
trades-letter-requesting-an-extension-on-cisa-comments (April 5, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Scope of substantial cyber incident definition;
2. Volume of information requested;
3. Workforce burden;
4. Data preservation requirements;
5. Protection of information.
1. Scope of Substantial Cyber Incident Definition
CISA is proposing to define the term ``covered cyber incident'' to
mean a ``substantial cyber incident.'' Under CIRCIA, covered entities
would be required to report a substantial cyber incident, including
``unauthorized access to a covered entities' information system or
network, or any nonpublic information contained therein, that is
facilitated through or caused by either a compromise of a cloud service
provider, managed service provider, other third-party data hosting
provider, or a supply chain compromise.''\7\ The inclusion of ``any
nonpublic information'' and ``third-party data hosting provider or a
supply chain compromise'' in this definition is very broad, which may
result in CISA receiving far more incident reports than it is capable
of triaging.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act
(CIRCIA) Reporting Requirements Proposed Rule, GOVINFO.GOV, https://
www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-04-04/pdf/2024-06526.pdf (April 4,
2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Unfortunately, the unauthorized access to any nonpublic information
is a common occurrence in the United States. In 2023 alone, there were
3,205 known compromises, more than 1,400 public data breach notices,
and more than 353 million total victims.\8\ In addition, the
exploitation of the MOVEit vulnerability in 2023 exemplified the impact
a supply chain compromise can have. During this event, 102 entities
were impacted directly, however, ``1,271 organizations were indirectly
affected when information stored in or accessed by a MOVEit product or
service was compromised via a vendor.''\9\ Therefore, it may be more
appropriate for CISA to require reports from third-party service
providers who disclose non-public information, rather than require
reports from the companies themselves that are the victims of the
disclosure of non-public information. As CISA has championed in its
Secure by Design initiative, the onus should be on the producers and
developers of products, rather than on consumers and end-users.\10\ EEI
recommends that CISA consider scaling back this definition to cover
only the most risky and impactful incidents. This also may help CISA
prioritize resources and mitigations for those incidents that rise to a
higher threshold.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ 2023 Was the Worst Year Yet for Data Breaches in Every Way--
Except One, PCMAG.COM, https://www.pcmag.com/articles/2023-was-the-
worst-year-yet-for-data-breaches (February 26, 2024).
\9\ 2023 Data Breach Report, IDTHEFTCENTER.ORG, https://
www.idtheftcenter.org/post/2023-annual-data-breach-report-reveals-
record-number-of-compromises-72-percent-increase-over-previous-high/
(January 25, 2024).
\10\ Secure by Design, CISA.GOV, https://www.cisa.gov/
securebydesign (April 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
2. Volume of Information Requested
The proposed rule estimates CISA will receive 210,525 CIRCIA
reports through 2033, at a cost of $1.2 billion for the Government and
$1.4 billion for industry. Given the total number and cost of reports
expected, EEI recommends that CISA reconsider the volume of information
it is requesting from covered entities.
As mentioned, the electricity subsector already is required to
report cyber incidents through NERC, DOE, and the SEC. As the sector's
statutorily designated Electric Reliability Organization and SRMA,
respectively, NERC and DOE have the sector-specific expertise necessary
to process the content of energy sector cyber incident reports. In
contrast, a recent report by the U.S. Government Accountability Office
found that CISA has insufficient staff with the requisite operational
technology skills, including a lack of threat hunting and incident
response expertise in the energy sector.\11\ Both CISA and industry
would benefit from the development and implementation of reporting
requirements that would result in the production of a manageable amount
of information for all affected parties. To this end, it may be
advisable for CISA to consider reviewing the type of information
requested by NERC CIP-008-6 and OE-417, respectively, to help it
formulate reporting requirements that are not unduly burdensome for
either CISA or industry but that comply with CIRCIA's information-
reporting requirements.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ Cybersecurity Improvements Needed in Addressing Risks to
Operational Technology, GAO.GOV, https://www.gao.gov/assets/
d24106576.pdf (March 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
EEI also has concerns with CISA's ability to obtain the resources
necessary to triage the volume of information it proposes to request.
The DHS fiscal year 2024 budget request included $98 million \12\ for
CIRCIA for the staffing, processes, and technology necessary for
successful implementation; however, the final fiscal year 2024
appropriations package included just $73.9 million, $23 million below
the request.\13\ Despite the $116 million requested for CIRCIA in
fiscal year 2025, EEI remains concerned with CISA's ability to have the
mechanisms in place to handle the information it is requesting from
covered entities appropriately.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Fiscal Year 2024 Budget in Brief, DHS.GOV, https://
www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2023-03/
DHS%20FY%202024%20BUDGET%20IN%20BRIEF%20%28BIB%29_Remediated.pdf (April
2023).
\13\ Division C--Department of Homeland Security Appropriations
Act, 2024, HOUSE.GOV, https://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20240318/
Division%20C%20Homeland.pdf (March 2024).
\14\ Fiscal Year 2025 Budget in Brief, DHS.GOV, https://
www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/2024-03/
2024_0311_fy_2025_budget_in_brief.pdf (April 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
3. Workforce Burden
As this subcommittee has explored, the national cybersecurity
workforce shortage is a major challenge across all critical
infrastructure sectors. With more than 448,000 cybersecurity job
openings in the United States, the energy sector is no exception to
this challenge.\15\ The volume and content of the required CIRCIA
reports will create a significant burden for the energy sector's
cybersecurity workforce. EEI recommends CISA consider reducing this
burden by prioritizing the implementation of interagency information-
sharing agreements and by ensuring submission requirements are similar
to the industry's submission requirements for NERC CIP-008 and OE-417.
A 2018 DOE Multiyear Plan for Energy Sector Cybersecurity found that
Federal incident reporting guidelines were driven by compliance more
than process improvement and that coordination among reporting
mechanisms could be valuable.\16\ The need to focus on requirements
that are outcome-based rather than compliance-based remains necessary
to reduce the workforce burden of reporting multiple times to the
Federal Government.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Cybersecurity Supply/Demand Heat Map, CYBERSEEK.ORG, https://
www.cyberseek.org/heatmap.html (April 2024).
\16\ Multiyear Plan for Energy Sector Cybersecurity, ENERGY.GOV,
https://www.energy.gov/ceser/articles/doe-multiyear-plan-energy-
cybersecurity (March 2018).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Data Preservation Requirements
The proposed rule requires that, regardless of whether a covered
entity submits a CIRCIA Report or is eligible for an exception from
reporting, it must preserve data and records related to the covered
incident or ransom payment for no less than 2 years from the date of
submission or the date the submission would have been required. The
proposed rule estimates data preservation costs to total more than $306
million, which is the largest category of costs following the initial
familiarization costs of implementation. EEI recommends that CISA
consider reducing the proposed data-retention threshold to help ease
costs and, instead, should allow those resources to be leveraged for
security mitigation measures.
5. Protection of Information
The current cyber threat landscape proves that no entity, public or
private, is immune to cyber risk. In fact, CISA itself recently
identified a threat actor's exploitation of two of its key systems, the
Infrastructure Protection Gateway and Chemical Security Assessment
Tool.\17\ Upon finalization and implementation of CISA's CIRCIA
regulations, the cyber incident reporting information for all 16
critical infrastructure sectors will be in the possession of one
Federal agency, CISA, thereby making it an extremely attractive, high-
value target. Given this reality, it is imperative that any information
entrusted to CISA be protected sufficiently from cyber threat actors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ Kapko, Matt, CISA Attacked in Ivanti Vulnerabilities Exploit
Rush, CYBERSECURITYDIVE.COM, https://www.cybersecuritydive.com/news/
cisa-attacked-ivanti-cve-exploits/709893/ (March 11, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
Thank you again for holding this hearing. The electricity subsector
and EEI's member companies are committed to advancing our strong
cybersecurity posture and remain committed to working with both public
and private partners across all sectors to comply with incident
reporting requirements in a way that prioritizes and enhances critical
infrastructure security. We appreciate the bipartisan support that
cybersecurity legislation historically has enjoyed in this committee
and the work that you have done to enhance the energy sector's
cybersecurity posture. We look forward to working together to continue
to bolster critical infrastructure security and resilience for the
safety, security, and well-being of all Americans.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Aaronson.
I now recognize Ms. Hogsett for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF HEATHER HOGSETT, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, TECHNOLOGY
AND RISK STRATEGY FOR BITS, BANK POLICY INSTITUTE

Ms. Hogsett. Thank you.
Chairman Garborino, Ranking Member Swalwell, Chairman
Green, honorable Members of the subcommittee, thank you for
inviting me to testify.
I'm Heather Hogsett, senior vice president of technology
and risk strategy for BITS, the technology division of the Bank
Policy Institute, or BPI.
BPI is a nonpartisan policy, research, and advocacy
organization representing the Nation's leading banks. Through
our Technology Division, we work with our Members on cyber risk
management, critical infrastructure protection, fraud
reduction, regulations, and innovation.
On behalf of BPI members, we greatly appreciate this
committee's leadership and the opportunity to provide
perspective on CISA's proposed rule to implement CIRCIA.
The financial industry has been a strong supporter of
sharing cyber threat and incident information for more than two
decades and has experienced the value it provides.
We were pleased to support CIRCIA as it was being
considered by Congress because it sought to develop a uniform
incident reporting standard across all major sectors of the
economy and would provide CISA with information it needs to
better understand cyber threats.
While we continue to believe that CIRCIA will play an
important role in our collective defense against nation-state
attacks and cyber criminals, we urge CISA to substantially
revise the proposed rule in several areas to ensure its
requirements are simple, directly support CISA's ability to
have awareness of significant cyber incident and to quickly
share useful information with industry, and to allow cyber
personnel to focus on response and recovery, rather than
Government reporting.
As currently drafted, this proposal will require extensive
efforts by critical personnel during the most critical phase of
an incident. When combined with a low threshold for reporting,
this will add significant burden and compliance obligations.
As CISA and this committee move forward, we offer several
recommendations. CISA should refine its broad interpretation of
the CIRCIA statute including definitions and data requirements.
The definition of substantial cyber incident should be revised
to ensure a higher threshold for reporting and avoid
overreporting of incidents that cause minimal harm or impact.
For instance, the requirement to report a disruption of a
covered entity's ability to engage in business or industrial
operations or deliver goods or services lacks an impact
threshold and could lead to a large number of immaterial or
less significant incidents being reported.
CISA should also reduce the reporting requirements to those
that support the goal of CIRCIA to quickly identify and assess
risks across sectors and provide useful information to critical
infrastructure entities to defend against attacks.
When CIRCIA was enacted, Congress was careful to note that
legislation sought to strike a balance between getting
information quickly and letting victims respond to an attack
without imposing burdensome requirements. The proposed rule
would disrupt that balance by requiring entities to share
sweeping investigative findings and details that are typically
not available until weeks or months after an incident.
For example, entities should not be required to report a
time line of compromised system communications with other
systems or an assessment of the effectiveness of response
efforts.
CISA should also focus on building the capability to
leverage reported information for actionable purposes. CISA
should ensure it is adequately equipped to intake incident
reports and has the capabilities and subject-matter expertise
to provide timely and actionable information back out to
industry, along with tools, to help minimize or avoid threats.
CISA should also clarify how it will protect this very
sensitive information and how it will provide sector risk
management agencies with information they need to fulfill their
responsibilities and coordinate with entities in their
respective sectors.
Finally, we encourage Congress to continue to focus on
regulatory harmonization. While we have seen progress in
coordination on cyber incident notification by the prudential
banking regulators, other independent regulators such as the
Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission have continued to issue rules that duplicate
or conflict with CIRCIA.
In particular, the SEC's cyber incident disclosure rule
adds unnecessary complexity to incident response and undermines
the purpose of CIRCIA by publicizing that a company has been
attacked while CISA is still working to confidentially warn
other potential victims and prevent further harm.
We encourage Congress to explore legislative solutions to
better facilitate harmonization efforts as this may be the most
effective forcing function to achieve increased streamlining
moving forward.
In closing, we are committed to continuing to work with
CISA and this committee to refine the proposed rule and ensure
its successful implementation. If its requirements are balanced
appropriately, CIRCIA will help reduce attacks and the
disruption they cause to individuals, businesses, our economy,
and our way of life.
Thank you for opportunity to speak today, and I'm happy to
answer any questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Hogsett follows:]
Prepared Statement of Heather Hogsett
May 1, 2024
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and Honorable Members
of the subcommittee, thank you for inviting me to testify. I am Heather
Hogsett, senior vice president of technology and risk strategy for
BITS, the technology policy division of the Bank Policy Institute.
BPI is a nonpartisan policy, research, and advocacy organization
representing the Nation's leading banks. BPI members include universal
banks, regional banks and major foreign banks doing business in the
United States. BITS, our technology policy division, works with our
member banks as well as insurance, card companies, and market utilities
on cyber risk management and critical infrastructure protection, fraud
reduction, regulation, and innovation.
I also serve as co-chair of the Financial Services Sector
Coordinating Council Policy Committee. The FSSCC coordinates across the
financial sector to enhance security and resiliency and to collaborate
with Government partners such as the U.S. Treasury and the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, as well as financial
regulatory agencies.
On behalf of BPI member companies, I appreciate the opportunity to
provide feedback today on CISA's notice of proposed rulemaking to
implement the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act
of 2022. We were pleased to support CIRCIA as it was being considered
by Congress because it sought to develop a uniform incident reporting
standard across all major sectors of the economy and would provide CISA
with information it needs to better defend against attacks.
While we continue to believe that CIRCIA will play an important
role in our collective defense against nation-state attacks and
malicious criminals, we urge CISA to substantially revise the proposed
rule in several key areas to ensure its requirements are simple and
directly support CISA's ability to have better awareness of significant
cyber incidents; to quickly provide useful information to critical
infrastructure; and to allow cyber personnel to focus on response and
recovery rather than Government reporting.
As currently drafted, this proposal will require extensive efforts
by critical personnel during the most critical phase of an incident and
includes expectations for on-going updates. When combined with a low
threshold for reporting and other existing regulatory reporting
requirements, this will add significant burden and compliance
obligations.
BPI is working with our member companies and several other
financial trade associations to provide a detailed response that I will
be happy to share with this committee once it is complete. In the
interim, I would highlight that we believe CISA took an overly broad
approach and expanded certain areas well beyond the statute. We offer
the following concerns and recommendations:
(1) CISA should refine its broad interpretation of the CIRCIA
statute. CISA should apply a higher threshold for incidents
that must be reported to better focus on significant cyber
threats. It should also reduce the reporting elements to those
that support CIRCIA's goal to quickly identify and assess risks
across sectors and disseminate early alerts and mitigation
measures where possible.
(2) CISA should focus on building the capability to leverage
reported information for actionable purposes. CISA should
ensure it is adequately equipped to intake incident reports and
has the capabilities and subject-matter expertise to provide
timely and actionable information back out to industry along
with tools to help minimize or avoid threats. CISA should also
clarify how it will protect this information and provide Sector
Risk Management Agencies with information they need to fulfill
their responsibilities and coordinate with entities in their
sector.
(3) Congress should continue to focus on regulatory harmonization.
While we have seen progress in coordination on cyber incident
notification by the prudential banking regulators, other
independent regulators continue to issue rules that duplicate
or conflict with CIRCIA. In particular, the SEC's cyber
incident disclosure rule adds unnecessary complexity to
incident response and undermines the purpose of CIRCIA by
publicizing that a company has been attacked while CISA is
still working to warn other potential victims and prevent
further harm.
cyber incident information sharing in the financial sector
Financial institutions are often targeted by hostile nation-state
cyber actors and criminal organizations seeking to disrupt the
financial system and overall functioning of the U.S. economy. As a
critical infrastructure sector, the financial services industry has
acknowledged the severity of these risks and invested significant
resources over more than 2 decades to enhance or otherwise support
cyber information-sharing efforts and incident response coordination.
The formation of the FSSCC and Financial Services Information
Sharing and Analysis Center were both key elements in these efforts.
The FSSCC strengthens the resiliency of the financial services sector
by proactively identifying cyber threats, driving preparedness and
coordinating crisis response.\1\ The FS-ISAC shares cyber threat
information and best practices with roughly 5,000 members in 70
different countries.\2\ Each organization strengthens public-private
cooperation through trusted, confidential forums that enable detailed
information sharing and serve as a model other critical infrastructure
sectors have sought to emulate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ About FSSCC, FSSCC, https://fsscc.org/about-fsscc/.
\2\ Who we are, FS-ISAC, https://www.fsisac.com/who-we-are.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition to these 2 settings, BPI members supported regulatory
efforts to ensure timely awareness of significant cybersecurity threats
facing financial institutions or critical infrastructure more broadly.
The prudential banking regulators' Computer-Security Incident
Notification Rule \3\ is an example of this. That rule allows
institutions that have suffered a potentially significant incident to
satisfy their compliance obligations by notifying their primary
regulator--either the Federal Reserve Board, the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency or the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation--via a simple email or telephone call within 36 hours. This
requirement balances regulators' need for early awareness of
significant cyber threats without diverting critical resources at
affected entities who need to effectively respond.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Computer-Security Incident Notification Requirements for
Banking Organizations and Their Bank Service Providers, 86 Fed. Reg.
66424 (Nov. 23, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
BPI members were also broadly supportive of CIRCIA while it was
being negotiated in Congress and leading up to its enactment in March
2022.\4\ As a regularly-targeted critical infrastructure sector, we
shared policy makers' view that the proliferation of cyber incidents
represents a critical economic and national security threat. To that
end, banks and other financial institutions believed CIRCIA was a
unique opportunity to expand visibility, awareness, and coordinated
sharing of incident information across all critical infrastructure
sectors to combat sophisticated and persistent cyber threats.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ Press Release, Bank Policy Institute, President Signs Omnibus,
Includes BPI-Supported LIBOR and Cyber Incident Reporting Solutions
(Mar. 15, 2022), https://bpi.com/president-signs-omnibus-includes-bpi-
supported-libor-and-cyber-incident-reporting-solutions/; Press Release,
Bank Policy Institute, Incident Reporting Law Moves Toward Finish Line
as Senate Seeks to Advance Sensible Solution (Oct. 6, 2021), https://
bpi.com/incident-reporting-law-moves-toward-finish-line-as-senate-
seeks-to-advance-sensible-solution/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
financial services regulatory landscape
For CIRCIA to be effective, however, it is important that CISA
acknowledges existing regulatory requirements and harmonizes those with
CIRCIA wherever possible. As the Cyber Incident Reporting Council's
report commissioned by CIRCIA identified, there are 8 distinct cyber
incident reporting requirements applicable to the financial sector
alone.\5\ Financial institutions are also subject to rigorous
supervision and examinations to determine whether they operate in a
safe and sound manner. This includes on-site examiners evaluating
compliance with relevant statutory requirements and whether firms
implement appropriate security controls, including third-party risk
management, operational risk and resiliency programs, and oversight by
the board of directors.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ DEP'T OF HOMELAND SEC., HARMONIZATION OF CYBER INCIDENT
REPORTING TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 9 (2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The recent adoption of the SEC's public company disclosure \6\ rule
adds to this already complex regulatory landscape. As BPI and many
industry stakeholders have pointed out,\7\ the SEC's rule conflicts
with the primary purpose of confidential reporting requirements like
CIRCIA, creates confusion and diverts resources from critical response
and recovery activities. Requiring public disclosure--particularly of
on-going incidents--puts sensitive information into the hands of
hostile threat actors while shortening the time frame agencies like
CISA will have to warn other potential victims. In the first few months
since the rule went into effect, we've seen malicious actors even turn
the disclosure requirement into an additional extortion method used
against victim companies.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ Cybersecurity Risk Management, Strategy, Governance, and
Incident Disclosure, 88 Fed. Reg. 51896, 51944 (Aug. 4, 2023).
\7\ Press Release, Bank Policy Institute, SEC Rule on Cyber
Disclosure Risks Harming Investors, Exacerbates Security Risks (Jul.
26, 2023), https://bpi.com/sec-rule-on-cyber-disclosure-risks-harming-
investors-exacerbates-security-risks/; Heather Hogsett, Fool's Gold:
Why the Exceptions to the SEC's Cyber Disclosure Rule Cannot and Will
Not Work, and the Damage that Will Ensue, BANK POLICY INST. (Dec. 18,
2023), https://bpi.com/fools-gold-why-the-exceptions-to-the-secs-cyber-
disclosure-rule-cannot-and-will-not-work-and-the-damage-that-will-
ensue/.
\8\ Ransomware gangs are now reporting to the SEC, says CrowdStrike
CEO, CNBC (Dec. 21, 2023), https://www.cnbc.com/video/2023/12/21/
ransomware-gangs-are-now-reporting-to-the-sec-says-crowdstrike-
ceo.html.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
implementing circia
Successful implementation of CIRCIA will provide several important
benefits to our national cyber defense. If calibrated and implemented
appropriately, CIRCIA will provide CISA with more information from
across critical infrastructure sectors to enhance its analysis and
assessment of emerging cyber threats. This in turn will improve the
quality of the alerts and security services offered by CISA and other
government partners and provide earlier warning to potentially affected
companies so they can better protect themselves.
CIRCIA will also provide greater insight into the threats facing
third parties and other service providers. Like financial institutions,
threat actors have frequently targeted these entities in recent years
and the proposed rule acknowledges how the compromise of a third-party
service provider can ``cause significant cascading impacts to tens,
hundreds, or even thousands of other entities.'' Consistent incident
reporting from those entities will provide CISA with a more complete
picture of the cyber threat landscape and will also help third-party
providers enhance their own incident management processes.
Benefits notwithstanding, implementing CIRCIA will be a challenge.
As noted in the CIRC Report, there are 45 in-effect reporting
requirements administered by 22 Federal agencies--many of which have
different definitions and thresholds for reporting.\9\ Rather than
implementing the CIRC report's recommendation to adopt a more uniform
definition and threshold for a reportable cyber incident, CISA's
proposed substantial cyber incident definition adds another broad term
with a reporting threshold well below many other existing requirements.
Streamlining those requirements is no trivial task given the divergent
missions and authorities of those Federal agencies--however, CISA's
narrow interpretation of the ``substantially similar'' exemption under
CIRCIA will render it unusable. As a result, entities will likely have
to continue to simultaneously assess compliance with multiple
notification, reporting, and disclosure obligations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Id. at 4-5.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
There is also the challenge of getting some independent regulatory
agencies to engage and support broader harmonization efforts. For
example, the SEC first proposed its public company disclosure rule just
8 days after the Senate passed CIRCIA. Since then, the SEC rule has
created uncertainties around what cyber threat and incident information
can be shared between private-sector entities and has been used as an
additional extortion method by ransomware criminals--all for the
attenuated benefit of informing investor decision making. This past
January, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission also proposed a new
rule on operational resilience that would require reporting of cyber
incidents within 24 hours.\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ Operational Resilience Framework for Futures Commission
Merchants, Swap Dealers, and Major Swap Participants, 89 Fed. Reg.
4,709, 4758-59 (Jan. 24, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA's 447-page NPRM is in many ways a reflection of how
challenging it is to bring coherence to the fragmented cyber regulatory
landscape. Articulating a definition for covered entity across 16
critical infrastructure sectors is not a straightforward exercise. At
the same time though, the required data elements CISA proposes for
CIRCIA reporting are expansive and, in several instances, well beyond
what was contemplated by the underlying statute. For example, the rule
proposes to require firms to report detailed investigative findings
such as the ``time line of compromised system communications with other
systems''\11\ as well as ``a description of any unauthorized access,
regardless of whether the covered cyber incident involved an attributed
or unattributed cyber intrusion, identification of any informational
impacts or information compromise, and any network location where
activity was observed.''\12\ The NPRM also proposes that reports
include the ``direct economic impacts to operations''\13\ and even an
``assessment of the effectiveness of response efforts in mitigating and
responding to the covered cyber incident.''\14\ These requirements are
broader than those contained in the CIRCIA statute and, as discussed
above, will make it difficult if not impossible to leverage a report
provided to another Federal agency under the ``substantially similar''
reporting exemption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ CIRCIA NPRM  226.8(a)(3)(iv).
\12\ Id. at  226.8(a)(2).
\13\ Id. at  226.8(a)(4).
\14\ Id. at  226.8(a)(4)(i)(2).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Given the breadth and detail of the proposed reporting elements--
several of which are typically unknown prior to the 72-hour reporting
deadline--CIRCIA's supplemental reporting requirements would likewise
become more burdensome than Congress intended. Because CISA interprets
``substantial new or different information'' as anything responsive to
a required data field in a CIRCIA report, it is likely that an impacted
entity will have to provide numerous supplemental reports during a
single incident response. If not balanced appropriately, outsized
compliance demands can create operational risks by consuming the time
of front-line cyber personnel on reporting requirements instead of on
network and enterprise security operations.
The proposed data elements are also relevant for another important
aspect of CIRCIA's implementation--CISA's capability to intake reported
information and provide timely and useful alerts back out to
potentially impacted entities. This includes providing clarity for how
CISA will share reported information with Sector Risk Management
Agencies and other law enforcement partners. Equally important will be
how CISA protects this very sensitive information once submitted as it
will quickly become a target for attackers and could put covered
entities at risk if breached. In the final rule, CISA should carefully
calibrate the information required in CIRCIA reports with its own
ability to leverage that information in furtherance of some actionable
purpose. As currently constructed, the proposed rule requires
information beyond CISA's direct statutory mandate and above what is
necessary ``to enhance situational awareness of cyber threats across
critical infrastructure sectors.''1515 6 U.S.C.  681a(a).
recommendations
As noted above, BPI is working on a comprehensive response to the
CIRCIA NPRM. Based on our discussions with banks and other financial
institutions thus far, we offer 3 recommendations for CISA and the
committee's consideration:
(1) CISA should refine its broad interpretation of the CIRCIA
statute.--CISA should revise the definition of ``substantial
cyber incident'' to ensure a higher threshold for reporting and
avoid over-reporting of incidents that cause minimal harm or
impact. For instance, the requirement to report a ``disruption
of a covered entity's ability to engage in business or
industrial operations, or deliver goods or services'' lacks an
impact threshold and could lead to a large number of immaterial
or less significant incidents being reported. The CIRCIA
statute had additional language for this prong referencing
disruptions to business or industrial operations ``including
due to a denial of service attack, ransomware attack, or
exploitation of a zero day vulnerability.''\16\ While Congress
may not have intended to limit this threshold exclusively to
those 3 scenarios, it does indicate a specific operational
disruption much narrower than the one outlined in the proposed
rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\16\ 6 U.S.C.  681b(c)(2)(ii).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CISA should also reduce the reporting requirements to information
that supports CIRCIA's goal to allow CISA to quickly identify
and assess risks across sectors and provide early alerts and
mitigation measures where possible. Covered entities should not
be required to share sweeping investigative findings or details
that are often not available until weeks or months after an
incident.
In its proposed rule, CISA interprets the CIRCIA statute well
beyond Congress's intent that CIRCIA promote ``shared awareness
of the cyber threats across the public and private
sectors''\17\ and not become a large-scale data collection
exercise. For example, CISA acknowledges that the data elements
proposed for CIRCIA reports exceed those specified by Congress
in the statute. In fact, CISA's proposal outlines a level of
granularity never seen before in incident reporting regimes and
will make harmonizing cyber incident reports across Federal
agencies even more challenging.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ S. REP. NO. 117-249, at 2 (2022), https://www.Congress.gov/
117/crpt/srpt249/CRPT-117srpt249.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To fulfill its goal of better awareness of cyber threats across
critical infrastructure sectors, Congress recognized CISA would
need to be notified of substantial incidents within a
relatively short time frame--hence the 72-hour reporting
requirement. Nevertheless, when CIRCIA was enacted, Congress
was careful to note the legislation sought to strike ``a
balance between getting information quickly and letting victims
respond to an attack without imposing burdensome
requirements.''\18\ CISA's proposed rule would disrupt that
balance by requiring information that is often unknown within
72 hours and as a result significantly increasing supplemental
reporting demands.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Press Release, U.S. Sen. Homeland Sec. Comm., Peters & Portman
Landmark Provision Requiring Critical Infrastructure to Report Cyber-
Attacks Signed into Law as Part of the Funding Bill (Mar. 15, 2022),
https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/media/dems/peters-and-portman-landmark-
provision-requiring-critical-infrastructure-to-report-cyber-attacks-
signed-into-law-as-part-of-funding-bill/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
(2) CISA should focus on building the capability to leverage
reported information for actionable purposes.--CISA estimates
that over 316,000 companies will be considered covered entities
under the final rule. When combined with the breadth of the
proposed substantial cyber incident definition, CISA is likely
to receive far more than the 15,000 annual incident reports it
now anticipates. If CISA is to preserve its productive and
collaborative relationship with the private sector, it is
critical to assemble the necessary infrastructure, staff, and
communication channels to analyze and disseminate actionable
cyber threat information to potentially impacted entities.
It is also vital that CISA clearly articulate a process that will
allow SRMAs, including the U.S. Treasury Department, to quickly
be notified of an incident and to access information the SRMA
may need to coordinate response efforts within their respective
sectors. The financial services sector has a strong and
collaborative relationship with Treasury that includes incident
response playbooks and a communication plan. Both of these
include coordination with regulators and interconnect with
other national response mechanisms. The sector has experienced
several ransomware attacks in the last year that impacted the
sector to varying degrees. In each instance, Treasury played a
vital role in the early stages by working with firms and
regulators to assess impacts and potential downstream effects.
Critical in this coordination is Treasury's ability to quickly
access incident information while avoiding the need for various
Government agencies to contact the affected entity. CISA should
clarify how this process will work once CIRCIA reporting is in
place and how it will preserve and support the role of SRMAs.
(3) Congress should continue to focus on regulatory
harmonization.--With CIRCIA, Congress took an important step
toward establishing a harmonized cyber incident reporting
standard across critical infrastructure. In 2023, the Biden
administration similarly identified harmonizing and
streamlining existing regulation as a strategic priority in its
National Cybersecurity Strategy,\19\ and the CIRC issued its
report on harmonization with several recommendations for
Congressional action.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\19\ WHITE HOUSE, NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY STRATEGY 1, 9 (2023),
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/National-
Cybersecurity-Strategy-2023.pdf.
\20\ DEP'T OF HOMELAND SEC., HARMONIZATION OF CYBER INCIDENT
REPORTING TO THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT 34 (2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Despite these efforts, independent regulators like the SEC and CFTC
continue to offer their own disparate standards for incident reporting
which will contribute to growing burnout and attrition among key
cybersecurity personnel. According to a recent survey of large
financial institutions, Chief Information Security Officers report
spending between 30 to upwards of 50 percent of their time on
regulatory compliance, with several firms noting that their security
teams spend more than 70 percent of their time on compliance
activities. As regulations continue to expand in number and scope,
cybersecurity teams will have less time to adjust to rapid
technological change. This presents considerable operational risk--
particularly as hostile actors move to weaponize emerging technologies
like artificial intelligence and quantum computing.
With that being the case, we encourage Congress to explore
legislative solutions to further harmonization efforts. The CIRC
report's recommendation that Congress remove any barriers to
harmonization and drive adoption of model definitions, time lines, and
thresholds for cyber incident reporting \21\ could be beneficial if
applied across all Federal agencies to include independent regulatory
agencies. It is vital that Congress make clear to regulators that they
must recognize existing Federal requirements and leverage the CIRCIA
reports, rather than continue to issue new incident reporting
requirements. This may be the most effective forcing function to
achieve increased streamlining moving forward.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
conclusion
The financial services sector has long supported the early and
confidential sharing of cyber threat and incident information. Early
awareness of threats helps firms respond and calibrate additional
security measures that can prevent malicious activity or minimize its
impact. CIRCIA represents an important step toward expanding this type
of awareness and information sharing across all critical infrastructure
sectors. If its requirements are appropriately balanced, CIRCIA will
help reduce attacks and the disruption they cause to individuals,
businesses, our economy, and our way of life.
It is imperative that we work together to ensure the final
reporting requirements of CIRCIA balance CISA's needs for early
incident information while not disrupting critical incident response
and remediation activities. As currently drafted, CIRCIA would add
significant requirements to an already challenging and complex set of
Government reporting requirements. It will also overwhelm CISA with
information that is not needed or useful to fulfill the goals of better
situational awareness and timely information sharing with critical
infrastructure.
We are committed to continuing to work with CISA and this committee
to refine the proposed rule and ensure its successful implementation.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ms. Hogsett.
I now recognize Mr. Mayer for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ROBERT MAYER, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, CYBERSECURITY
AND INNOVATION, US TELECOM, THE BROADBAND ASSOCIATION

Mr. Mayer. Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell,
honorable Members of the subcommittee, thank you for convening
this hearing on implementation of the CISA Cyber Incident
Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act, CIRCIA, perhaps the
most important of the foundational cybersecurity-related
statutes Congress has passed.
My name is Robert Mayer. I'm senior vice president of
cybersecurity and innovation at USTelecom. Our members include
broadband providers, suppliers, and technology innovators, all
providing advanced and secure communication services to markets
urban and rural and everywhere in between.
In addition to my role at USTelecom, I serve as the chair
of the Communications Sector Coordinating Council and co-chair
of the DHS ICT Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force, the two
principal organizations that serve as the Government's industry
partners for developing cybersecurity and supply chain security
policies.
Thank you for holding this hearing today. It is absolutely
crucial to our national security that CISA critical
infrastructure entities and other Government agencies work
collaboratively with this subcommittee to implement Congress'
vision for this law.
Our members have a long history of successful collaboration
with U.S. Government partners, dating back the Cuban Missile
Crisis when the U.S. Government formed a critical alliance with
the telecommunications industry to ensure its survival in the
event of a nuclear attack. That collaboration continues today
as USTelecom works regularly with Government partners like
NIST, CISA, the intelligence community, DOD, and other valued
partners.
Unfortunately, parts of our Government risk undermining
this collaboration as we increasingly see a regulatory mindset
focused on prescriptive compliance rather than dynamic
teamwork. This manifested last week in the FCC's misguided
order that will impose 20th-Century utility-based prescriptive
regulations on internet service providers including in the
realm of cybersecurity where other agencies such as CISA are
the ones with the appropriate expertise.
To be clear, CIRCIA implementation is an enormous task.
CISA estimates that 300,000 entities will be covered by its
requirements and it will take years of multiple iterative
exchanges between Government and critical infrastructure
entities to fully mature.
There are several areas in particular that we believe need
our collective attention. For one, we need clarity on the terms
and definitions in the rule. The proposed scope of covered
entities and covered cyber incidents are expansive and
currently lack key guidance that cybersecurity practitioners
and the attorneys will need.
Without more precise definitions and clear reporting
thresholds, overreporting will occur and could overwhelm
Government resources and undermine the effectiveness of CIRCIA.
We should avoid unproductive and disproportionate focus on
routine events in favor of reporting cyber incidents that
pertain directly to CISA's mission.
Moreover, it is imperative for our Government partners to
recognize the substantial cyber resources that will be
allocated to assess whether an event meets the reporting
criteria and fulfill the expansive set of reporting
requirements.
It's also important to underscore that CIRCIA partnership
implies reciprocity. To fulfill CIRCIA's purpose, CISA needs to
establish mechanisms of rapidly disseminating valuable
defensive advisories to critical infrastructure entities while
also supporting victims as they respond to highly debilitating
attacks.
It is also vital that we achieve harmonization and
efficiency in reporting. Our members from the smallest to the
largest have expressed concern about the substantial resources
they will need to dedicate to complying with a rapidly growing
patchwork of incident reporting requirements.
Our ask from the Federal Government partners is this.
Providers need to be able to submit reports through a single
agency. It will be essential to streamline the contents of
reports as much as possible, by developing a common format,
while allowing a variety of flexible reporting mechanisms that
could ideally be tailored to the unique needs of organizations.
Finally, we call on CISA to establish ex parte
communications for the CIRCIA rulemaking. This is a critical
step in the spirit of collaboration toward ensuring a robust
framework that reflects the intricate realities of
cybersecurity and critical infrastructure sectors.
Agency adoption of a transparent and open process akin to
that employed by other Government agencies will facilitate
continuous and meaningful input from industry stakeholders
whose expertise and first-hand experience are invaluable for
crafting policies that are not only effective but also
practical.
Deep and persistent collaboration is the key to achieving
Congressional intent in implementing CIRCIA. USTelecom and its
members will continue to work closely with CISA through the
Comm Sector Coordinating Council and other fora and by actively
participating in the CIRCIA rulemaking process. We look forward
to continued successful collaborations to combat the ever-
evolving cyber threats we face.
I look forward to your questions.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank----
Mr. Mayer. Thank you.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Mayer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Robert Mayer
May 1, 2024
Chairman Andrew Garbarino, Ranking Member Eric Swalwell, Members of
the subcommittee, thank you for convening this hearing on
implementation of the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act (CIRCIA), perhaps the most important of the
foundational cybersecurity-related statutes Congress has passed. My
name is Robert Mayer, and I am the senior vice president, cybersecurity
and innovation at USTelecom and serve as the chair of the
Communications Sector Coordinating Council and co-chair of the DHS ICT
Supply Chain Risk Management Task Force.
It is absolutely crucial to our national security that CISA,
critical infrastructure entities, and other Government agencies work
collaboratively to implement Congress's vision for this law--to deepen
and operationalize the partnership between Government and industry that
is indispensable to our defense against cyber threats.
As this subcommittee is well aware, the United States'
adversaries--China, Russia, Iran, North Korea--are increasingly
becoming an aggressive military alliance, and those governments and
their criminal proxies have extremely sophisticated cyber capabilities.
We need close and well-coordinated teamwork between Government and
industry to ensure our defense.
CIRCIA can be a profoundly powerful tool in deepening this
collaboration and teamwork, and I implore the subcommittee to push this
principle relentlessly in the years to come.
Unfortunately, parts of our Government risk undermining this
principle, as we increasingly see a rigid regulatory mindset focused on
prescriptive compliance rather than dynamic teamwork. This manifested
last week in the FCC's misguided order that will impose 20th Century
utility-based prescriptive regulations on Internet Service Providers--
including even in the realm of cybersecurity--which are investing
billions of dollars to innovate for the 21st Century.
As the most dynamic and innovative nation in history, we need to
recognize that our defense against these threats requires us to deepen
our collaboration. We need to double down on, not undermine, the
Government-industry partnership. At this very moment, and literally
every moment, experts in Government and private industry are working
shoulder to shoulder to outwit and outpace highly-organized efforts to
infiltrate our Nation's critical infrastructure. That is the only
approach that will work.
Thankfully, the launch of CIRCIA can help get this right, because
CIRCIA--if properly implemented--is fundamentally about collaboration
and holistic situational awareness. Now, it is incumbent on Government
and industry partners to roll up our sleeves and collectively begin the
work of translating Congress's directions into operational reality.
To be clear, CIRCIA implementation is an enormous task--CISA
estimates that 300,000 entities will be covered by its requirements--
and it will take years and multiple iterative exchanges between
Government and critical infrastructure entities to fully mature. Here
again, the more collaboration and partnership we practice, the more we
can develop mutual understanding and expectations of what is needed and
how to achieve it.
There are several areas in particular that we believe need our
collective attention.
For one, we need clarity on the terms and definitions in the rule.
Without sufficient specificity, this is difficult to accomplish. The
proposed scope of ``covered entities'' and ``covered cyber incident''
are expansive and currently lack key guidance that cybersecurity
practitioners will need, as they seek to provide CISA with information
that is responsive to the agency's mission.
Moreover, it is imperative for our Government partners to recognize
the substantial cyber resources that will be allocated to assess
whether an event meets the reporting criteria. The industry requires
more precise definitions and clear reporting thresholds. Without these,
there is a real risk that, in an effort to comply with the law, the
industry will report numerous events that could easily overwhelm CISA's
capacity to act on the information. Such overreporting could
unnecessarily burden Government resources and undermine the
effectiveness of CIRCIA. It is crucial to establish definitions that
are not excessively broad, as overly inclusive terms could divert
essential resources away from cyber defense and toward regulatory
compliance for its own sake.
Critically, we believe that covered cyber incidents should only be
those pertaining directly to the mission of CISA and avoid unproductive
and disproportionate focus on routine events.
It is also important to underscore that partnership implies
reciprocity. To fulfill CIRCIA's purpose, CISA needs to establish
mechanisms of rapidly disseminating valuable defensive advisories to
critical infrastructure entities while also supporting victims as they
respond to highly debilitating attacks.
The estimated cost to industry of these new requirements is $1.4
billion over 11 years, and it is estimated the Federal Government will
incur costs of $1.2 billion over the same time frame. Collectively, our
Nation needs a return on this investment and for the law to achieve its
aims. We will work with CISA to ensure that meaningful incident reports
lead to broader situational awareness and to increased operational
preparedness and response capabilities.
It is also vital that we achieve harmonization and efficiency in
reporting. Our members, from the smallest to the largest, have
expressed concern about the substantial resources they will need to
dedicate to complying with a rapidly-growing patchwork of incident
reporting requirements. Our ask from Federal Government partners is
this: Providers need to be able to submit reports to a single agency.
It will be essential to streamline the contents of reports as much as
possible--by developing a common format--while allowing a variety of
flexible reporting mechanisms that could ideally be tailored to the
unique needs of organizations.
Finally, we call on CISA to establish ex parte communications for
the CIRCIA rulemaking. This is a critical step toward ensuring a robust
regulatory framework that reflects the intricate realities of
cybersecurity in critical infrastructure sectors. As CISA now possesses
enhanced regulatory powers, it is imperative that the agency adopts a
transparent and open process akin to that employed by other regulatory
bodies. This approach will facilitate continuous and meaningful input
from industry stakeholders, whose expertise and first-hand experience
are invaluable for creating regulations that are not only effective but
also practical.
Such a process would not only enhance the quality and applicability
of the regulatory outcomes but also bolster the credibility and
trustworthiness of CISA as a regulatory authority in the eyes of the
industries it regulates.
Deep and persistent collaboration is the key to achieving
Congress's intent in implementing CIRCIA, and USTelecom and its members
will continue to work closely with CISA, our sector risk management
agency, through the Communications Sector Coordinating Council and
other fora, and by actively participating in the CIRCIA rulemaking
process. For decades, we have engaged consistently with CISA, its
predecessors, and other Government agencies to provide information
about cyber threats and to advance law enforcement investigations, and
we will continue to deepen and evolve that practice.
We seek the Government's continuing partnership in making that a
reality. I look forward to your questions.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Mayer.
I now recognize Ms. Elazari for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF AMIT ELAZARI, CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, OPEN POLICY
GROUP

Ms. Elazari. Chairman Green, Chairman Garbarino, Ranking
Member Swalwell, Members of the subcommittee, on behalf of
OpenPolicy and our community of innovative companies, thank you
for the opportunity to testify today on the implementation of
CIRCIA.
My name is Dr. Amit Elazari, and I'm the CEO and cofounder
of OpenPolicy. We are the world's first technology platform for
policy intelligence and engagement, making Government affairs
and policy more accessible to entities of all sizes.
OpenPolicy represents leading entrepreneurial companies,
innovators that create cutting-edge security solutions that
protect critical infrastructure and Federal agencies.
OpenPolicy itself is a small business, a startup, and perhaps
the smallest among the IT Sector Coordinating Council members.
Members of the subcommittee, at the time when threats to
our Nation have never been more profound and the consequences
have never been higher, many businesses and organizations still
stand defenseless against persistent and advanced attacks.
These threats advanced with AI. We are in an arms race against
the adversaries, and they have an asymmetric advantage. They
already have the information.
Winning in this race or merely keeping ahead, keeping pace
requires more than just information. It requires reducing our
collective risk. It requires achieving cyber resilience. This
is one of the key goals of CIRCIA.
CIRCIA is one of the most comprehensive cyber laws passed
in decades. It holds a great promise to reduce risk if
implemented properly. If not, we risk a lot. Our colleagues
have already spoken about this.
For small businesses, we actually risk increasing the cyber
risk. This is because we have a small amount of firefighters,
defenders, and we can overwhelm them with these requests. With
billions in potential costs for both Government agencies and
critical infrastructure entities, we need to get this right.
The communicative cost of this expanded scope we talked
about, covered entities, covered incidents, needs to be met
with a broader value-for-risk reduction. This entails action
within CIRCIA and beyond it. Significant infrastructure
investments, we talked about common architecture, common
technologies, common forms.
We need to be giving back to those entities. We need to
make sure that we take all those reports in and use the state-
of-the-art technology to really get those insights and move
from prevention to mitigation.
In the context of the CIRCIA rule, we are focusing on a few
more recommendations. First of all, I talked about technology
and infrastructure. The common framework to work between
agencies needs to rely on the cutting elementary solutions.
This is because only with AI we will be able to deduct the most
important insights from all this information coming in and
actually move toward resilience and mitigation.
We need to align the findings that we're getting from the
indicators with other programs that are investing within
agencies and critical infrastructures like CDM. If the threats
are coming from OT, from OT infrastructure, this needs to be a
priority across the board.
This type of reflection must also look at harmonization,
and my colleagues already talked extensively about that. I'm
going to bring forth one concrete recommendation.
The DOD, the DIB has a large population of small entities.
We estimate about 20 percent of all impacted entities with the
current scope within DOD. The CIRCIA agreement with DOD,
getting that aligned with the different clients, this must be a
priority. We will need Congress' support and oversight with
this priority.
My colleague, he already talked about ex parte. In the next
15 months after the comment period extension, the landscape
will change. An ex parte process would ensure we get feedback
from all stakeholders involved as the threat landscape evolves
in a way that is transparent. CISA can bring a model that is
building on the FCC or the copyright office there to ensure ex
parte communication.
We have an opportunity to lead in this race. Proper
implementation of CIRCIA can yield significant progress. Your
support and oversight is essential. There could be additional
measures. We must focus on technology solutions and
infrastructure.
We appreciate the time and the ability to share comments
with you and stand ready to collaborate with you.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify, and I welcome
your questions.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Elazari follows:]
Prepared Statement of Amit Elazari
April 29, 2024
Chairman Garbarino, Ranking Member Swalwell, and distinguished
Members of the subcommittee, on behalf of OpenPolicy and our community
of innovative companies, thank you for the opportunity to testify today
on the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical Infrastructure Act or
(CIRCIA).\1\ We appreciate your leadership in supporting the passage of
CIRCIA, and commend your critical role in conducting oversight of the
law's implementation process. We very much welcome the opportunity to
continue working with this subcommittee.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ 6 U.S.C. 681-681; Public Law 117-103, as amended by Public Law
117-263 (Dec. 23, 2022).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At a time when threats to our Nation have never been more profound,
and the consequences for human lives, critical infrastructure, and the
foundational institutions on which we rely, have never been more
prominent, the majority of businesses and critical infrastructure
providers still stand defenseless against persistent and existential
cyber threats. These threats have only expanded with the advancement of
AI; the convergence of operational technology (OT), IoT, and IT
systems; and the growing sophistication of adversaries.
CIRCIA, perhaps the most comprehensive legislative action on
cybersecurity in decades, presents a critical opportunity to increase
the Government's situational awareness, reduce cyber risk, and move us
collectively forward in the endless asymmetric fight against
adversaries seeking to undermine U.S. national and economic security.
But, as I must emphasize--only if implemented properly.
My name is Amit Elazari, and I am the CEO and co-founder of
OpenPolicy, a small business and technology company (otherwise known as
a ``startup''). I'm also the former head of cybersecurity policy at
Intel Corporation, served as chair of the Cyber Committee of the
Information Technology Industry Council (ITI), and was a member of the
IT-Sector Coordinating Council (SCC) executive committee.
In addition to my current role, I teach at the University of
California at Berkeley in the Master in Information and Cybersecurity
Program and serve as an advisor to the UC Berkeley Center for Long-Term
Cybersecurity. I also co-founded Disclose.io, whose body of work
related to establishing authorization for third-party ``good faith''
security research (ethical, or ``friendly'' hacking) is referred to in
the CIRCIA proposed implementing rule (``Rule'' or NPRM'').
In my capacity as a cyber policy expert, I engaged extensively in
the stakeholder process as CIRCIA was drafted, and am now actively
engaged in the rulemaking process. Today, I'm honored to share my
views, and the view of the OpenPolicy community, on the progress made
regarding CIRCIA implementation and the proposed rule.
By way of background, OpenPolicy \2\ is the world's first policy
intelligence and engagement technology platform, aiming to democratize
access to the policy-making process for entities of all sizes by
leveraging AI. OpenPolicy is a small business and perhaps the smallest
member of the IT Sector Coordinating Council.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ www.openpolicygroup.com.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
OpenPolicy collaborates with and represents leading innovators that
develop cutting-edge technologies to enhance cybersecurity and protect
critical infrastructure. OpenPolicy members include some of the world's
leading AI, IoT, and botnet prevention security companies such as
Armis, Human Security, FiniteState, HiddenLayer, Kiteworks, Cranium AI,
and more. Our members' solutions are used extensively by the critical
infrastructure community and among Federal agencies to protect against
malicious attacks.
My testimony identifies concrete policy recommendations that seek
to align the Rule and CISA's implementation process with Congressional
intent. I also want to highlight the Rule's impact on small businesses.
This committee is right to reflect on the implementation of CIRCIA,
given its mandate, and also because of changes in the policy landscape,
technology itself, and the threat landscape since both CIRCIA's
enactment and the RFI release. OpenPolicy applauds you for facilitating
this discussion.\3\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ CIRCIA requires covered entities to report to CISA-covered
cyber incidents within 72 hours after the covered entity reasonably
believes that the covered cyber incident has occurred and ransom
payments made in response to a ransomware attack within 24 hours after
the ransom payment has been made. See 6 U.S.C. 681b(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
background
Recent events underscore the urgent need to strengthen national
security and defense, and the opportunity CIRCIA has to advance
Government situational cyber awareness.
The promise CIRCIA holds relies on the ability of CISA to quickly
intake reports, allocate resources, and provide support to entities
affected by cyber incidents. CISA seeks to identify trends and swiftly
disseminate this information to network defenders. Such proactive
sharing will help alert other potential targets about emerging and
existing threats and ideally prevent them from succumbing to similar
attacks.
This use of information from the time an incident is reported, in
support of immediate remediation but also to further longer-term
prevention--is what CIRCIA aims to achieve and is meant to enhance our
collective security. Congress intended for CIRCIA to not only improve
Government awareness of cyber incidents but also to enhance security
resilience throughout the entire ecosystem and ultimately advance risk
reduction.
The effectiveness of CIRCIA and its underlying regulations should
be measured not only by how efficiently information from reported cyber
incidents is examined, enriched, and transferred, but also by how that
information is leveraged to improve the security of the entire
ecosystem, i.e., in a manner proportional to the cost (estimated in
$U.S. billions). Achieving this goal will entail a unified Federal
policy for leveraging the reported information to increase cyber
resilience. This will require actions that extend beyond CIRCIA and the
Rule. But the Rule, implemented correctly, presents a critical
opportunity to advance this goal.
On the matter of Rulemaking process:
The landscape will continue to change--The Rulemaking
process on CIRCIA should enable ``ex parte''
filings and engagements in the 15 months that
follow the comment period.

CISA's 450-page NPRM on CIRCIA was released on April 4, 2024.
Indeed, CISA's comprehensive and diligent work has resulted in an
extensive Rule that will have a significant impact on our Nation, its
security posture, and definitions that will have a profound impact on
small businesses and the startup/innovation community. The majority of
impacted entities may not be able to bring their unique point of view
forward during this time frame, and most lack the resources and access
to Government affairs professionals.
CISA has engaged extensively with stakeholders via the RFI, and
various listening sessions, yet the critical phase of the regulatory
development process begins now--with the release of the Proposed Rule,
the Comments Consideration and adjudication process, and preparation
for Final Rule release. Thus, we encourage CISA not only to extend the
comment period and continue with the stakeholder engagement process but
to also create a process that will allow for additional ``ex parte''
meetings and filings on the Rule. This should be accompanied by a
transparent process for ex parte filings publication, similar to the
proposed rules processes conducted and operated by the Federal
Communications Commission or the Copyright Office.\4\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\4\ See, for the FCC, 47 CFR  1.1200-1.1216, and Federal
Communication Commission, ``Ex Parte Resources'', https://www.fcc.gov/
proceedings-actions/ex-parte/general/ex-parte-resources. See, for the
Copyright Office, 37 CFR  201, 205, U.S. Copyright Office, Ex Parte
Communications, https://www.copyright.gov/rulemaking/ex-parte-
communications/.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Such a process would ensure that perspectives could be provided in
a transparent and inclusive manner to CISA as the policy, technology,
and threat landscape evolves in the 15-month period that follows the
NPRM release and after the comment period has ended. This would enable
additional engagement and better alignment on the Rule, following the
formal comment period.\5\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ OpenPolicy conducted meetings and led ``ex parte'' comments on
a recent Cybersecurity policy related Rule and Order released by the
FCC, which were ultimately cited in the Final Order. We find this
process to be very useful and essential in a case where the evolving
landscape merits continued, transparent engagement during the long
period of comments adjudication, and particularly beneficial for small
businesses who may not be able to engage on NPRM by the end of the
comment period. We acknowledge the robust engagement processes already
done by CISA, and further encourage CISA to continue and expand its
engagement processes with innovative companies and small businesses,
especially for sectors where they serve a large proportion of the
impacted community, such as the DIB.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On matters of policy:
The cumulative cost of compliance burden, due to the
proposed scope and expansion of liability, should
be balanced and reciprocated with increased cyber
resilience and risk reduction value
The record on stakeholder engagement reflects consensus on
underlying concerns associated with definitions and issues proposed to
be addressed in the Rule:

Complexity and Regulatory Duplicity (among Federal agencies
and regulators, States and Federal laws, and other applicable
global regimes, such as E.U. NIS 2.0 directive) that will
result in duplicative reporting, information and data overload,
``noise'', and extensive compliance burden on entities,
including on small businesses, during the critical, ``fire-
fighting'' period of incident response, when resources are
limited. There is an urgent need for ``harmonization'' and
streamlining of requirements.

Concerns related to the definition of ``covered cyber
incident'' capturing ``too much'' and in a manner that does not
advance CISA's situational awareness, but rather overwhelms
CISA.

Concerns related to the chilling effect of expanded
liability, which may hinder the public-private partnership
model that undergirds information sharing and threat mitigation
practices today with the U.S. Government and CISA, in
particular.

Concerns related to the scope of covered entities and impact
on smaller businesses.

Concerns related to the adverse impact to privacy and
security due to increased information sharing, in certain
cases, and the case of sharing sensitive ``vulnerability''
information in particular.
The Rule proposes a broad scope on many of these issues, notably
the definitions of covered entities, incidents, and required fields. It
notes however CISA's goal is to ``achieve the proper balance among the
number of reports being submitted, the benefits resulting from their
submission . . . ''. Our overarching recommendation is to ensure that
the cumulative impact and increased costs associated with such
expansion, will in fact, result in additional value to risk reduction
and enahnced cyber resilience.
To that end, OpenPolicy proposes the following policy
recommendations:
To ensure enhanced situational awareness of cyber threats across
critical infrastructure sectors ``translates'' into enhanced cyber
resilience and risk reduction, CISA should consider:

Additional reports, support functions, and public-private
partnership structures focused on impacted under-resourced
entities for information sharing and cyber resilience
resources.

Robust consideration to ensure that state-of-the-art secure
and diverse sets of technology solutions, including AI
capabilities, are used to intake incident reports,\6\ review
them, respond, and enable real-time mitigation in a way that
supports entities' ability to transition from ``remediation''
to ``prevention''.\7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ One method of technology adoption could be adopting
standardized reporting forms supported by advanced programmatic and
technological capabilities, whereby CISA can quickly operationalize,
anonymize, and share data with the industry in a way that is not
attributed to specific entities. This approach ensures that incident
information, rather than being relegated to solely routine threat
reports, is transformed into actionable intelligence that can be
immediately utilized to protect entities and enhance industry awareness
and preparedness. The primary purpose of this reporting requirement
should be to deliver critical and practical information in real time,
enabling front-line cyber defenders to thwart attacks. Clarifying this
goal will significantly aid in addressing the tactical details of the
final rule. It would not only ensure that it meets its intended
objectives effectively but also foster the overall resilience and
awareness of the entire cyber ecosystem.
\7\ CISA notes, the concern from ``noise'' increased scope (as
illustrated by a broader set of ``entities'', ``incidents'', and
``reporting fields''), ``can be mitigated through technological and
procedural strategies.'' [Rule, at 23652-3]. More attention and
resources should be provided in support of such technological and
procedural strategies, to achieve the desired ``translation'' effect.
CISA also recognizes further the breadth of duplicity and also that
agencies may have different motivations in requesting such information.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Alignment of other CISA, and other Government-supported,
resources (including programs such as CDM) to the nexus of
threats, indicators, and compromises ``spotted'' via the
reporting.

Increased funding and resources to support the intake of
remediation solutions and overall resilience of critical
infrastructure, including Federal infrastructure, to attacks--
embodying the zero trust and secure by design culture.
Our continued focus should be preventing attacks, not only
remediating them. The volume of reports should be calibrated in service
of this cause. Achieving this goal will entail a broader technical and
programmatic collaboration between all Federal agencies involved, as
well as the adoption of technology solutions.
To summarize, CISA was tasked with regulatory development and
proposed definitions seeking to balance these inquiries with the
underlying congressional intent of CIRCIA. The NPRM reflects a
cumulative extended scope of proposed definitions with respect to
covered entities, the scope of incidents to be reported, the
application on small businesses, and the potential (and actual risk)
for duplicative burden for reporting.
Overall this approach reflects a higher ``cost'' and ``burden''
that needs to be accompanied by a balanced ``value'', and progress in
situational awareness and risk reduction--thereby enabling a
significant ``giving back'' component.
Further action is needed to reduce the potential cost associated
with regulatory duplicity and the potential for liability
CISA has acknowledged both the concerns of stakeholders associated
with a complex reporting landscape and the need for further action on
this matter.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ ``In an attempt to minimize the burden on covered entities
potentially subject to both CIRCIA and other Federal cyber incident
reporting requirements, CISA is committed to exploring ways to
harmonize this regulation with other existing Federal reporting
regimes, where practicable and seeks comment from the public on how it
can further achieve this goal.'' Id. at 23653.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
We recommend the following:

CIRCIA Agreements, geared to enable information-sharing
mechanisms and the underlying technology architecture to
support such sharing in a secure manner, should be prioritized,
resourced, and achieved. The Rule clarifies that good-faith
efforts to reach such agreements would be made. However and as
demonstrated by policy actions in the last 2 years, achieving
this goal requires a more holistic and deliberate effort from
all agencies involved and Congress. As the Congressional
Research Report on CIRCIA puts it: ``It seems unlikely that
Federal regulators will relinquish their specific reporting
requirements in deference to CISA because existing regulations
and the proposed CIRCIA rule serve different purposes.''\9\
(emphasis added).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ Congressional Research Service, CIRCIA: Notice of Proposed Rule
Making: In Brief, April 11, 2024.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the focal points of the CIRCIA agreements should be
addressing the potential overlap with reporting requirements
applicable to the Defense Industrial Base (DIB), under DFARS
clause 252.204-7012. This path will reduce the considerable
burden on a sector that is largely composed of small businesses
(see below). This approach could be enabled by 2 related policy
actions that recently matured. First, The DoD DFAR is soon to
be revised,\10\ thereby enabling further harmonization, despite
the difference in scope of the ``incident'' definition.\11\
Second, the DoD recently announced supporting infrastructure
that can potentially enable a CIRCIA Agreement.\12\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ The Defense Acquisition Regulations Council Director has
recently tasked a team with rule development, exploring a revision for
DFARS clause 252.204-7012, DFARS clause 252.204-7012, Safeguarding
Covered Defense Information and Cyber Incident Reporting (See DFARS
Case 2023-D 024, has described, on the DFARS Open Cases Report, https:/
/www.acq.osd.mil/dpap/dars/opencases/dfarscasenum/dfars.pdf.
\11\ Compared to the CIRCIA proposed rule definition, covered
entities in the Defense Industrial Base (DIB) Sector are already
obligated to report cybersecurity incidents in a substantially similar
time frame (72 hours) pursuant to DFARS clause 252.204-7012, see
Safeguarding Covered Defense Information and Cyber Incident Reporting.
In contrast, the current scope of the DIB sector reportable incidents
is narrower, and focuses on compromises of Controlled Unclassified
Information while the CIRCIA proposed rule outlines a broader scope for
``covered incident''.
\12\ On March 12, 2024, DoD published the Defense Industrial Base
Cybersecurity Activities (DIB CS) final rule, which expands eligibility
to DoD's voluntary incident reporting and cyber threat intelligence
sharing program to all DIB entities (rather than just cleared defense
contractors). These revisions will allow all defense contractors who
own or operate an unclassified information system that processes,
stores, or transmits covered defense information to benefit from
bilateral information sharing.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Congress should conduct oversight and perhaps even act in
service of achieving additional CIRCIA agreements and reducing
duplicity, when practical and desired, to achieve agency
alignment.

The need for harmonization and reducing duplicity is
clear.\13\ The path toward reducing regulatory duplication,
including with globally applicable regimes, should move away
from aspirational and exploratory, toward actionable and
practical--and such efforts will likely require a common
technology architecture, where additional resources may be
needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See also the National Cybersecurity Strategy, at p. 11, ``The
Federal Government must coordinate the authorities and capabilities of
the departments and agencies that are collectively responsible for
supporting the defense of critical infrastructure''.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

On legal liability, we recommend enhanced ``due process''
mechanisms for covered entities. We are concerned about
liability protection erosion in the case of good-faith
disagreements between CISA and the covered entity. As drafted,
liability protection measures are ``abandoned'' once a subpoena
is issued but without intervening process. While CIRCIA
provides CISA the ability to use its subpoena power, the
current NPRM does not include further consideration, or a
``curing'' process, an arbitration process, or other procedures
to deliberate with CISA, in good-faith, the amount of
information requested prior to CISA leveraging its subpoena
power, while enabling the entity to maintain liability
protection (see  226.14(d)(1), and ps. 23735). We recommend
further consideration and Congressional oversight to ensure a
measured approach in the Final Rule implementation on this
topic.
Small Businesses First ``Mindset''
Although the CIRCIA proposed rule affects many small entities
across all critical infrastructure sectors, its impact on the DIB
Sector small business community is profound. Defense security
compliance Industry Expert Jacob Horne provided some striking
analysis:\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ See also Jacob Horne, Sum IT Up Podcast: CIRCIA Rulemaking and
Double Incident Reporting for the DIB, available at: https://
www.summit7.us/blog/circia-rulemaking- ?hs_amp=true.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nearly a quarter of all affected entities are in the Defense
Industrial Base Sector.

Of the 316,244 affected entities, CISA estimates 72,000 of
them are in the DIB.

17% of entities affected by the CIRCIA proposed rule are DIB
SMBs.

DoD has stated that roughly 75% of the DIB is made from
small and medium-sized businesses.
That amounts to 54,000 of the 72,000 DIB entities in Table 1
Affected Population, by Criteria (see NPRM, at 23742).

98% of affected entities are SMBs, 17% of affected SMBs are
in the DIB.

Of the 316,244 covered entities, CISA estimates that
310,855 would be considered small entities (See, Id. at
23763).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Wire/
DIB       Radio       Critical    Financial
Sector     Comms    Manufacturing   Services
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Percent Total Affected Entities.................................        23%        20%          12%          12%
Percent Total Costs.............................................        16%        14%           9%           9%
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
See Table 1 and Table 10 of the NPRM, Id.

We, therefore, recommend prioritizing ``scoping'' activities (such
as achieving CIRCIA agreements) impacting small businesses that are
profoundly impacted by the Rule, such as the DIB small business
community.
summary
The Congressional intent for CIRCIA is ``preserv[ing] national
security, economic security, and public health and safety'', and
assisting the Federal Government with increasing situational awareness
and visibility to cyber threats in support of a broader mission to
achieve systemic risk reduction for the United States and its
underlying critical infrastructure. This ultimate value, of increasing
cyber resilience merits additional proportionality between the cost,
and value of and processes CISA and the Federal Government will
exercise to ``give back'' to impacted communities who bear the
implementation cost. This balance may require more resources and
additional infrastructure to ``rapidly deploy resources'' and better
diverse, state-of-the-art solutions to stay ahead of malicious actors
and deploy alerting systems. It will further require those who need to
alert the Government--to have solutions, and ``alert systems'', to spot
issues, and to intake alerts and process them into action. To achieve
cyber resilience we must approach CIRCIA implementation in the context
of the broader common fabric of cybersecurity policy efforts,
implemented in the United States and globally.
Creating the architecture, technically, procedurally, and
programmatically, and the culture, that truly achieves the underlying
risk reduction goal of CIRCIA will require action from CISA, and other
agencies, that may extend beyond the Rule, but proper implementation of
CIRCIA can result in considerable progress. Much progress has been
made--we will continue to rely on Congress's relentless attention to
this matter, as we move forward with CIRCIA's implementation.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify today and look forward for
your questions.

Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Ms. Elazari.
Members will be recognized by order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning. An additional round of questioning
may be called after all Members have been recognized.
I now recognize the gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Ezell,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you all for being here today, and I'll just tell you
I can't hear as fast as you talk. So just be a little patient
with me. I may talk a little slower than the rest of these
folks around here, but I'll do my best.
As CISA introduces new proposed rules around cybersecurity,
I want to ensure that our industry partners are being heard.
Ms. Hogsett, CISA estimates that implementing the CIRCIA
will cost $2.8 billion, cover 314,000 entities, and result in
over 200,000 reports over the next 11 years.
Do you agree with CISA's analysis about the cost and this
impact?
Ms. Hogsett. Thank you for the question, sir.
So we are still going through the estimates and how CISA
put those together. I will say, based on our conversations with
financial institutions, that from what we can tell, the
estimates for both number of companies and entities that would
have to report, the number of reports they would likely
receive, but also the cost to retain certain information is
underestimated by quite a significant margin.
This is not an insignificant Government reporting burden
that would be imposed on covered entities.
Mr. Ezell. To give us perspective, how many reports do you
estimate that entities in your sector generate in a year? Can
you describe current existing compliance costs for your sector?
Ms. Hogsett. For my sector?
Mr. Ezell. Yes.
Ms. Hogsett. So I'd have to get back to you with more
specifics for the purpose of CIRCIA.
What I can tell you is that financial services is one of
the most heavily-regulated sectors out there.
Mr. Ezell. Right.
Ms. Hogsett. We recently did a survey of our member
institutions to look at the compliance burden and the amount
time that they spend on regulations and compliance, as opposed
to improving their programs and defending against attackers.
Chief information security officers who are often the lead
point for this within firms report spending anywhere from 30 to
50 percent of their time on compliance, and their teams
collectively have reported spending about 70 percent of their
time.
Mr. Ezell. OK. One of the stated goals of CIRCIA is to use
information gathered about cyber incidents and to, ``enhance
the quality and effectiveness of information sharing in
coordination of efforts with the appropriate entities''.
Are you confident in CISA's ability to analyze this massive
amount of data and use it to produce actionable information in
some sort of a timely fashion?
Ms. Hogsett. Again, thank you for the question.
We think that CISA has some work to do to scale back the
requirements of this to ensure they are getting useful
information and we're not just getting a lot of signal because
we want CISA to be able to pinpoint those incident and those
threat vectors that are really of most significance and then
have the capability to very quickly turn that back around so
that if a financial institution is facing something that might
come to face an electric company or a telecom, that that gets
out very quickly and we can prevent that from spreading
further.
That requires a speed with which we have not yet seen
Government be able to move. So we do encourage narrowing the
threshold for incidents that would need to be reported,
narrowing the elements that would need to be reported, and then
also ensuring that CISA has the necessary capabilities and
staff expertise.
You need some level of subject-matter expertise to also
kind-of know what to look for to really make this successful.
We think it can be successful and it would be very valuable,
but we do need to narrow it a little bit.
Mr. Ezell. Well, anytime you get the Government involved,
it's going to slow down. We all know that. So, you know, coming
from police world, we get a lot of information, and sometimes
it's not that easy to gather it and use it and get it done in a
timely manner.
So, Dr. Elazari, can you highlight some areas where Federal
agencies could improve regulatory reporting requirements to
help small businesses?
Ms. Elazari. Thank you, sir.
So it is really striking to see the largest amount,
significant amount of impacted entities are actually smaller.
The threshold that is now proposed is building on the small to
medium business size. So actually a start-up with a 50 million
ARR, annual revenue, I understand from the estimates could be
in scope. So this is a very large community.
Out of it, interestingly, a lot of it from the defense. The
defense industrial base, these are innovators. They are working
to protect us. So this is an area we must pay attention to.
So we are aware of a lot of duplicity, and actually it's
striking. The Congressional reports, research itself says it's
unlikely that some agencies would resist urge to continue with
their reporting requirements because they think it's served--
it's serving other goals.
Mr. Ezell. Right.
Ms. Elazari. So this is an area where we would need
Congress support with.
I want to be very actionable. The duplicity issue is
serious, and it's discussed. There is a National Cyber Director
report on it. It requires additional action.
In the context of the CIRCIA agreement framework that CISA
has put out in the proposed rule, the use of the terminology is
somewhat aspirational. We would study the potential duplicity.
There is desire and good-faith desire to work with agencies,
but we really need to be doubling down on those sectors where
the duplicity is not just harmful for the businesses, it's
harmful for the Nation.
In those areas where we have a lot of burden on small
businesses like the DIB which some common architecture formats,
where we can, where we can achieve common goals--and I
understand that two recent changes in the default rules for the
DOD have opened the door on--for this issue. I've elaborated on
this in the written testimony. So we think this should be a
priority.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you very much.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize the former Chair of this committee, the
gentlelady from New York, Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I thank our Ranking Member for allowing me to waive on this
afternoon.
Good afternoon. First, let me thank our panel of witnesses
for joining us today to share their views on CISA's recent NPRM
on cyber incident reporting.
Let me also once again thank the Chair and Ranking Member
for permitting me to participate in today's hearing.
CIRCIA was one of the subcommittee's most significant
accomplishments during the 116th Congress, and I'm committed to
ensuring its success.
I'm also glad to see some familiar faces at the witness
table. Both Ms. Hogsett and Mr. Mayer testified at the
subcommittee's legislative hearing on CIRCIA in September 2021
and offered critical input that improved the bill.
So I appreciate your continued commitment to CIRCIA's
success.
Implementation of CIRCIA will be an enormous undertaking
for both the Government and the private sector, and so I
congratulate CISA on publishing the NPRM.
Having reviewed sections of the proposed rule, I want to
clarify a few points. When I began working with my colleagues
on the subcommittee and in the private-sector draft CIRCIA, our
consensus was that the Federal Government would benefit from a
well-scoped incident reporting framework.
Notably, on September 2021--at a September 2021 hearing, I
said that we do not expect all critical infrastructure owners
and operators to be subject to this reporting requirement.
Rather we expected to apply only to a subset.
Additionally, our intent was that reporting requirements
would be appropriately tailored to limit overreporting and
ensure that CIRCIA ultimately yields the security benefits we
intended. In short, we wanted reporting from more than the 120
entities the Solarium Commission recommended and a greater
range of incident than just those that would trigger a unified
coordination group. But we did not intend to subject everyone
or every incident to reporting.
To that end, I hope that CISA will continue to further
engage with stakeholders to refine the parameters for incident
reporting.
Another priority was streamlining reporting and reducing
the cost of compliance, which brings me to my first question
directed to all of our witnesses.
What can CISA do--be doing right now to streamline incident
reporting and what can it do to ensure that cyber incident
intake forms are accessible and easy to use?
Mr. Aaronson. We'll go in order.
So, first of all, let me just thank you, Representative
Clarke, for everything you just said about your intent with
CIRCIA. I think all of us, I'll certainly speak for EEI, agree
with that intent.
I think, most importantly--and I mentioned it both in my
written and verbal testimony today--is to leverage sector risk
management agencies as areas where they are already collecting
data through mandatory reporting requirements that are sector-
specific and meaningful.
Leveraging the substantially similar reporting requirement
definition that you put in the act but that doesn't seem to
really be as prominent in the proposed rule is probably the
most important recommendation I can give.
Mr. Mayer. Thank you, Congresswoman Clarke, and also thank
you for the work you've done to put--promote this work with
CIRCIA and other efforts in cybersecurity.
I think the two points you mentioned are critical here, and
here's where there's opportunities for improvement.
One is a subset of the covered entities. I have no way of
providing any assurance, as I read the rules as they are
proposed, that we're not going to require all of the companies
within our sector to be responsive to this. That will
absolutely guarantee that the CISA will be overwhelmed with
information that's submitted.
The question was asked about the 200,000 potential reports
between now and 2033. That's light years away, 11 years, when
it comes to cybersecurity. We'll be in a completely different
environment in 11 years. We'll have 6G. We have AI. We'll
probably have quantum computing at that point.
So trying to speculate about what that environment looks
like in terms of threats and reporting is very challenging.
I do think it's very important that we get clarity around
what is a reportable event because the way it reads right now,
I have no way of knowing what a company would be responsible
for submitting, given the current types of attacks that we're
facing.
One company alone in our industry talked yesterday about
having 6,000 attacks a month. We could be at 200,000 reports in
1 year or less just from a narrow subset of companies.
So we really need work together with CISA and other
stakeholders to figure out how do we get to the intention of
the legislators, Congress, and CISA which is to provide rapid
response in times of triage--we're talking about really
significant incident--so that we can help victims, so that we
can forewarn other folks in the ecosystem, that we can
integrate the information, assemble it, study it, analyze it,
and produce mitigating communications, what can we mitigate.
If we do that, we have a much higher likelihood that we're
going to be successful. If we don't do that, I think we're
looking at a big problem. Hopefully over time it will evolve.
We'll get better at it.
Ms. Elazari. I will just add----
Mr. Garbarino. We'll let--you can continue, please. You can
answer the question.
Ms. Elazari. OK.
First of all, Ms. Clarke, thank you so much for your
leadership in support of passage of the law.
I will just add very briefly. Common architecture, the NPRM
is very lean on except the web form and some API. Colleagues
have already discussed the issue of the definition, the scope,
the reporting.
If there is not going to be a very sophisticated technology
system to take all this intake forms with one format and APIs
or at least where we can harmonize, we won't be able to
leverage the same cutting-edge solutions that the adversaries
are already using.
That is technology that is also going to help us move again
from prevention, from the firefighting, to understanding the
systematic risk, to moving to cyber resilience which is
prevention.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you.
I thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I thank you, Ranking Member.
I appreciate the indulgence. Thank you.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. Thank you for coming.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee, for 5
minutes.
Ms. Lee. Thank, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you to all of our witnesses for being here today for
this hearing.
Mr. Aaronson, I would like to start with you.
You identified in your testimony 5 specific areas you
thought were in need of further consideration related to our
process here, and one in particular was data preservation
requirements.
I recognize your concern about the cost and logistics of
maintaining the current data preservation that is proposed, but
CISA suggests that maintaining data in this way helps them to
analyze information and come up with better long-term
strategies to help prevent attacks.
Would you share with us how long and in what way you
recommend data be preserved?
Mr. Aaronson. Thank you so much for the question,
Congresswoman Lee.
So I would say the importance of data retention, that's a--
that's resource-intensive. We were talking about some of the
statistics that you've heard. Mr. Mayer just mentioned a
number. I mentioned a company that will remain nameless but
that thinks they could have as many as 600 a month, and that
would--that would evolve out to more than 65,000 over the next
9 years.
That is a significant burden of retention. That's a
significant burden on the resources that would be needed from a
digital perspective. That's a significant burden from a work
force perspective, having to manage all that.
So I think maybe a little bit more philosophically,
juxtaposing incident reporting, which is mandatory, and
information sharing, which is voluntary, the idea here is we're
trying to glean signal from noise.
I don't disagree with CISA's interpretation that more data
could yield more information, but that's within reason. If
we're talking about one company generating 65,000 reports over
the course of the next 9 years, extrapolated over 300,000
potentially covered entities, how do you glean signal from that
noise? How do you get or manage 2 years worth of that data? How
do you manipulate it? How do you resource it? How do you have
staff that deals with it? How do you have the digital
infrastructure that can actually maintain all of that?
Those are really serious questions and really resource-
intensive challenges.
Ms. Lee. Is there a time line that you think would be more
appropriate?
Mr. Aaronson. So I think it's less the time line and more
the amount of data that would be requested. So if we can start
to narrow down the number of reports that would be required to
those things that are truly impactful and truly impacting truly
critical infrastructure, then a 2-year time horizon is not
untenable.
But if you're talking about throwing everything against the
wall, that's when it becomes a more resource-intensive
challenge.
Ms. Lee. You just mentioned something that is--was my next
question because several of you have touched on this subject
and that is the idea that the threshold for the reporting
requirement itself you perceive to be overly broad and that
it's going to capture too many things, too much information.
I think Ms. Hogsett referred to it as, you know, what is a
reportable event and whether the definition there should be
narrowed.
Mr. Aaronson, I'll start with you since we're already
discussing it. Do you have any specific thoughts on how that
definition should be narrowed? What should be a reportable
event?
Mr. Aaronson. So in particular, the--so it's the four
prongs. Right? Any one of them could trigger a reportable
event.
The phrasing ``loss of integrity'' and some of the supply
chain aspects, that's a lot of things. You know, without
getting technical but things like password spraying, things
like any sort of impact on a cloud provider could impact
integrity, could impact availability. That becomes a reportable
event.
Does that really matter? That's the question that we need
to ask ourselves. What are those types of incidents that we
truly need to be collecting?
Ms. Lee. Ms. Hogsett, let me hear from you on that same
question.
Ms. Hogsett. Yes, thank you for the question.
So we referred to it in our past comments to CISA as it
should be with malicious intent. So if you think about an event
that is having an impact and causing harm and it's not just a
technical glitch or a system mis-configuration that took things
off-line, I don't think those are the things that CISA should
be collecting on.
But the way the definitions are currently crafted, it would
capture that. We think that that should be narrowed to
accommodate that letter.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Mayer, do you have any additional thoughts on
that threshold of reporting requirement?
Mr. Mayer. I do think we have to get to the--when you are
talking about confidentiality and integrating availability. You
know, we're providing services that--we're providing services
at 99.99 percent availability over the course of the year, what
threshold would you lower that to, to make that reasonable?
I don't know the answer to that. But it's not, you know,
what could conceivably be every single type of outage that
occurs because all networks have issues. The question is: Have
you built in the resiliency, the redundancy to respond quickly
and survive that? How resilient are the networks?
I'm going to talk very briefly about supply chain because
it's something I'm very familiar with through the task force.
When you look at the supply chain and you talk about
compromises, if we have to report events in the supply chain,
we're not just talking about a static event. We're talking
about everything from the design, to the development to the
production, to the distribution, to the operations, to the
maintenance, and ultimately to the end of the life cycle.
What is--what we have to look at is: Where is the most
critical event that's going to occur? What's going to be the
immediate impact? What is the potential for some cascading
impact? How big a part of the ecosystem can potentially be
impacted? That's going to be an iterative and evolving process.
So we have to get to the place where we can refine the
analysis and thinking here and maybe have a life span of 6
months. We may decide after 6 months this is no longer a
legitimate threshold because there's a new attack vector.
That's the kind of iteration. That's where the
collaboration with industry comes in. That's where the shared
expertise and, you know, perspective between Government and
industry comes to play.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
I now recognize the Ranking Member, Mr. Swalwell, from
California for 5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Swalwell. Ms. Hogsett, just to follow up on your point
about not having to spend time and resources reporting a
glitch, which I agree with, how would you be able to tell that
early on, though, if it wasn't malicious? I don't know the
answer to that, but that would just be my follow-along on that
issue.
Ms. Hogsett. Yes, it does take time. I think there's room,
and we have this in other areas where the entity is allowed to
take time to actually assess what happened. You can fairly
early on figure out, OK, well, we had a major upgrade going in
and it went awry versus we don't know what this is. It
potentially looks bad. Then our firms would err on the side of,
like, that's a bad thing.
It reaches we would refer to a materiality, like, has a
significant material impact on a material part of your
operations. That's a significant threshold.
That's kind-of how we think about it and would encourage an
opportunity to talk to CISA a bit further about how we could
capture that.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
Ms. Elazari, you noted in your opening and alluded to the
risk of being overly broad, especially for small businesses,
and that if you do that, you risk them actually becoming more
vulnerable to an attack.
I think I understand what you are saying but just want to
give you a little more time to articulate what that looks like.
Ms. Elazari. Thank you, and I appreciate the question.
So there are a couple of points here. Certainly the
thresholds are really broad in the rule, both in terms of the
definitions of the small businesses. They actually refer to the
specific sectors in certain cases.
I think we risk two main elements. When it comes to the
small businesses, they really don't have the ability to divert
the resource in order, you know, to make those type of
assessments. So there is a strong, you know, concern they're
going to be overreporting. They really cannot be seeping
through those definitions, and they don't have the legal teams
that could do that.
The other perhaps, you know, striking problems is for the
small businesses, if you're devoting the resource there,
they're not firefighting. This is real risk.
The final point is that those small communities are also
the ones that really need our assistance not just in the
prevention but into moving into remediation, not just the
immediate attack but that Secure By Design, so multifactor,
patching, the basic tools.
So that should be a big focus, giving back. That may
require some more resource, some more infrastructure.
Very quickly, Congressman, with your permission, I will say
most of the incidents we have seen out there, including some
software supply chain issues, have nothing to do with malicious
intent.
So the common frameworks today for incident report do not
hinge on the concept of malicious intent, but I do believe
there is a lot of value in reflecting on what Europe is doing.
NIS directive is already being implemented.
It seems that the thresholds here in CIRCIA in the proposed
NPRM are actually going beyond some of definitions there. So
perhaps there is some learning to be held.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you. I think that also goes to what Ms.
Hogsett was saying, that distinguishing between a software
upgrade that goes south, and a malicious actor is really
important, and we want to make sure you have clear guidance on
that.
To all witnesses--maybe Mr. Aaronson, I'll start with you--
and if you could just limit it to about 20 to 30 seconds so
each could answer.
As you engage with other regulators, what do you see as a
willingness to harmonize with CISA?
Mr. Aaronson. So, I think they're willing--I mean, it's
probably a better question for the regulators themselves, but I
think they would welcome that, right?
So the electric power sector has the Department of Energy's
OE-417 forms. Those are pretty interesting. They're very
limited in what they're asking for, but when they are asked,
it's because of an impactful incident.
NERC has been around since 2005, and has been asking for
some very specific information about incidents. That feeds very
nicely into what CIRCIA is trying to do. I think it's just
about not reinventing the wheel on the CISA side.
I think on the sector risk management side, on the sector-
specific side, we've already got pretty good reporting regimes.
Let's leverage those.
Mr. Swalwell. Great.
Ms. Hogsett.
Ms. Hogsett. So some--we have a large number of regulators.
Some of them are very willing to participate and sort-of
recognize that you need to be aligned. We have others that are
independent regulators who continue to do their own thing.
The SEC is one I would point to in particular that we see
as particularly harmful, but we've also seen the Commodity
Futures Trading Commission just earlier this year propose a new
rule. As part of that, it would require instant reporting as
well.
So we continue to see a proliferation of additional
requirements rather than a centralization, as I think Congress
intended to make this occur through CISA.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thanks.
Mr. Mayer. So for the cons, I don't suffer the situation
where we have, I don't know, 15, 20 different regulators. But
we have one regulator who is very determined to impose
cybersecurity requirements on our sector, and we would hope
that as part of what the CIRC is recommending----
Mr. Swalwell. Yes.
Mr. Mayer [continuing]. There would be a dialog between
CISA and our regulators to make sure that we're not having
competing requirements, that a single set of information can be
shared as appropriate.
Any other agencies that get involved in this should begin
to think about what that harmonization picture looks like
broadly for the sectors, all of the critical infrastructure
sectors.
Ms. Elazari. Perhaps I can just provide one point of view.
I think even if we had more cohesive--cohesive kind of
landscape and we have more parallels, we still wouldn't have
common architecture.
So if the different regulators and agencies are not feeling
like they're getting that visibility, sometimes their goal is
different. We know from the SEC, the goal is, they're, you
know, educating the investors, right, where the goal of CIRCIA
is very different.
If we want to have that common architecture to gain
insights, of course with the state-of-the-art technology and
with the secure elements that we need to maintain that
information in confidence, even with that streamlining, it will
be hard to get from that information everything we need to give
back.
So I think that's a common area of focus for the agencies
as they're considering the duplicity.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you. Yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for 5 minutes of questioning.
I want to, in my second round, I'm going to focus on
harmonization, but really on this first round, I want to talk
about the specific rule, and really hear from industry as to
what--you know, the comment period is open. We think it's going
to be extended--what really needs to be done, because as I said
in my opening statement, this needs to be done right. We don't
want to do it and then have to change it. This needs to be done
right. That is why we're doing this.
You know, I was looking at some things, you know, for
example, there's a--under the proposed rule, there's a covered
entity would have to submit a supplemental report. They don't
have all the information required within 72 hours of having a
reasonable belief that there's an incident has occurred.
You know, they're looking at, they want information such as
technical details, physical locations of networks, devices,
information systems, the impact of covered cyber incident, and
the covered entity's operations, you know, et cetera.
That seems just one of the many things that they're looking
for. You know, I want to hear from you, do you think this
information is feasible to provide, you know, within 72 hours,
or, you know, how much longer after that will a supplemental
report be filed? Are there going to be multiple--is there
concerns of multiple supplemental reports?
You know, I want to hear specifically from everyone, all of
you, just really the concerns about what's under the current
rule, what's proposed, and what needs to be done to fix it. So
we'll start with Mr. Aaronson.
Mr. Aaronson. So there's a lot there. I would say the rule
itself--I think Ms. Clarke hit it really well--the intent of
the committee always was to create a subset of reports that
actually glean--you know, again, create meaningful insights,
and I fear that by asking for all of these things in such a
short amount of time--yes, there's the supplemental and all
that.
But as everybody has said, that fog of war in those early
days, that is not a good time to be spending on compliance
burdens; it's a good time to be responding and recovering and
then understanding what the impact is.
I'll keep going back to the value of the OE-417. There was
an impact. Great. We told somebody there was an impact. Now
there's knowledge that was an impact, and we can all talk to
each other.
The other value of that construct is, it creates a signal
that something happened, now let's dig deeper.
This idea that we are going to generate so much information
in a short amount of time, in the interest of creating insights
for other sectors, is just flawed. This goes back to my
juxtaposing information sharing versus incident reporting.
Incident reporting is about compliance. Incident reporting is
about mandatory knowledge.
As Dr. Elazari said, incident reporting in the SEC's case
is about transparency to investors.
If what we're trying to solve here is to create cross-
sector awareness, voluntary information sharing is what we need
to be prioritizing, and to the extent that CIRCIA needs to find
those truly impactful, truly critical incidents that happened,
then having that first step of, this happened, like an OE-417,
as opposed to trying to dig deep and create all of this, you
know, kind-of long-term record, it's just not the right
approach.
Mr. Garbarino. Ms. Hogsett.
Ms. Hogsett. To build on Scott's point, so this is frankly
the most expansive data-reporting regime we've seen. We've got
companies that have to comply globally with hundreds of
different regulatory reporting requirements. This is the most,
I think, of any of those, quite frankly.
The data elements, as Scott noted, are well beyond what
would initially be known. So, you know, a better approach, what
I think we would propose is, narrow that to really critical
information that you can do something with, and then send that
back out to a wider audience.
There is value in CISA being able to follow up with the
entity, and I think on our part, you know, our firms would far
prefer to get the information in quickly to CISA, and then have
an on-going dialog if CISA would like more information, as
opposed to making it a foregone conclusion that you must submit
all of these data elements.
If you actually read the full rule, the requirement is sort
of an allowance to provide, if you don't have the information
right away at 72 hours, you can provide the supplemental
reports.
The assumption, as its written, is that you will, at some
point in time, provide all of that data, or at least say, don't
have it, won't provide, and then you're sort-of like, Are you
going to take it? Is that good? Or is CISA going to come back
at you and say you didn't comply.
So I think there's a lot of questions that firms still have
around how often, like, when--what would trigger a supplemental
report. You might have multiple of those before the incident is
closed.
It's just creating an on-going reporting requirement that
we think could be balanced better to make it effective for
everybody.
Mr. Mayer. I think there's a theme here that runs across a
lot of these issues, and that is a lack of specificity and
clarity. So the rule talks about providing new and different
information. I don't know what ``new and different
information'' means and how significantly new it is, and how
different it is from what was originally provided.
It's also not time-bound. So I could be in this situation
or a company could be in this situation where they're into
perpetuity, you know, providing supplemental information that
may not have any impact on improving security in the ecosystem.
So we need to tighten this up, get some clarity around what
type of supplemental information is going to contribute to a
better understanding, allowing CISA to more immediately respond
and help victims and forewarn victims.
If it doesn't meet that criteria, we're going to be taking
resources away from CISA's people, and we're going to take
resources away from front-line practitioners, who are going to
be more concerned about complying with the supplemental
requirements out of fear of some enforcement action
potentially. I don't think that improves security at all.
Mr. Garbarino. Doctor.
Ms. Elazari. I think it's worth underlying what was the
goal with the supplementing reporting clause in the beginning.
The concern was--and it's right--that in the 72 hours, there
isn't enough information.
So the goal was to report something and not fear from
liability as we come toward the potentially, and often needed,
supplemental reporting, but the problem is, we have all these
fields, and instead of thinking about it as a voluntary measure
as needing and allowing CISA to use their RFI, right, process,
in order to ask more information, it's flipped backward.
So that, combined with the potential for liability
protections being removed once, you know, CISA exercises their
subpoena power, creates a very big risk that people--entities
will just be over-reporting at scale, essentially what we call
in security DDOSing, creating a denial of service, overloading
of information.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Doctor.
I'm so happy my friend from New Jersey, Mr. Menendez, could
join us. This is wonderful. I now recognize Mr. Menendez for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Menendez. It's a pleasure to be here. Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Ranking Member, thank you for convening today's hearing. To our
witnesses, thank you for being here. I'd like to discuss
possible solutions to building out CISA's analytical
capabilities.
Dr. Elazari, in your testimony you mentioned that CISA
should be using state-of-the-art technology to collect incident
reports, including leveraging artificial intelligence.
Can you expand on how leveraging AI could improve the
process of incidents reports?
Ms. Elazari. Thank you, Congressman. So, I'm not the
technology expert here, but our community does include some of
the most innovative AI companies in the world. In security
right now, the cutting--the leading-edge companies are
leveraging AI in order to study information on scale, use
generative AI models as well to be ahead of the attacker, to
predict where the attacker would be, leveraging knowledge from,
you know, the dark web and knowledge about the adversaries, and
really, you know, being ahead of even the--of the incident.
I think there is a lot of new technologies out there, but
what is striking, in the context of the proposed rule, is
CISA's comfort about getting all these reports. They actually
say it--we're not concerned about not getting not enough
reports--sorry--too much reports. We are concerned about not
getting enough. We're going to solve it with today's technology
and strategic approaches.
But the funding is $100 million annually, I believe, so
there is no proportion between how do we think that all this
reporting is coming in, and actually we will be using cutting-
edge solutions like the solutions to give back.
I must emphasize, give back, it's not just an immediate
remediation. It's what are the patterns, where do we need
prioritize more cyber resilience measures, right, those secure
by designs, those measures that we need to give to the critical
infrastructure entities that don't have resource.
So we have to be leveraging those cutting-edge solutions
and they're going to be changing in the next 15 months, and
this is where the ex parte process will allow us to have that
dialog with the right parties in place with CISA.
Mr. Menendez. So you're confident in the technology and
that it will assist CISA. You're just concerned, it seems like,
that the funding mechanisms to ensure that CISA has the ability
to procure and use and have the work force to use the
technology that's state-of-the-art, cutting-edge, that will
enable them to do their job better?
Ms. Elazari. So I think, sir, there are also very
legitimate concerns being raised on the scope itself. There are
two prongs here. There is everything that is being reported in
the overload, but then at the minimum at the other side, we
should be using cutting-edge solutions because that's the way
to make sure that the asymmetric advantage that the attackers
have, they have--they go after the weakest link--is met with
the best solutions to get the insights.
I do believe that--and we need to study this more--but
there is an underestimate on how much it's going to be costing
to not just create that common architecture to get all the
reports in one place and secure them, but also, use those
solutions in order to make sure that we are actually having--
getting the best indicators. There is a lot of information
right now we are asking for entities. We need to give back
risk-reduction value.
Mr. Menendez. Understood. On the flip side, is there any
risk that in using AI, CISA's processing of these reports might
include hallucinations, and could the use of AI end up reducing
the accuracy for the sake of processing speed? Anybody that
wants to answer that question.
Ms. Elazari. I would just say very quickly, sir, that I
think our--this administration, this Congress, recognizes both
the benefits and the need to use AI, and both the potential
risks. So I think there are processes under way. We are, in
fact, taking part in many of them, to make sure that as we are
deploying AI solutions, we are also making--make sure it's
deploying solutions to make it trusted and secure.
Mr. Menendez. Great.
Mr. Mayer. We also want humans in the loop so that there's
a way to make sure that the AI is not hallucinating and telling
you to shut down, you know, parts of the global network when
that may not be necessary, so.
I mean, we're all going to be learning how to use AI and
how to not use it and how to evolve it over time, how to make
sure we have assurances that it's not, as you said,
hallucinating. That's a process. It's a new technology that
we're going to be looking at.
Mr. Menendez. Keeping people in the room and part of the
process, do you believe that we are--that the technology that
we're developing, that's being developed in the AI space, or
state-of-the-art technology that we could use for CISA, do you
believe that our training of the work force is being developed
as quickly, and will we have the people that we need to ensure
that we keep--excuse me--people in the room to take advantage
of the technology and have that sort of parallel track?
Mr. Mayer. It's a race.
Mr. Menendez. Yes.
Mr. Mayer. We're going to have to do a lot to prepare the
work force for the introduction of AI on so many different
levels. The displacement that's going to occur as a result of
AI is going to be significant.
I will tell you that AI has advantages, both in terms of
improving our defensive capabilities, but it also provides
advantages to the adversaries in terms of their offensive
capabilities.
We know the adversaries are going to use every advantage
they can get, and AI is going to be a big vector for
accelerating that. So we have to have the same capabilities in
terms of defending our networks and the ecosystem.
Mr. Menendez. Absolutely.
Ms. Hogsett. I would just add, I agree with Robert and the
previous comments. The human capital element and the subject-
matter expertise is the key piece, that technology will get you
so far. But not just keeping a human in the loop, but also CISA
currently has challenges with having specific subject-matter
expertise to, again, weed through the noise that they're
getting in, to pick out key pieces and how to connect those.
Machines can't currently do that, and it's actually
something we've heard from security experts at the firms we
work with, is that, if you've got someone who's watching
networks all day long, they know when something is an anomaly.
They automatically instinctively have that, and they know what
to look for. So technology can amplify that, but it's not 100
percent solution.
Mr. Aaronson. I know we're over time, but I am
professionally obligated, when talking about AI, as a
representative of the electric power sector, to say a couple of
things.
So first of all, artificial intelligence, as has been said,
is, first of all, an incredible opportunity with all sorts of
efficiencies.
It also represents an attack vector, for sure, and so from
a national security perspective, it is an imperative that
United States win at artificial intelligence.
AI needs data centers, data centers need extraordinary
amounts of electricity, and electricity needs infrastructure.
So, we need to be making sure that we're building out
infrastructure that can support this AI revolution, support the
data centers that will support this digital opportunity.
So there is a very clear through-line between the AI/
national security imperative and infrastructure development to
support it.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that, and yield back, Chairman.
Mr. Garbarino. Come late and you go over.
Now, for our second--I'm going to start a second round, and
I'm going to recognize the gentlelady from Florida, Ms. Lee,
for another round of questions.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Aaronson, I'd like follow up on another one of
the concerns that you identified. So overall, of course, we're
here trying to find ways to streamline our processes, promote
efficiency, eliminate duplication, but you highlighted a
particular concern related to all 16 critical infrastructure
sectors reporting to CISA, and therefore, all of this sensitive
information residing at CISA as a potential protection of
information becoming a vulnerability in and of itself.
Tell us, though, how would you reconcile those two goals
of, let's have a single reporting system, let's streamline this
for our private-sector partners, but also, being concerned
about housing that kind of information all in one single
location?
Mr. Aaronson. Yes. So it's sort-of a two-fold question.
There is the malicious side of it which is--and I don't have
some, you know, magic-wand answer. I would simply say, we have
to recognize that that is going to be a target.
That--you know, sophisticated adversaries watch incident
reporting. They like to know: did their attack have the impact
that they intended? They like to use that information to hone
new attacks.
So, a treasure trove, as I said earlier, of information is
100 percent going to be a target. We simply need to protect it
accordingly. I think this goes to some of the CISA resourcing
issues.
Let's go into this with eyes wide open. This isn't just
about collecting data and putting it in a data warehouse
somewhere. This is about protecting it as the critical,
sensitive information that it is.
The second part is protection from things like FOIA, and
using, again, public policy protections, like in the electric
power sector, we have CEII--critical electric infrastructure
information--making sure that this does not become open-source
information, that well-meaning public citizens and reporters
and whomever else want access to. We just need to make sure
that we put belts and suspenders around protecting it as the
sensitive information that it is.
Ms. Lee. You just mentioned something that I think is very
interesting and important and not always recognized about
artificial intelligence and the data centers and the
necessity--the type of power and infrastructure that's going to
be required to support these data centers.
Would you elaborate a bit on what you see coming on the
horizon in that regard?
Mr. Aaronson. So extraordinary growth, and I think we
always look at past performance as indicator of future need,
and that's just not where we are right now. This is exponential
growth that we are about to see.
I see this as an opportunity for everybody involved. I
think there are a lot of opportunities with respect to
infrastructure build-out. There are a lot of opportunities with
respect to things like small modular reactors. I think the more
storage, battery, utility scale storage we can get out there,
we have to build more infrastructure to support this demand.
Full stop.
I also view it as a supply chain challenge. The Chinese
have used their industrial policy for the last 30-plus years as
a weapon.
Much as we hear the Director of National Intelligence say
that near-peer nation-states are using cyber threats to hold
the United States at risk at a time of their choosing, I think
Chinese industrial policy is doing the same thing.
When I talk about this, I like to use actually a Chinese
proverb. The best time to plant a tree was 30 years ago. The
second best time is today. The best time to combat Chinese
industrial policy was 30 years ago. The second best time is
today.
So in addition to the build-out of the grid and
infrastructure to support the AI revolution, we also need to be
thinking about near-shoring, friend-shoring, onshoring,
manufacturing capacity so that we can meet the demand growth
that we're about to see.
Ms. Lee. Then turning back to your earlier point about
efficiencies, you touched on sector risk management agencies
earlier, and suggested that we might be better--we might be
better able to utilize them. Tell us more about your thoughts
on the sector risk management agencies.
Mr. Aaronson. Yes. So the electric power sector enjoys a
really constructive relationship with our SRMA, the Department
of Energy. There's a couple reasons for that. The Department of
Energy is nonregulatory. So when we work with them, it is not
with sort-of this regulatory sword of Damocles hanging over us.
It is really this operational collaboration that happens
between and among.
Leveraging SRMAs as this existing entry point for
information sharing and for existing incident reporting allows
for, again, a more efficient way to then inform--and I want to
be careful here--CIRCIA and CISA play a really important cross-
sector role.
That said, inputs from sector-specific agencies to then
inform the cross-sector, in the electric power sector's
opinion, that's the value of CISA, that's the value of CIRCIA,
and so we want to see that leveraged.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentlelady yields back.
Even though he came late, I'm going to recognize him again.
Mr. Menendez, from New Jersey, you're recognized for 5 minutes
of questions.
Mr. Menendez. That's why I love showing up, Mr. Chairman.
An important part of improving cyber incident reporting
requirements is to increase regulatory harmonization.
Currently, not only have numerous Federal agencies imposed
cyber incident reporting requirements, but many international
governments have also mandated cyber incident reporting.
In March, Secretary Mayorkas announced a new effort to
align incident reporting requirements with E.U. regulations
where feasible.
For any of the witnesses, how important is international
reporting harmonization to your sectors, and how can CISA and
the NPRM help facilitate that kind of international
harmonization?
Ms. Hogsett. I'm happy to start. So for the financial
services sector, we have a number of firms that operate
globally and so I think one of the largest ones has I think the
count is something like 115 different regulators that have a
requirement to report incidents.
So that international dynamic is very valuable if for no
other reason than to help ensure that a victim company can
focus on getting themselves back on their feet and protecting
any of their customers, et cetera, and not focusing on having
to tick the box on multiple different requirements.
In our sector we actually have a G7 cyber experts group so
of the global 7 countries that are our allies we have a work
stream to help align some of these requirements.
The Financial Stability Board for us has already put out a
proposed incident reporting template that we're working to try
to get alignment globally on those common data elements.
The Cyber Incident Reporting Council that was created under
CIRCIA actually highlighted some of this. There's a great value
in helping streamline this so that we can all coordinate as we
might need to globally.
Like if China is targeting critical infrastructure here,
they might be targeting it at our allies at the same point in
time. We want to make sure they can get information and that's
shared as well.
The challenge right now with the way the CIRCIA rule has
been put together is, it goes well beyond other requirements.
So if you can narrow that, it will get us that much closer to
having harmonization, having a streamlined reporting so that we
can get information where it needs to go without disrupting a
response.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that.
Mr. Mayer. I think the more that CISA can do to help
facilitate a dialog, either bilateral or multinational dialog,
around some level of consistency is going to be very important.
It's not just international, we also have to worry about States
and localities getting involved in fragmented reporting
requirements.
The more requirements there are that are not aligned and
inconsistent, the much more challenging it's going to be for an
enterprise to effectively address those reporting requirements
in a way that's efficient for them and efficient for
Government.
So I think CISA has a role to play on that international
dialog, along with other agencies of Government, including the
State Department.
Ms. Elazari. So to put this in context, I think actually
the IT sector has, perhaps, the most multinationals, but it's
not just multinationals with large departments of cybersecurity
and lawyers.
If we have those small business entities with some software
that is focusing on a critical function--we're talking about
start-ups with $50 million, you know, in revenue, these--
software is going anywhere, right? These companies often rely
on operating globally often with Five Eye, with Europe.
So, I think actually not only it is essential, there is big
opportunity in this international alignment, and I want to
speak about two things in particular. We saw this in action
with the IoT Cyber Trust Mark and the important work with the
FCC to look into the E.U.-cyber intersect.
I believe the NAS 2 directive has actually more confined
proposed definitions for some of the things we have seen in
this proposed rule. So I think opting in, allowing companies
that want to actually mutually report to a common architecture,
at least when it comes to the NAS directive, where we have a
lot of that critical sector and a lot of the IT companies
already covered.
That is one very particular implementation that would not
only bolster cyber resilience and the ability to work with our
allies for remediation but really help companies.
So I think not only this is a priority. We need to be
pragmatic and focus on these areas where we have the same
covered entities, the same agreements, right, on the covered
issues to ensure not just common definitions, but common
architecture.
Mr. Menendez. Appreciate that. One quick follow-up. The
important work of regulatory harmonization requires not just
the cooperation of CISA, but also the regulatory agencies that
may have inconsistent reporting requirements.
As you engage with other regulators, what do you see as a
willingness to harmonize with CISA, and how can Congress and
CISA better support efforts at regulatory harmonization? I went
over last time, so these have to be quick answers.
Mr. Aaronson. I'll try to give a quick answer. It's also
responsive to Ms. Lee's question a minute ago, and I want to
pick up on something Ms. Hogsett said.
Common architecture, common definitions, the problem right
now is CISA's requests are so much different than every other
regulatory agency. They've kind-of gone above and beyond. There
isn't anything that's substantially similar.
So, I think there's got to be a, let's meet each other
halfway. I think there are some regulatory agencies--I can't
speak for any of them, but I think some would like more
information. So maybe it is rising that tide a little bit. But
CISA's got to come back down a little as opposed to asking for
the kitchen sink.
Mr. Menendez. I appreciate that, and I yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
myself for 5 minutes of my second round of 5 minutes. That's
good English.
Mr. Mayer, CISA expects entities will be able to self-
identify as a covered entity, and they think it's going to be
easy. Do you agree that most entities will be able to easily
self-determine whether they are a covered entity under the
rule?
Mr. Mayer. Well, I think in our sector's case, I think--and
I alluded to this earlier--I would start with the assumption
that you're a covered entity just by virtue of the fact that
you're providing communication services, you're a part of the
critical infrastructure 16 sectors.
I don't think, you know, the exemptions under the small
business is going to necessarily be persuasive in getting you
the exemption. So the assumption has to be that, assume you're
covered.
Mr. Garbarino. Better to be safe than sorry, I guess,
right?
Mr. Mayer. Sorry?
Mr. Garbarino. Better be safe than sorry?
Mr. Mayer. Correct.
Mr. Garbarino. OK. The sector-specific plans referenced in
the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking were last published in 2015.
Is your sector still accurately represented by its specific
plan?
Mr. Mayer. I believe it is. I think when we look at what we
identified as risks and the performance plan, many of that--
much of that is still relevant.
I will say yesterday that the National Security Memo that
came out will set in motion the requirement for a new sector's
risk assessment, and a sector-specific plan. So we will put
resources to evaluate what's changed, what's most impactful,
and what stretch should we be thinking about and perhaps that
we were not fully cognizant of over the, you know, years ago
when we did the performance plan.
I think, for example, AI is going to be a factor, and in
the DHS ICT task force, we're looking at the threat analysis we
did 3 years ago, and we're now going through with the lens of
AI and trying to understand what changes about that threaten
landscape.
So yes, it's going to have to be updated, but a lot of it
is still relevant.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. I said I was going to talk a
little bit about harmonization, and I can't do that without
talking about the SEC rule which I hate. We've heard a lot of
anecdotal concerns about the chilling effect that this rule,
the SEC cybersecurity rule, is having on cyber information.
Ms. Hogsett, can you explain from the bank--BPI'S
perspective, I'll say, negative impacts, but I'll let you talk
about potential impacts of the SEC's rule on cyber information
sharing.
Ms. Hogsett. Sure. Thank you for the question, and thank
you for your leadership on this point. We really appreciate it.
So our concern with the SEC disclosure rule is that
literally the rule requires that 4 days after you've determined
that you have a significant event, you are publicly disclosing
that.
If we look at CIRCIA, that means that basically CISA has
about 24 hours, perhaps, to leverage the confidential
reporting, and then turn that back around into useful
information to help prevent attacks or further harm.
That in today's day and age is an extraordinarily short
period of time. So you're really cutting short and undercutting
the purpose and the effectiveness of CIRCIA itself.
Publicly disclosing gives attackers information they might
not otherwise have. We have seen it being automated using bots
to then start to automatically scan other companies to detect
if they have a certain vulnerability.
It also prioritizes the desire of investors to have
transparency over the need for critical infrastructure to
protect themselves. So we believe that this is very harmful.
In the short 4 months that it has been in effect, we've
already seen it interfere with long-standing collective defense
efforts because it's caused confusion about what information
can and cannot be shared.
We've also seen attackers use it as an additional extortion
method. So, if you don't file with the SEC, your ransomware
actor will then threaten to report you to the SEC, and it is
now the third prong of an attack that they have started to use.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. Hopefully, our efforts--we're
still working on a CRA--hopefully our efforts are successful.
Last thing, I have time for probably one more question, and
we're going to be submitting a lot of questions for you to
answer, because I could go on for another hour, I think.
Mr. Aaronson, just yesterday, Biden administration released
an NSM-22 update and PPD-21, and you talked about how EEI
enjoys a positive relationship with DOE, your sector risk
management agency.
Can you elaborate a little more on what's working well with
the energy sector and the SRMA relationship and what could be
improved as the administration works to implement both CIRCIA
and NSM-22?
Mr. Aaronson. These things just roll off the tongue, don't
they?
Mr. Garbarino. Yes.
Mr. Aaronson. I miss PPD. That was a lot easier to talk
about. So I mentioned before, I think part of the reason that
we enjoy a good relationship with the Department of Energy is,
they are nonregulatory. So, it's a much more trusted, kind-of
open relationship.
I think another aspect of our partnership is the Sector
Coordinating Council. We have a CEO-led Sector Coordinating
Council. I serve as part of the secretariat for that,
represents all segments of the sector all across not just the
United States but North America. It is a North American grid.
Bringing chief executive officers together with senior
Government officials really does help us to prioritize the
things that are important and then work collaboratively to buy
down risk.
The last thing I think I would say is, a focus not just on
trying to protect everything from everything all of the time,
but instead, acknowledging that resilience is probably the most
important avenue of defense. We call it defense in depth,
right? The attack does not have the intended impact or when it
comes to natural hazards, like storms and fires and earthquakes
and what have you, that ability to make sure bad days do not
become catastrophic.
So, working collaboratively with Government to restore
power as quickly as possible when something bad happens, having
spare equipment programs working collaboratively with the
Department of Energy on policies that enable resilience, that's
really the crux of the fruitful relationship that we have.
The last thing I'll say is operational collaboration. We
talk a lot about information sharing--we talked about it a lot
today--yes, information sharing is important, but industry and
Government working hand-in-glove, side by side, to share
actionable intelligence, to inform intelligence, through
organizations like the Energy Threat Analysis Center, or ETAC,
have been really fruitful ways to leverage Government resources
and industry resources to buy down risk and to understand
attacks and socialize mitigation as quickly as possible.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you.
I now recognize the gentleman from California, Mr.
Swalwell, for another round of questions. Do you have----
Mr. Swalwell. Yes, please.
Would you all agree that the SEC rule is affecting our
ability to recruit talented CISOs to help us protect critical
infrastructure? I'll start with Ms. Elazari. If that's the
case, why is that the case, and is it driving folks out of the
profession as well?
Ms. Elazari. So I think it is the case. As a matter of
fact, we've seen an amicus brief filed on litigation related to
SolarWinds, SEC v. Tim Brown and SolarWinds. We have seen an
amicus brief on behalf of the CISO community with about, I
believe, 50 leading cybersecurity professionals, by the way,
former, you know, S&P 500--very large organizations as well as
a different amicus brief from Government--former Government
officials, noting that one of the potential consequences of
that particular litigation, but also the overarching, right,
the overarching SEC cyber rule, is creating that chilling
effect on the professional community.
We must understand that is not a community we have many of.
The gentleman here talked already about the issue of skilled
work force.
So this is a big priority, and we need to look at the
CIRCIA rule and the scope of what's covered, but also, the
issue of the liability protections being stripped away if there
is a disagreement after the RFI and the first subpoena and to--
and really think about those professionals.
So I think all of this is very important context because we
do have a crisis around the skilled work force in
cybersecurity, especially in the top layer. We have heard from
the community there is impact, both with the rule and both to
litigation around it.
Mr. Swalwell. Great. Thank you.
Anyone else want to weigh in on that?
Ms. Hogsett. We've definitely heard a rise in concern among
the CISO community with the SEC rule, particularly, as Dr.
Elazari noted, the enforcement measure by the SEC with personal
liability against the SolarWinds CISO.
Cybersecurity is a team sport. The CISO is, quite frankly,
sort-of the conductor----
Mr. Swalwell. Yes.
Ms. Hogsett [continuing]. And they can do many things, but
they can't control all of it. So I think for CISOs who have not
previously had that sort of a personal liability, it is deeply
concerning for them, and I've actually heard of one who
basically decided to retire because the risk was just too great
after a really successful decades'-long career.
Given the threat environment especially that we face, it is
deeply concerning to many.
Mr. Swalwell. As one recently told me who was a Fortune 100
CISO, he said, when an attack happens now, rather than respond
to the attack, the first thing that you do is, you huddle all
of the lawyers, and you're losing precious response time
because you're worried about, like, your personal liability on
any action that you take, which means that consumer data and,
you know, consumer information and then potentially critical
infrastructure could be seriously jeopardized as that's taking
place, so.
Ms. Hogsett. Yes.
Mr. Swalwell. I'll yield back.
Mr. Garbarino. The gentleman yields back.
I'd like to thank the witnesses for their valuable
testimony and the Members for their questions.
The Members of the subcommittee may have some additional
questions for witnesses, I know I do, and we would ask that the
witnesses respond to these in writing.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be held open for 10 days.
Without objection, this subcommittee stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 3:43 p.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]
