- A REVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2025 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

A REVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2025 BUDGET
REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF HOME-
LAND SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

SECOND SESSION

__________

APRIL 16, 2024

__________

Serial No. 118-59

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
57-752 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Thomas R. Suozzi, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Sean Corcoran, Chief Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     5
Prepared Statement.............................................     7
Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Honorable Delia C. Ramirez, a Representative in Congress From the
State of Illinois:
Prepared Statement.............................................    14

Witness

Mr. Alejandro N. Mayorkas, Secretary, Department of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    17

For the Record

Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Article, Forbes, Feb 6, 2024...................................     5
Excerpt, Hearing Transcript, July 18, 2018.....................   135
Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas:
Report, Government Accountability Office, July 2014............    64

Appendix I

Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green, M.D. for Honorable
Alejandro Mayorkas.............................................   147
Questions From Honorable Delia C. Ramirez for Honorable Alejandro
Mayorkas.......................................................   156

Appendix II

Honorable Dan Bishop, a Representative in Congress From the State
of North Carolina:
Report, House Judiciary Committee, April 16, 2024..............   159
Honorable Sheila Jackson Lee, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Texas:
Article, Vox, October 31, 2023.................................   178

A REVIEW OF THE FISCAL YEAR 2025 BUDGET REQUEST FOR THE DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

----------

Tuesday, April 16, 2024

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:01 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark Green
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, McCaul, Higgins, Guest,
Bishop, Gimenez, Pfluger, Garbarino, Greene, Gonzales, LaLota,
Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell, Strong, Brecheen, Crane,
Thompson, Jackson Lee, Swalwell, Correa, Carter, Thanedar,
Magaziner, Ivey, Goldman, Garcia, Ramirez, Menendez, Suozzi,
and Clarke.
Chairman Green. The committee will come to order. Without
objection, the committee may recess at any point.
Good morning, Secretary Mayorkas, and thank you for joining
the committee to discuss the budget that you and President
Biden have put forward for the Department of Homeland Security.
On March 1, the Department celebrated its 21st anniversary,
and I want to thank all the public servants throughout DHS who
dedicate their lives to securing the homeland. This work is
vital to our Nation's safety and security.
Mr. Secretary, when you took the oath of office you swore
to ``support and defend the Constitution of the United States
against all enemies, foreign and domestic, well and faithfully
discharge the duties of the Office.'' The Immigration and
Nationality Act further makes clear that you have a ``duty to
control and guard the boundaries and borders of the United
States.''
During your 3 years as Secretary, you have failed to
fulfill this oath. You refuse to comply with the laws passed by
Congress and you have breached the public trust. You
facilitated and encouraged record levels of illegal immigration
since your first day in office and we have all witnessed the
devastating results of your open borders agenda.
I have shared this before but I feel it is necessary to
repeat it. You abolished working policies and following the
statements of your boss on his campaign trail promises to
improperly grant asylum to anyone who came. As a result, people
from all over the world tested the system. They came and were
released. They phoned home and the mass waves began. With this
increased demand the cartels took advantage, regulated that
flow to overwhelm the crossing sites at our border.
You responded by removing the Border Patrol agents from the
border, marshals from the air, Customs agents from airports to
process and release these record numbers of people, and issued
guidance to DHS law enforcement to violate laws passed by this
coequal branch of Government, Congress, on detection and
removal.
With the border wide open and Border Patrol occupied
processing the mass waves of people, the cartels have poured
drugs, criminals, and trafficked humans into this country. This
has led to the deaths of thousands, the loss of billions of
dollars, and created the crisis that you just finally
acknowledged as such in recent testimony.
Even your counterpart, the FBI Director Christopher Wray
has said there is no way to ensure Hamas and other terrorists
are not a part of the roughly 2 million got-aways who have
entered our country uncaught on your watch. The massive
increase in Chinese nationals, 53,000 and counting, in 2023
adds to the threats we now face at home because you chose not
to enforce the law.
Your refusal to follow those laws is contemptable. Your
disregard of the requests from this coequal branch of
Government in pursuit of our Constitutional duty to conduct
oversight, your false statements to this body and the American
people, and your issuance of guidance to the employees of DHS
telling them to violate laws passed by Congress shows a
disregard for the Constitution you swore an oath to uphold.
However, instead of acknowledging those failures and
pledging to change course, your actions and directives remain
unchanged. You have doubled down.
This budget request reflects this obstinance. It fails to
take seriously the crises threatening our national security
interests, especially our wide-open borders. For example, you
request a $1.45 billion cut in top-line spending for CBP's
budget from what Congress enacted last year that includes a
$245 million cut in funding for CBP's border security
operations budget.
Instead, as you did in last year's budget you proposed a
$4.7 billion slush fund called the Southwest Border Contingency
Fund, which ironically would not be used to actual secure the
border, but simply help you process and release more illegals,
aliens quickly into the interior.
Might I remind you that our Founders wanted the Executive
branch--if the Founders wanted the Executive branch to just get
a slush fund it would never have detailed the funding duties of
this body in the division of power.
Again, that is treading on the Constitution. This fund
won't solve the humanitarian crisis that you have created. It
would facilitate it while trying to hide the truth from the
American people.
Your budget proposal only provides for 350 new Border
Patrol agents. The Secure Border Act passed by this House in
2023 provided enough funding for 8 times that number. Your
budget only requests funding for 34,000 ICE beds and by
comparison in fiscal year 2021, the previous administration
requested 60,000 ICE beds at a time when illegal crossings were
at their lowest in decades.
Your targets for removals of illegal aliens are abysmal. In
2020, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, ICE removed 185,884 illegal
aliens, while in fiscal year 2019, ICE removals exceeded
267,000. Last year, despite more than 3.2 million inadmissible
encounters at our border, you only accomplished around 143,000
removals and in this budget you are only targeting 125,000. At
that rate it would take 16 years to remove just the roughly 2
million got-aways on your watch to say nothing of the more than
9 million encounters many of whom have also been released.
Meanwhile, the Chinese Communist Party continues to carry
out multiple-faceted, covert espionage and influence missions
against the United States. Beijing has shown that if we give an
inch, they will take a mile. Mr. Secretary, you have given them
all 1,951 miles of our Southern Border.
While we are deeply appalled by your handling of the border
security and immigration issues, this committee does look to
work with the Department on key issues. This past February, the
administration issued an Executive Order providing for more
stringent cybersecurity at our ports as well as an emphasis on
supply chain security. We support these initiatives.
Your proposal also recognizes that our cyber work force is
vital to the protection to our homeland. Strengthening our
cyber work force pipeline will be one of the top priorities for
the remainder of this year. It is imperative that the 419 full-
time employees you request for cybersecurity and infrastructure
security agency are utilized effectively. To that end we must
ensure CISA's authorities and resources align with its mission.
Secretary Mayorkas, the world is only growing more
dangerous. Our adversaries in China, Russia, Iran, and
elsewhere are expanding their capabilities and seeking to
undermine our interests even within our homeland. While parts
of this budget request to deal with some of those threats, the
request as a whole fails to meet the important time we have.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, MD
April 16, 2024
Good morning, Secretary Mayorkas, and thank you for joining the
committee to discuss the budget you and President Biden have put
forward for the Department of Homeland Security.
On March 1, the Department celebrated its 21st anniversary. I want
to thank all the public servants throughout DHS who dedicate their
lives to securing the homeland. This work is vital to our Nation's
safety and security.
Mr. Secretary, when you took the oath of office, you swore to,
``support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all
enemies, foreign and domestic,'', ``well and faithfully discharge the
duties of the office'', you were assuming. The Immigration and
Nationality Act further makes clear that you have a, ``duty to control
and guard the boundaries and borders of the United States''.
During your 3 years as Secretary, you have failed to fulfill this
oath. You have refused to comply with the laws passed by Congress and
you have breached the public trust.
You have facilitated and encouraged record levels of illegal
immigration since your first day in office--and we have all witnessed
the devastating results of your open-borders agenda.
I've shared this before, but I feel it's necessary to repeat it.
You abolished working policies, and following the statements of your
boss on his campaign trial--promises to improperly grant asylum to
anyone who came. As a result, people from all over the world tested the
system, came and were released, phoned home, and the mass waves began.
With this increased demand, the cartels took advantage, regulated that
flow to overwhelm the crossing sites at our border. You responded by
removing the Border Patrol agents from the border to process and
release these record numbers of people, and issued guidance to DHS law
enforcement to violate laws passed by this coequal branch of
Government, Congress, on detention and removal. With the border wide
open, and Border Patrol occupied processing the mass waves of people,
the cartels have poured drugs, criminals, and trafficked humans into
this country. This has led to the deaths of thousands, the loss of
billions of dollars, and created the crisis you just finally
acknowledged as such in recent testimony.
Even your counterpart, FBI Director Christopher Wray, has said
there is no way to ensure Hamas and other terrorists are not a part of
the roughly 2 million got-aways who have entered our country uncaught
on your watch. And the massive increase in Chinese nationals, 53,000
encountered in 2023, adds to the threats we now face at home because
you chose to not enforce the law.
Your refusal to follow those laws is contemptible. Your disregard
of the requests from this coequal branch of Government in pursuit of
our Constitutional duty to conduct oversight, your false statements to
this body and the American people, and your issuance of guidance to the
employees of DHS telling them to violate laws passed by Congress, shows
a disregard for the Constitution you swore an oath to uphold.
However, instead of acknowledging those failures and pledging to
change course, your actions and directives remain unchanged. You've
doubled down.
This budget request reflects that obstinance. It fails to take
seriously the crises threatening our national security interests,
especially our wide-open borders.
For example, you request a $1.45 billion cut in topline spending
for CBP's budget from what Congress enacted last year. That includes a
$245 million cut in funding for CBP's Border Security Operations
budget.
Instead, as you did in last year's budget, you proposed a $4.7
billion slush fund, called the ``Southwest Border Contingency Fund,''
which ironically would not be used to actually secure the border, but
simply help you process and release more illegal aliens quickly into
the interior. Might I remind you, if the Founders wanted the Executive
branch to just get slush funds, they would never have detailed the
funding duties of this body in the division of power. Again, you tread
on the Constitution.
This fund won't solve the humanitarian crisis you created--it would
facilitate it while trying to hide the truth from the American people.
Your budget proposal only provides for 350 new Border Patrol
agents. The Secure the Border Act, passed by the House in 2023,
provided enough funding for over 8 times this number.
Your budget only requests funding for 34,000 ICE beds. By
comparison, in fiscal year 2021, the Trump administration requested
60,000 ICE beds--at a time when illegal crossings were at their lowest
in decades!
Your targets for removals of illegal aliens are abysmal. In fiscal
year 2020, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, ICE removed 185,884 illegal
aliens, while in fiscal year 2019, ICE removals exceeded 267,000. Last
year, despite more than 3.2 million inadmissible encounters at our
borders, you only accomplished around 143,000 removals. And in this
budget, you're only targeting 125,000.
At that rate, it would take 16 years to remove just the roughly 2
million got-aways on your watch--to say nothing of the more than 9
million encounters, many of whom have also been released.
Meanwhile, the Chinese Communist Party continues to carry out
multifaceted covert espionage and influence missions against the United
States. Beijing has shown that if we give an inch, they will take a
mile, and Mr. Secretary, you have given them all 1,951 miles of our
Southwest Border.
While we are deeply appalled by your handling of border security
and immigration issues, this committee does look to work with the
Department on other key issues. This past February, the administration
issued an Executive Order providing for more stringent cybersecurity at
our ports, as well as an emphasis on supply chain security. We support
these initiatives. Your proposal also recognizes that our cyber
workforce is vital to the protection of our homeland. Strengthening our
cyber workforce pipeline will be one of our top priorities this year,
and it is imperative that the 419 full-time employees you requested for
the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency are utilized
effectively. To that end, we must ensure CISA's authorities and
resources align with its mission.
Secretary Mayorkas, the world is only growing more dangerous. Our
adversaries in China, Russia, Iran, and elsewhere are expanding their
capabilities and seeking to undermine our interests, even within our
homeland. While parts of this budget request deal with some of those
threats, this request as a whole utterly fails to meet the moment.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Good
morning.
I want to begin by thanking Secretary Mayorkas for being
here today. Mr. Secretary, your testimony before the committee
despite the unfounded extreme MAGA attacks against you speaks
to your character, integrity, and commitment to the Department
of Homeland Security, its mission, and its people.
In what seems like a split screen today, this morning the
committee is holding its annual hearing on a Department of
Homeland Security's budget request. This afternoon Republican
Members will deliver to the Senate their baseless Articles of
Impeachment in perhaps the most politicized, partisan stunt
this committee has ever engaged in.
From the moment the Secretary took office in February 2021,
Members of the other side of the aisle have unfairly targeted
him for their own political gain. Chairman Green promised
donors at a campaign event that he would bring an impeachment
case against Secretary Mayorkas. He told his contributors to
get the popcorn and promised it is going to be fun.
According to an internal Republican memo, Republicans had
already scheduled a committee vote to impeach the Secretary
prior to holding a hearing. This entire thing was a sham from
the start. After two hastily-thrown-together so-called
impeachment hearings that provided not even a shred of evidence
of an impeachable offense, Republicans short-circuited their
own marker and refused to let Democrats offer amendments in
their rush to the House floor.
In advance of the vote, the Secretary, who is Jewish and
whose mother survived the Holocaust, was referred to using
language the American Jewish Committee has included in its
glossary of anti-Semitic terms.
Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to insert in the
record an article describing this incident.
Chairman Green. So, ordered.
[The information follows:]
``Vile'': White House Slams GOP Rep. Green For Calling DHS Sec.
Mayorkas A ``Reptile''
Sara Dorn, Forbes Staff
Feb 6, 2024, 01:14pm EST
TOPLINE
The White House suggested Rep. Mark Green (R-Tenn.) used an
antisemitic term Tuesday when he called Department of Homeland Security
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas a ``reptile'' in a tense GOP meeting to
discuss the impeachment push--as last-minute Republican opposition
threatens to torpedo the effort.
KEY FACTS

Green referred to Mayorkas, who is Jewish, as a ``reptile
with no balls'' because he has not resigned, Politico reported,
citing two Republicans who were in attendance.

White House Spokesperson Ian Sams called Green's comment
``vile,'' and noted it is included in the American Jewish
Committee's ``glossary of antisemitic terms,'' he said in a
statement.

The glossary states that antisemitism includes
``illustrations and images that depict Jews as vermin,
tentacled creatures, reptilian men, and other `subhuman'
monsters,'' rhetoric that was used in Nazi propaganda to
dehumanize Jews.

Green, who is leading the impeachment push against Mayorkas
that the House was set to vote on Tuesday, made the statements
as the effort is on the brink of failing amid growing GOP
opposition.

A spokesperson for Green acknowledged that he used the term
and compared Mayorkas to former President Nixon for refusing to
resign, denying that the term was used in reference to anything
other than an attempt to avoid accountability.
TANGENT
Republicans can afford to lose just three votes under their slim
majority in the House, assuming all Democrats vote ``no.'' At least two
GOP members, Reps. Ken Buck (R-Colo.) and Tom McClintock (R-Calif.),
have said they will vote against the resolution, citing a lack of
sufficient evidence to merit impeachment, while Rep. Mike Gallagher (R-
Wis.) declined to tell Politico how he would vote, and at least four
others, Reps. Patrick McHenry (R-N.C.), Brian Fitzpatrick (R-Pa.),
David Joyce (R-Ohio) and Maria Salazar (R-Fla.), reportedly remain
undecided.
KEY BACKGROUND
House Speaker Mike Johnson (R-La.) stood by his plans to bring the
legislation to the floor for a vote Tuesday, despite the opposition,
telling reporters ``there is no other measure for Congress to take but
this one.'' The resolution calls for impeaching Mayorkas under systemic
refusal to comply with the law and breach of public trust, accusing him
of failing to maintain ``operational control'' of the border, lying to
Congress about the state of border security and executing a ``catch and
release scheme,'' among other allegations. The impeachment effort comes
as immigration has become a top issue in the 2024 Presidential
election, with former President Donald Trump and his allies seeking to
pin the unprecedented surge in migrant crossings on President Joe
Biden.
The resolution is likely doomed in the Democrat-controlled Senate,
which is responsible for conducting impeachment trials.
WHAT TO WATCH FOR
The Senate could hold a procedural vote as soon as Wednesday on the
bipartisan border legislation unveiled Sunday, which would require the
president to implement stricter asylum requirements if border crossings
exceeded a certain threshold, speed up the asylum process, offer
additional visas and allocate more money for anti-fentanyl enforcement,
among other measures. It's unclear if it has the 60 votes needed in the
Senate to break the filibuster, as some Republican opponents of the
legislation are pushing for a return to Trump-era policies, while some
progressives have said the bill is too restrictive. Biden has pushed
for its passage, calling it the ``toughest and fairest'' immigration
legislation in decades. House Republican leaders have declared the
legislation as ``dead-on-arrival,'' arguing it fails to re-implement
Trump-era policies, including Title 42, which allowed border agents to
turn away migrants under the Covid-19 public health emergency, and
``Remain in Mexico,'' which required migrants to await asylum hearings
in Mexico. Trump has also pushed Republicans to reject the legislation,
casting it as a ``gift'' to Democrats in an election year.

Mr. Thompson. The impeachment vote failed in another
embarrassing miscalculation of House Republican leadership. On
a second try Republicans limped their sham impeachment articles
across the finish line. Over 2 months later, Republicans are
still transmitting the impeachment articles to the Senate,
having waited until they thought the timing was political
advantageous.
So much for the claims of urgency about the border. They
waited. They wanted to have a dog-and-pony show marched into
the Senate showing again what deeply unserious people they are.
The Senate should dismiss the baseless impeachment articles
without delay.
To make matters worse, in their zeal to impeach Secretary
Mayorkas, Republicans have shirked their responsibility to
conduct meaningful oversight of DHS and advance its many
critical missions. Republicans have not yet held a single full
committee oversight hearing on cybersecurity, domestic
terrorism, aviation security, disaster preparedness and
response, or election security this Congress, shocking for a
committee born out of 9/11 attacks, which once had a reputation
for rising above the partisan politics to help secure the
homeland on behalf of the American People.
The committee's legislative work has suffered, too. By this
time last Congress, the committee had reported 49 measures and
that was during a global pandemic. This Congress, by contrast,
the full committee has reported fewer than half that number.
This is what happens when Republicans make someone who
espouses political violence, pushes anti-Semitic tropes, and
want to defund the FBI the de facto leader of their party. This
is what happens when Republicans prioritize the whims of
extreme MAGA members over politics that serve the American
people.
It is chaos and dysfunction by design. If you don't believe
me, just look at how long it took us to elect a Speaker. We did
nothing but vote after vote after vote. To add insult to
injury, Democrats were accused of slowing things down and we
are the Minority party, we are not in charge.
If Republicans are looking for someone to hold accountable
they should start looking in the mirror. Through it all,
Secretary Mayorkas has remained steadfast. He continues to do
his job across the Department's many critical Homeland Security
missions, including border security and immigration
enforcement. He has used the full range of authorities at his
disposal and stretched the resources provided by Congress to
secure the border.
Under his leadership the Department has removed record
levels of migrants, detained more people than Congress had
provided funding for, and prevented unprecedented amounts of
fentanyl from entering our communities.
Republicans talk a lot about supporting border security,
but, you know, talk is cheap. If Republicans were serious about
improving conditions along the border, they would provide the
Department the funding necessary to do so. Instead, the
majority of committee Republicans, a dozen in fact, including
the Chairman, voted no on providing DHS the funds it needs to
secure the border.
Republicans have also refused to consider the border
security's supplemental funding the Department requested months
ago, starving DHS and its front-line personnel of the money
they need to carry out their duties.
Americans aren't fooled by these Republican political
games. They understand that where you invest your resources
speaks to what you really value. If Republicans valued border
security like they claim, they would pay for it.
I want to hear Secretary Mayorkas today about the
administration's budget request for the Department of Homeland
Security. I want to ask how we can support the Department, its
mission, and its 260,000 dedicated personnel. That is our
responsibility and it is one I know our Democratic Members take
seriously.
Mr. Chairman, this committee can do better. It has done
better under leadership from Chairmen of both parties. I look
forward to returning to better days on this committee.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
April 16, 2024
I want to begin by thanking Secretary Mayorkas for being here
today. Your testimony before the committee--despite the unfounded
extreme MAGA attacks against you--speaks to your character, integrity,
and commitment to the Department of Homeland Security, its mission, and
its people.
In what seems like a split-screen day, this morning the committee
is holding its annual hearing on the Department of Homeland Security's
budget request. Then this afternoon, Republican Members will deliver to
the Senate their baseless articles of impeachment--in perhaps the most
politicized, partisan stunt this committee has ever engaged in.
From the moment the Secretary took office in February 2021, Members
on the other side of the aisle have unfairly targeted him for their own
political gain. Chairman Green promised donors at a campaign event that
he would bring an impeachment case against Secretary Mayorkas. He told
his contributors to ``get the popcorn'' and promised ``it's going to be
fun.''
According to an internal Republican memo, Republicans had already
scheduled a committee vote to impeach the Secretary prior to holding a
hearing. This entire thing was a sham from the start.
After two hastily-thrown-together so-called ``impeachment
hearings'' that provided not even a shred of evidence of an impeachable
offense, Republicans short-circuited their own mark-up and refused to
let Democrats offer amendments in their rush to the House floor.
In advance of the vote, the Secretary, who is Jewish and whose
mother survived the Holocaust, was referred to using language the
American Jewish Committee has included in its glossary of antisemitic
terms. Mr. Chairman, I ask unanimous consent to insert in the record an
article describing this incident. The impeachment vote failed, in
another embarrassing miscalculation for House Republican leadership. On
a second try, Republicans limped their sham impeachment articles across
the finish line.
Over 2 months later, Republicans are transmitting the impeachment
articles to the Senate, having waited until they thought the timing was
politically advantageous. So much for their claims of urgency about the
border. They wanted to have a dog-and-pony show marching to the Senate,
showing yet again what deeply unserious people they are.
The Senate should dismiss the baseless impeachment articles without
delay.
To make matters worse, in their zeal to impeach Secretary Mayorkas,
Republicans have shirked their responsibility to conduct meaningful
oversight of DHS and advance its many critical missions. Republicans
have not held a single full committee oversight hearing on
cybersecurity, domestic terrorism, aviation security, disaster
preparedness and response, or election security this Congress.
Shocking for a committee borne out the 9/11 attacks, which once had
a reputation for rising above partisan politics to help secure the
homeland on behalf of the American people.
The committee's legislative work has suffered too. By this time
last Congress, the committee had reported 49 measures--and that was
during a global pandemic. This Congress, by contrast, the full
committee has reported fewer than half that number.
This is what happens when Republicans make someone who espouses
political violence, pushes antisemitic tropes, and wants to defund the
FBI the de facto leader of their party. This is what happens when
Republicans prioritize the whims of extreme MAGA members over policies
that serve the American people. It is chaos and dysfunction by design.
If Republicans are looking for someone to hold accountable, they
should start by looking in the mirror.
Through it all, Secretary Mayorkas has remained steadfast. He
continues to do his job across the Department's many critical homeland
security missions, including border security and immigration
enforcement. He has used the full range of authorities at his disposal
and stretched the resources provided by Congress to secure the border.
Under his leadership, the Department has removed record levels of
migrants, detained more people than Congress has provided funding for,
and prevented unprecedented amounts of fentanyl from entering our
communities.
Republicans talk a lot about supporting border security, but talk
is cheap. If Republicans were serious about improving conditions along
the border, they would provide the Department the funding necessary to
do so.
Instead, the majority of committee Republicans--a dozen, in fact,
including the Chairman--voted no on providing DHS the funds it needs to
secure the border. Republicans have also refused to consider the border
security supplemental funding the Department requested months ago,
starving DHS and its front-line personnel of the money they need to
carry out their duties.
Americans aren't fooled by these Republican political games. They
understand that where you invest your resources speaks to what you
really value. And if Republicans valued border security like they
claim, they would pay for it.
I want to hear from Secretary Mayorkas today about the
administration's budget request for the Department of Homeland
Security. I want to ask you how we can support the Department, its
mission, and its 260,000 dedicated personnel. That is our
responsibility, and it is one I know our Democratic Members take
seriously.
Mr. Chairman, this committee can do better. It has done better,
under leadership from Chairmen of both parties. I look forward to
returning to better days on this committee.

Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. Other Members of the
committee are reminded that opening statements may be submitted
to the record.
[The statements of Hon. Jackson Lee and Hon. Ramirez
follow:]
Statement of Hon. Sheila Jackson Lee
Tuesday, April 16, 2024
Chairman Green and Ranking Member Thompson, thank you for this
opportunity for the committee to receive testimony from the Secretary
of Homeland Security on ``A Review of the Fiscal Year 2025 Budget
Request for the Department of Homeland Security.''
I offer my sincere and heartfelt apology to Secretary Mayorkas for
the treatment he has received from this committee's Republican
Majority.
A politically-motivated impeachment was and will continue to be a
stain on the record of this committee.
I thank Secretary Mayorkas for his presence today and extend to him
my commitment to work with him on meeting the needs of the agency for
fiscal year 2025.
The Iranian regime is the world's leading state sponsor of
terrorism.
Iran has a long history of backing Hamas attacks on Israel.
This weekend Iran retaliated for Israels killing of senior
officials in Syria which leaves the world on the edge of a cliff.
During my time in office, I have seen the United States at war with
too few moments that we have been at peace.
After 20 years in Afghanistan and Iraq it is clear why our
partnership with Israel has been beneficial to stability and people in
that region.
Now the United States is struggling to bring claim and reason to a
period of unrivaled chaos and violence.
Israel's attack in Syria killed top Iranian commanders and is the
sole reason that Iran has launched direct attacks against Israel, but
this is not the start of the conflict it is the latest and most
dangerous escalation.
On October 7, 2023, Hamas's violent attack against civilians caused
the bloodiest single-day massacre of Jews since the Holocaust, killing
nearly 1,400 Israelis.
Members of this committee must focus on international terrorism
threats, including the threats to the homeland resulting from actions
taken by Iran to stoke and sustain terrorism across the region and the
globe.
The elements that created Hamas needed hate and fear to grow in
numbers and resources to carry out attacks.
The United States is not free of people who seek violence as a tool
to oppose people who are perceived as different.
In this country we must be vigilant against white supremacist
groups and hate in the form of violent words and acts that target
fellow citizens because they have a different skin color or worship
differently.
In 2022, Anti-defamation League (ADL) tabulated 3,697 antisemitic
incidents throughout the United States.
This is a 36 percent increase from the 2,717 incidents tabulated in
2021 and the highest number on record since ADL began tracking
antisemitic incidents in 1979.
The path forward has two clear forks in the road--one leads to a
restoration of peaceful coexistence and one toward unchecked bloodshed.
I do recall the war following the attacks of September 11, 2001, it
should have been a police action to apprehend the masterminds behind
the attack.
On September 18, 2001, 7 days following the September 11 attacks,
letters containing weaponized anthrax were placed in the U.S. mail.
On October 15, 2001, Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle (D-SD)
informed reporters that anthrax was found in his Senate offices.
By October 30, 2001, there were 15 known cases of anthrax poisoning
linked to the U.S. mail.
The letters laced with anthrax had a message: ``You cannot stop us.
We have the anthrax. You die now. Are you afraid? Death to America,
Death to Israel, Allah is Great.''
The source of the anthrax attacks was linked to the U.S. Army's
Fort Detrick bio-medical research laboratory.
I come to this hearing with two perspectives: the world is a less
safe place when people cease to see each other as human beings; and the
United States is best served by representatives who use reason and not
emotion to advance national defense and foreign policy.
As a student of the post-September 11, 2001, debate in deploying
troops, the decision to pursue al-Qaeda in Afghanistan when we knew
they were the source of the attack it was quickly overcome by emotion
which lead the Nation down a path of war that did not end until the
Biden administration.
As a Member of Congress and a senior Member of the Committees on
Homeland Security and the Judiciary, both of which deal with national
security issues, I have long been committed and engaged in efforts to
develop policies that anticipate and respond to new and emerging
challenges to the security of our Nation and the peace and safety of
the world.
I will never forget September 11, 2001, when 2,977 men, women, and
children were murdered by 19 hijackers--15 of whom were Saudi
nationals, who took control of commercial aircraft and used them as
missiles.
I stood on the East Front steps of the Capitol on September 11,
2001, along with 150 Members of the House of Representatives and sang
``God Bless America.''
September 11, 2001, remains a tragedy that defines our Nation's
history, but the final chapter will be written by those who are charged
with keeping our Nation and its people safe while preserving the way of
life that terrorists sought to change.
I visited the site of the World Trade Center Towers in the
aftermath of the attacks and grieved over the deaths of so many of our
men, women, and children.
I was heartbroken, along with the Nation, over the lives lost at
the Pentagon, the World Trade Center, and in Shanksville, Pennsylvania.
Following the attacks rhetoric started to shift toward Iraq having
some connection to the attack and later to accusations that that
country was actively pursuing nuclear ambitions.
Later, charges were made that Iraq had deceived U.N. inspectors and
had continued to develop nuclear capability.
It was charged that they had acquired weapons-grade yellowcake
uranium from Niger; and had secret sites building a bomb or bomb-making
capability.
These accusations were based on forged documents promoted in the
President's State of the Union address in January 2003, 2 months before
the start of the war.
This did not deter the United States from declaring an unprovoked
war against Iraq that is estimated to have led to the deaths of over
100,000 civilians.
Since September 11, 2001, it has been a priority of this Nation to
prevent terrorists, or those who would do Americans harm, from boarding
flights whether they are domestic or international.
Over the last 22 years, since enactment of the Homeland Security
Act, the mission of the Department of Homeland Security has expanded to
include cyber defense of civilian agency and private-sector networks;
protecting critical infrastructure in the form of the Nation's electric
grid, water delivery systems, transportation networks and Federal
election systems; and, most recently, fighting the international reach
of white nationalism, white supremacy, and violent acts targeting
religious minorities living within the United States.
The struggle against violent extremism began on September 11, 2001,
but it has extended to this day because of the continued attacks
against religious freedom, diversity, equal rights for women, and other
core principles that are foundational to our Nation's expression of a
democratic republic.
To succeed in the fight against violent extremism, our Nation's
leadership--in the Congress and the Executive branch--must work
together.
I am supportive of efforts to employ effective approaches to
interdicting, disrupting, and dismantling terrorist networks.
The Obama administration focused on how best to use our Nation's
soft power and military power for minimizing, eliminating, and
containing terrorists' threats in the region, with a full understanding
that over-aggressive actions militarily can pull our country into a
precipitous military struggle that would be open-ended.
We must support our strategic partners like Israel, but we must
also hold them accountable for adhering to international standards for
conduct when engaged in wars.
Over 200 hundred aid workers have been killed, which is exemplified
by the deaths of World Food Kitchen volunteers that shocked the world
and further eroded Israel's status as a democracy that uphold
international norms.
conclusion
We must remember that after the battles are all fought and decided
that the underlying causes for so many willing souls to commit
themselves to kill and die for religious beliefs that make any military
only approach to solving the Iran problem not feasible.
The battle against extremism across the globe and within the United
States has entered a new phase.
The demons of racism, intolerance, and racial supremacy are active
in engaging people in a hidden struggle in opposition to the diversity
that is our Nation's best hope for a prosperous future.
I am a firm supporter of getting to the source of problems that
come from the complexity of our interconnected world.
Our Nation needs our best efforts on the behalf of peace and
security abroad to assure that we have peace and security at home.
The larger threat to the United States from Iran will be cyber
threats.
We must be prepared to defend and expand protection of cyber assets
both public and private.
Homeland security and national defense are not and should not be
made into political issues.
history of middle east failures
Members of this committee and the witnesses before us today
understand that the fight against violent extremism is far from over
and the actions by this administration and this Congress can make a
difference.
Past misdeeds by the Trump administration in the region have led us
to the heightened insecurity that exists today.
Part of the struggle for peace we face today is a direct
consequence of invading Iraq without provocation or reason.
Paraphrasing Secretary of State Colin Powell's advice to President
George W. Bush: ``if we break it--we will own it.''
He was warning President Bush about the folly of entering a war of
choice with Iraq and the complexities of that region of the world that
could spiral out of control.
I can offer a similar warning to this Congress.
We must repair the special relationship that the United States had
with the Kurdish people when they joined the fight to defeat ISIS.
Our work as Members of this committee has for well over a decade,
focused on potential links between international terror groups and
persons residing within the United States.
Today, our focus remains the same, but the domestic targets of
international terror have expanded to include members of white
nationalist groups, neo-Nazi, and white supremist adherents.
ai and the path forward
Members of this committee must put aside partisan bias to work with
DHS and support the role of CISA in implement their responsibilities
under President Biden's recent AI Executive Order 14110, on Safe,
Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence.
The United States is far behind the rest of the world in developing
a regulatory framework for AI.
I will be introducing several bills on the topic to outline
critical areas that need attention.

Civil agencies' capacity to test, train, and adopt AI
applications;

A bill to establish a national dialog to ensure that
democratic values, norms, and legal frameworks are maintained
in the adoption of AI for Federal civilian agency use;

A Watermarking System to identify AI used by civilian
agencies.
Executive Order 14110 represents a comprehensive effort by the
Biden administration to maintain U.S. dominance in innovation while
ensuring artificial intelligence (AI) reflects U.S. values, including
prioritization of safety and security and respect for civil rights,
civil liberties, and privacy.
DHS and CISA have expertise and capabilities that can facilitate
the responsible development and deployment of AI across Federal
networks and critical infrastructure to ensure its stakeholders can
harness the potential of AI while mitigating the potential risks.
The Executive Order outlines that where practicable, AI security
policy should be aligned with existing efforts to strengthen the
security of technology, such as secure-by-design.
Given the momentum associated with AI policy, such alignment could
help to further accelerate the implementation of such security
principles to broader sets of technology while streamlining DHS/CISA
guidance.
DHS's and CISA's responsibilities under the E.O. fall primarily
into two categories: (1) ensuring the safety and security of AI; and
(2) promoting innovation and competition, particularly with respect to
attracting AI talent and protecting AI research and development from
intellectual property theft.
The Federal Executive branch is comprised of civilian Federal
agencies that provide the full scope of benefits and services to
residents of the States and territories as well as support of domestic
law enforcement and homeland security needs.
The Federal Executive branch is also charged with providing
rigorous oversight of a full scope of goods and services to ensure the
health and safety of the American people.
Much of the regulatory strength of the Federal Government was built
in the early- to mid-20th Century, when notable events brought experts,
Government oversight, industry leaders, as well as labor and consumer
advocates together to demand safer cars, food, drinking water, safer
construction for schools, homes, and multifamily dwellings, as well as
safe processes that governed automotive, rail, aviation, and shipping
to reduce hazards and accidents.
Each of the steps taken to put demands on industries to make
products save were often proceeded by a calamity.
For example, in the early 1900's, foodborne diseases such as
botulism, tuberculosis, were typhoid fever, at the highest incidence
recorded and prevalence while also being the leading cause of
increasing mortality rates all over the world.
By 1906, the U.S. Congress responded with passage of the Pure Food
and Drugs Act, that prohibited interstate commerce in adulterated and
misbranded food and drugs.
Following the experiences of World War II that brought to light the
suffering that could be caused by the spread of disease associated with
breakdowns in social order that impacted routine access to clean water
and uncontaminated food supplies, many more laws were passed.
In the early 1900's the frequency of automobile accidents prompted
manufacturers to incrementally improve vehicles by adding windshield
wipers, headlights, enclosed spaces for drivers and passengers.
However, it was not until Ralph Nader's book ``Unsafe at Any
Speed,'' shocked the American public and brought unprecedented
attention to automobile safety.
On the same path of Nader's work was that of Najeeb Halaby, the
chief of the independent Federal Aviation Agency who convinced
President Lyndon Johnson to create a Federal Transportation Department
to merge aviation and rail safety into a single agency focused on
transportation, which would also include automobile safety.
The development of computing technology did not follow a path that
took it toward safety and improvements.
This lack of government or judicial oversight created a culture of
normalized brokenness that exists to this day.
Errors and problems with computing devices or applications are
often fixed by turning a device off and on again and this is accepted
as normal, while it would never be allowed in other serious areas of
engineering such as for cars, planes, trains, or elevators.
The challenge is almost inconceivable--how do we fix the
underpinning of computing software for all applications and devices so
that we can have a baseline of trust for the work being done for AI?
AI's goal is to replace many tasks performed by humans with
machines, but the consequences for human error and computing error are
not the same.
Human errors are costly and borne by the person or the company they
represent, while a computer error is borne by the purchaser not the
manufacturer.
This situation in an AI world would create incentives to replace
people with machines that are not held to the same standards of care as
people.
AI is generally understood to mean computerized systems that
operate in ways commonly thought to require intelligence.
While precise definitions vary, President Biden's recent Executive
Order 14110 defined AI as ``a machine-based system that can, for a
given set of human-defined objectives, make predictions,
recommendations, or decisions influencing real or virtual environments.
``Artificial intelligence systems use machine- and human-based
inputs to perceive real and virtual environments; abstract such
perceptions into models through analysis in an automated manner; and
use model inference to formulate options for information or action.''
This makes the assumption that AI's human-based inputs function as
intended free from errors or omissions.
AI offers a wide range of potential applications across different
sectors.
In cybersecurity, AI has largely worked to the advantage of network
defenders.
For example, conventional cybersecurity tools defend against known
matches to malicious code, so hackers must modify small portions of
that code to circumvent the defense.
AI-enabled tools, on the other hand, can be trained to detect
anomalies in network activity, thus presenting a more comprehensive and
dynamic barrier to attack.
In the aftermath of the 2020 Solar Winds cyber campaign, Federal
agencies and the private sector have expedited implementation of
Endpoint Detection and Response systems that utilize AI to detect
anomalous network activity.
However, AI has and will continue to be used in myriad ways that
undermine national security, individual privacy, or introduce new and
novel attack vectors.
Rapid advances in generative AI, as highlighted by the release of
ChatGPT in November 2022, have increased concerns about how more
advanced versions of AI may increase security risks.
Generative AI ``means the class of AI models that emulate the
structure and characteristics of input data in order to generate
derived synthetic content.''
This can include images, videos, audio, text, and other digital
content.
There will be no one definition of AI or one method that defines
what it is or what it will mean.
The efforts behind AI are focused on may not be able to plan for
all possible outcomes, but one that may make this conversation much
more challenging is the creation of machines that can write their own
computing code or algorithms without human intervention will quickly
lead to code that is only understood by AI.
Shortly after President Biden signed the EO, CISA released its
2023-2024 Roadmap for Artificial Intelligence, which describes the five
lines of effort the agency will undertake under the Executive Order:

Responsibly Use AI to Support [CISA's] Mission;

Assure AI Systems;

Protect Critical Infrastructure from Malicious Use of AI;

Collaborate with and Communicate on Key AI Efforts with the
Interagency, International Partners, and the Public; and

Expand AI Expertise in our Workforce.
CISA's Roadmap works to leverage existing programs and policies to
address AI security issues where possible while developing new policies
and work streams where gaps in policies exist.
Some of the more specific objectives CISA seeks to implement under
its Roadmap include developing a strategy to adopt the next generation
of AI-enabled technologies; generating best practices on the
development and use of secure AI systems; engaging with international
partners on global AI security; and recruiting staff with AI expertise.
In line with CISA's commitment to international cooperation on AI
policy and its goal of providing guidance on best practices for the
private sector, last month, CISA and the United Kingdom's National
Cyber Security Centre jointly released Guidelines for Secure AI System
Development in collaboration with agencies from 16 other countries.
The guidelines focused on securing all aspects of the AI
development life cycle, including secure design, secure development,
secure deployment, and secure operation and maintenance.
The publication aligns with CISA's broader focus on encouraging
software developers to follow secure-by-design principles that ensure
security is built into the technology product development process.
As DHS increases its use of AI across its components and missions,
in April of this year, Secretary Mayorkas established the DHS AI Task
Force, which seeks to drive the use of AI across DHS while protecting
civil rights, civil liberties, and privacy.
The task force is chaired by the Department's chief AI officer and
the under secretary for science and technology, with the officer for
civil rights and civil liberties serving as vice chair.
Its initial focus areas will be on the use of AI in combating
fentanyl trafficking, strengthening supply chain security, countering
child exploitation, and protecting critical infrastructure.
AI offers a wide range of applications that will have significant
security implications.
DHS and CISA must seek to utilize AI to strengthen their ability to
defend the homeland from cyber and other threats, defend against
increased security risks posed by AI to critical infrastructure, and
support secure and safe AI development across the Federal Government
and private sector. Incorporating AI policy into existing security
frameworks will ensure that AI security efforts align with broader
Government policies and enhances efforts to build out stronger
security.
threats posed by biological weapons
I would offer that we must keep an open mind and vigilant stance
when considering threats posed by biologics.
Over the past 100 years, more than 500 million people died of
infectious diseases.
A percentage of these deaths were due to the deliberate release of
pathogens or toxins, mostly by the Japanese during their attacks on
China during the Second World War.
There are also naturally occurring threats like COVID-19.
There are two international treaties that outlawed biological
weapons, but they have failed to stop countries from conducting
offensive bio-weapons research and large-scale production of biological
weapons.
There are legitimate fears that modified pathogens could constitute
devastating agents for biological warfare that may target people,
agriculture, or animals with disastrous consequences.
The ability of the United States to remain actively engaged in
policing this area of national defense is strengthened by sound trade
agreements and NATO policies that place the United States strengthen
ties between military and economic allies.
We must do all that we can to support the work of men and women on
the front lines of defending our Nation and our standing in the world
I thank today's witnesses and look forward to their testimony.
Thank you.
______

Statement of Hon. Delia C. Ramirez
April 16, 2024
Thank you, Chairman and Ranking Member for holding today's hearing.
I also want to thank our witness, Secretary Mayorkas, for joining us
today.
For a whole year, I have heard my colleagues on the other side
claim they want an orderly ``legal'' immigration system. Yet, over and
over again, they have failed to support policies that would do so.
Instead, they have wasted Congressional resources and time on a sham
impeachment, do-nothing resolutions, and the persecution of asylum
seekers.
Contrary to Republicans' claims of wanting ``immigration the legal
way,'' this Congress under Republican leadership provided USCIS, the
agency that administers our Nation's immigration system, with only 33
percent of the funding amount DHS determined it needed for fiscal year
2024. Despite facing insufficient resources, USCIS reduced case
backlogs for the first time in over a decade and found ways to continue
providing needed benefits and documents, including by recently
increasing the automatic extension period for certain employment
authorization documents. But there is still so much more work to do.
I appreciate DHS providing additional funding for the Shelter and
Services Program (SSP) last week, which included $19 million for
Illinois. However, this is not enough. Last year, I joined my
colleagues in Congress, along with State and city governments that have
been supporting large numbers of new arrivals, to call for no less than
$5 billion for SSP, acknowledging the need is much greater--more like
$10 billion. Immigrant-serving organizations have called for a similar
amount.
In addition to more SSP funding, States and cities have continued
calling for effective intergovernmental coordination on the reception,
transportation, and related services of families and individuals
released by DHS.
The third piece of the President's fiscal year 2025 budget request
for DHS I want to call attention to now, is the $2 billion to sustain
34,000 ICE immigration detention beds and $360 million for ICE's non-
community-based alternatives to detention models that require intensive
supervision and surveillance versus $15 million for the Case Management
Pilot Program. The Case Management Pilot Program is DHS's community-
based case management approach to an alternative to detention focused
on facilitating program participants' ability to meaningfully
participate in their immigration proceedings while having their needs
met. It is managed by a national board chaired by the DHS officer for
civil rights and civil liberties.
Research shows community-based case management alternatives to
detention are far more cost-effective, costing less than $50 a day per
person versus $164 per ICE detention bed. They are extremely effective,
as more than 95 percent of participants comply with immigration
requirements, and they are far less retraumatizing than other
alternatives to detention that function as non-physical prisons and, of
course, far more humane than detention.
I would urge you to redirect considerable resources into smart
approaches that help our immigration system efficiently function rather
than perpetuate harm and chaos.

Chairman Green. We are pleased to have Secretary Mayorkas
here and I would ask the Secretary to please rise and raise his
right hand.
[Witness sworn.]
Chairman Green. Let the record reflect that the Secretary
has answered in the affirmative. Thank you, sir. You may be
seated.
I would now like to formally introduce our witness.
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas is the seventh Secretary of
Homeland Security, a role in which he has served since February
2, 2021. Prior to his appointment he served as the deputy
secretary of DHS and the director of USCIS.
I thank you for being here today, sir. The witness' full
statement will appear in the record. I now recognize Secretary
Mayorkas for 5 minutes to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ALEJANDRO N. MAYORKAS, SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF
HOMELAND SECURITY

Secretary Mayorkas. Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, distinguished Members of the committee, every day the
268,000 men and women of the Department of Homeland Security
carry out our mission to protect the safety and security of the
American people. They protect our shores, harbors, skies, cyber
space, borders, and leaders.
They stop fentanyl and other deadly drugs from entering our
country. They lead the response to maritime emergency. As we
speak they are engaged in the response to the tragic Francis
Scott Key bridge collapse in Baltimore. They help communities
recover and rebuild after a natural disaster. They combat the
scourges of human trafficking, forced labor, and on-line child
sexual exploitation and so much more. All this despite a
perennially insufficient budget.
The dedicated public servants of DHS deserve full support
and the American people deserve the results a fully-resourced
DHS can deliver. The funding opportunities outlined in the
President's fiscal year 2025 budget for DHS are critical to
meeting both goals. I welcome the opportunity to discuss this
proposed budget and highlight some of its key proposals with
you today.
When our Department was founded in the wake of 9/11 the
threat of foreign terrorism against high-visibility targets was
our primary concern. That foreign threat persists, but we now
also confront the terrorism-related threat of radicalized lone
offenders in small groups already resident here in the United
States.
This budget provides for an $80 million increase to our
Department's nonprofit security grant program and additional
funds for targeted violence and terrorism prevent grants so
that DHS can better help communities prevent tragedies from
occurring.
As lone actors in nation-states increasingly target our
critical infrastructure and our data, the President's budget
provides CISA with needed funding to improve our cybersecurity
and resiliency. Fentanyl is wreaking tragedy in communities
across the country. DHS has interdicted more illicit fentanyl
and arrested more individuals from fentanyl-related crimes in
the last 2 fiscal years than in the previous 5 combined.
The President's budget includes critical funding to advance
our strategy including funds for nonintrusive inspection
technology and targeted operations.
During the time when the world, including our hemisphere,
is experiencing the greatest displacement of people since World
War II, DHS has toughened our border enforcement and is
maximizing our available resources and authorities. In the last
11 months we have removed or returned more than 630,000
individuals who did not have a legal basis to stay, more than
in every full fiscal year since 2013.
The President's budget would further expand these efforts.
It provides funding for hiring law enforcement personnel and
bolstering refugee processing.
Our immigration system, however, is fundamentally broken.
Only Congress can fix it. Congress had not updated our
immigration enforcement laws since 1996, 28 years ago, and only
Congress can deliver on our need for more Border Patrol agents,
asylum officers, and immigration judges, facilities, and
technology.
Our administration worked closely with a bipartisan group
of Senators to reach agreement on a national security
supplemental package, one that would make the system changes
that are badly needed and give DHS the tools and resources
needed to meet today's border security challenges. We remain
ready to work with you to pass this tough, fair, bipartisan
agreement.
Finally, extreme weather continues to devastate
communities. Last year FEMA responded to more than 100
disasters. Our budget provides $22.7 billion to assist
community leaders and help survivors in the aftermath of major
disasters. Additional funds to invest in resilient strategies
that will save lives and taxpayer money in the decades to come.
Essential to our success across all mission sets is our
Department's ability to recruit and retain a world-class work
force.
In addition to the front-line border work force I
mentioned, the President's budget includes $1.5 billion to
maintain our commitment to fairly compensate the DSA work
force. The recently-passed 2024 budget, though welcome and
helpful to many of our operations, was enacted too late to
implement an appreciable hiring surge. It reduced by 20 percent
much-needed support for cities dealing with migrant-related
challenges and it cut critical research and development
funding.
I am eager to work with you to address these and other
shortfalls in the weeks ahead as I am eager to deliver the
sustained funding, resources, and support that the
extraordinarily talented and dedicated public servants of DHS
need and deserve.
[The prepared statement of Secretary Mayorkas follows:]
Prepared Statement of Hon. Alejandro N. Mayorkas
April 16, 2024
introduction
Chair Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members of
the committee: I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you to
discuss the Department of Homeland Security's Fiscal Year 2025
President's Budget.
Since its inception, the Department has continuously evolved to
achieve its mission. It has done so in an increasingly dynamic threat
landscape through new programs and capabilities, cross-component
collaboration, and unflinching dedication. Today, we are the third-
largest department in the Federal Government with a 268,000-member
workforce. Every day, our personnel interact with the U.S. public more
than any other Federal agency as we ensure the safety and security of
all Americans, promote lawful trade and travel, protect our critical
infrastructure, develop resilience to man-made and natural disasters,
respond when disaster strikes, advance the security of cyber space and
modernize information technology, combat human trafficking and on-line
child sexual exploitation, protect communities from illicit drugs and
weapons, safeguard our borders, defend U.S. interests in the Arctic and
the Indo-Pacific, guard our Federal buildings, and much more.
The fiscal year 2025 President's budget for the Department totals
$107.9 billion, providing the resources needed to keep our Nation safe,
strong, and prosperous. This funding supports the Department's ever-
evolving mission set and aligns with key Presidential priorities. The
budget continues investments to advance our mission to combat
terrorism, to secure our borders and enforce immigration law, to
counter threats of fentanyl and other illicit drugs, to promote a
humane and efficient system of refugee processing, and to address
personnel needs. The budget supports Indo-Pacific engagement and
readiness operations. It supports investing in and building a resilient
Nation, laying a foundation for the responsible use of Artificial
Intelligence (AI), and bolstering cyber defenses and national
resilience. This testimony highlights fiscal year 2025 investments
which ensure the Department has the resources it needs to enforce our
laws and keep the American people, our homeland, and our values secure.
Of the $107.9 billion requested in fiscal year 2025, $62.2 billion
is discretionary budget authority, and $22.7 billion is for the
Disaster Relief Fund to enable response and recovery efforts during
major disasters and emergencies and to build resilience to natural
hazards. A TSA legislative proposal related to fees, if enacted, would
decrease net discretionary appropriations by $1.6 billion by directing
more offsetting collections directly to TSA. The budget also includes a
proposed $4.7 billion Southwest Border Contingency Fund to respond to
changing conditions on the Southwest Border.
The budget includes, and reiterates the need for, the
administration's border and disaster supplemental requests transmitted
to Congress in October, which total $17.9 billion for DHS.
Additionally, DHS urges Congress to pass the Senate's bipartisan border
security supplemental in order to provide vital funding and authorities
in the Department's efforts to secure the Southwest Border, build
capacity to enforcement immigration law, and counter trafficking in
fentanyl.
I am eager to work with Congress to deliver for the American people
and the men and women who protect our homeland.
advance our mission to combat terrorism
The President's budget supports the Department's continued efforts
to combat terrorism, both domestically and abroad. The fiscal year 2025
budget fully funds the DHS Special Events Program, a critical program
that gathers information on more than 57,000 special events, to
identify and assess terrorism risk to high-profile events across the
Nation and facilitates the risk rating of special events using the
Special Events Assessment Rating (SEAR) methodology.
The President's budget provides $418.0 million to support the
Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Office (CWMD), increasing our
security against chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN)
terrorist threats. Funding of $181.4 million provided to CWMD in the
President's budget are dedicated to support State, local, Tribal, and
territorial (SLTT) partners by building personnel and technical
capabilities and increasing knowledge regarding CBRN threats and
incidents.
Continuing to invest in innovative solutions is vital in countering
weapons of mass destruction and to the Department's front-line
personnel who rely on such technologies, including United States Coast
Guard (USCG) Special Mission Units. The President's budget provides
$138.3 million to ensure CWMD possesses the resources needed for
research, acquisition, development, test, and evaluation of next
generation technology to bolster environmental biodetection and
chemical defense programs.
The budget includes an $80 million increase for the Nonprofit
Security Grant Program (NSGP), which provides target hardening and
other physical security enhancements for nonprofit organizations at
high risk of terrorist attack, including places of worship. The NSGP is
designed to integrate nonprofit preparedness activities with broader
State and local preparedness efforts. It is also designed to promote
coordination and collaboration in emergency preparedness activities
among public and private community representatives, as well as State
and local government agencies. Additionally, the budget includes $18
million for the Targeted Violence and Terrorism Prevention Grants to
support activities to prevent the recruitment or radicalization of
individuals to violence by interrupting those efforts, building
community-level resilience, and identifying the early signs of
radicalization to violence and providing appropriate interventions
through civic and public health organizations, law enforcement, or
other entities.
securing the border and facilitating lawful trade and immigration
Countries throughout the Western Hemisphere and across the world
continue to face unprecedented levels of migration inflamed by
violence, food insecurity, corruption, dire economic conditions, and
the lingering effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Failing authoritarian
regimes in Venezuela, Cuba, and Nicaragua, and an on-going humanitarian
and security crisis in Haiti and Ecuador, have driven millions from
their homes. Several countries' uncooperative governments severely
restrict our ability to return their nationals. Migrants from the
Middle East, Central Asia, Africa, and Asia are using pathways through
Central and South America to reach the United States. Migratory
movements are often leveraged by human smuggling organizations that
exploit migrants for profit as part of a billion-dollar criminal
enterprise.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE) work together to secure America's borders and
enforce our Nation's immigration laws. CBP is responsible for securing
our Nation's borders to protect against terrorist threats, combat and
deter transnational crime, and facilitate lawful travel, trade, and
immigration. ICE protects our Nation through criminal investigations
and enforcing immigration laws to preserve national security and public
safety and stands at the forefront of our Nation's efforts to
strengthen border security, counter fentanyl, and prevent the illegal
movement of people and goods. The fiscal year 2025 budget includes
$25.9 billion for CBP and ICE to continue these vital functions and
significant investment in personnel and technology to carry out these
critical mission sets.
The requested CBP funding includes an increase of $210.3 million
that would support the hiring of an additional 350 Border Patrol
agents, an additional 310 Border Patrol Processing Coordinators, 150
CBP officers, and 411 Operational and Mission Support Personnel.
Additional field agents and support staff will bolster situational
awareness, respond to enhanced levels of migration, and advance the
enforcement mission. It supplements CBP's efforts to reduce reliance on
the Department of Defense by including $39.8 million to sustain
Integrated Surveillance Towers along the Southwest Border. The budget
also provides $26.2 million for research and development efforts in
critical operational capabilities such as Counter-Unmanned Aircraft.
Requested ICE funding includes $2 billion to sustain 34,000 ICE
Enforcement and Removal Operations (ERO) immigration detention beds.
The Southwest Border Contingency Fund will resource additional
detention beds if conditions require increased capacity.
The request of $2.5 billion for ICE Homeland Security
Investigations (HSI) would fund additional personnel and technology
enhancements for investigative capacities, including a $21 million
increase for child exploitation investigations, a vital national asset
in the global fight against transnational criminal threats. These
investigations helped inform a forthcoming national public awareness
campaign. Children, teens, parents, trusted adults, and policy makers
will be educated and empowered to prevent and combat on-line child
sexual exploitation and abuse; learn how to report on-line enticement
and victimization; and obtain response and support resources for
victims and survivors of on-line child sexual exploitation. We look
forward to launching this campaign with our partners this month.
Working within a broken immigration system and in the face of
enormous challenges and consistently insufficient funding, DHS
faithfully enforces the law to secure our borders. We are removing and
returning record numbers of migrants who are unable to establish a
legal basis to remain in the United States. Since mid-May 2023, we
removed or returned more than 630,000 individuals, the vast majority of
whom crossed the Southwest Border, including nearly 100,000 individuals
in family units. Total removals and returns in the last 11 months
exceed removals and returns in every full fiscal year since 2013.
countering fentanyl
Fentanyl is one of the deadliest drugs our country has ever faced.
It is 50 times stronger than heroin and remarkably cheap and easy to
produce. The profit potential and potency of small doses of fentanyl
complicate efforts for law enforcement personnel cracking down on
smuggling operations. CBP and ICE are working together with Federal,
State, and local partners to successfully combat transnational criminal
organizations and counter their trafficking in fentanyl and other
controlled substances. The Department has stopped more illicit fentanyl
and arrested more individuals for fentanyl-related crimes in the last 2
fiscal years than in the previous 5 years combined.
The Department's fiscal year 2025 budget includes critical
investments in the fight against fentanyl. Through investments in Non-
Intrusive Inspection technology and targeted operations such as
Operations Artemis, Rolling Wave, and Argus, CBP and ICE HSI increased
the interdiction of fentanyl, fentanyl precursors, and collateral
contraband, in particular the pill presses used to manufacture
fentanyl. The administration is also prepared to send to Congress a
legislative proposal to cement the Unity Agenda Strategy to combat the
fentanyl epidemic.
supporting refugee processing and a fair, orderly, and humane
immigration system
The Biden-Harris administration is committed to safeguarding the
integrity of our Nation's immigration system by efficiently and fairly
adjudicating requests for immigration benefits. U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS) provides safe, lawful pathways for
migration. The fiscal year 2025 budget includes $265 million for USCIS
to bolster refugee processing in support of the administration's goal
to welcome up to 125,000 refugees from across the world, including up
to 50,000 from the Western Hemisphere; expand the E-Verify Program; and
support the Citizenship and Integration Grant Program.
investing in cybersecurity and emergency communications
The Department's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency
(CISA) serves as both America's cyber defense agency and as the
national coordinator for critical infrastructure security and
resilience.
President Biden signed the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act of 2022 (CIRCIA) into law in March 2022. To meet
CIRCIA's requirements, CISA must add new staff, update existing
programs, and implement new processes and technologies. The fiscal year
2025 budget includes critical resources to facilitate CISA's ability to
receive, analyze, and share reports required under CIRCIA once
regulatory reporting requirements become effective. The budget includes
$115.9 million to help ensure CISA has sufficient funds for staffing,
operations, and technology to successfully implement CIRCIA.
The fiscal year 2025 budget also includes $394.1 million to support
the Joint Collaborative Environment, which enables CISA to fulfill its
mission of centralizing and synthesizing cyber threat and vulnerability
data across Federal, SLTT, and private-sector stakeholders, and rapidly
work with these stakeholders to reduce associated risk.
Additionally, the budget includes $469.8 million for Continuous
Diagnostics and Mitigation to complete mobile asset deployments,
continue cloud asset deployments to fill capability gaps, and align to
agency zero-trust use cases. Funding also sustains existing Endpoint
Detection and Response investments and incorporates sensors to increase
operational visibility within the Network Security Management
capability.
The Federal Government continues to leverage TSA's unique
authorities--including the ability to issue Security Directives and
Emergency Amendments within hours of receiving information about a
threat--to address cyber threats. Cyber threats grew dramatically over
the past decade and that growth shows no sign of slowing down.
Accordingly, the fiscal year 2025 budget includes an increase of $15
million to conduct critical mission support functions to reduce cyber
threats to American critical infrastructure in both near- and mid-
terms, and in support of both the surface and aviation sectors.
responsibly deploying artificial intelligence technology
At the Department of Homeland Security, we embrace the
responsibility to ensure that AI is developed and adopted in a way that
realizes its full potential while protecting the public from any harm
its irresponsible or adversarial use might cause. The fiscal year 2025
budget enables the Department to responsibly leverage AI and machine
learning to advance our homeland security missions while protecting
individuals' privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties. Funding
incudes $5.0 million for a new AI office, led by the chief AI officer,
within the Office of the Chief Information Officer. The AI office will
be responsible for setting priorities, directing policies, and
oversight of the responsible use of AI across DHS.
DHS will continue to deploy AI tools across strategic areas of the
homeland security enterprise, including efforts to counter fentanyl,
combat child sexual exploitation and abuses, deliver immigration
services, secure travel, fortify our critical infrastructure, and
enhance our cybersecurity. Consistent with President Biden's Executive
Order, DHS will also direct funds to manage AI in critical
infrastructure and cyber space, promote the adoption of global AI
safety standards, reduce the risk that AI can be used to create weapons
of mass destruction and other related threats, combat AI-related
intellectual property theft, and help the United States attract and
retain skilled talent.
The fiscal year 2025 budget provides additional AI funds for talent
recruitment programs that will benefit DHS missions, including the DHS
AI Corps that launched in February to hire 50 AI experts in the
Department. The effort has already received over 3,000 applications.
Funds will also support training programs to build AI literacy across
the Department's workforce and secure AI systems in critical
infrastructure. The funds will also support existing ICE, CBP, and
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) programs ensuring investment
and expansion in line with Executive Order 14110, Safe, Secure, and
Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence.
In March 2024, we introduced the DHS AI Roadmap, which outlines the
Department's AI initiatives and the technology's potential across the
homeland security enterprise. It is the most detailed AI plan put
forward by a Federal agency to date, directing our efforts to fully
realize AI's potential to protect the American people and our homeland,
while steadfastly protecting privacy, civil rights, and civil
liberties.
Our roadmap for the coming year includes exploring new AI
applications and pursuing a whole-of-Government strategy for ensuring
the safe, secure, and trustworthy development and use of AI. We are
seeking to engage partners across Government, the private sector, and
academia to bolster our Nation's security.
investing in a disaster-resilient nation
FEMA strengthens the Nation's ability to prepare for and respond to
disasters of all types and magnitudes via partnerships with SLTT
governments and the delivery of assistance to disaster survivors. In
January, DHS announced historic changes to FEMA's Individual Assistance
Program that ensure survivors will be provided with faster and easier
access to resources they need immediately after a disaster. Last month,
these changes went into effect and they will transform how we interact
with survivors and empower individuals and communities in all future
disasters.
The budget includes increased funding for programs and activities
that support FEMA's goals to lead whole-of-community efforts in
resilience and promote and sustain a prepared Nation. The fiscal year
2025 budget provides a major disaster allocation totaling $22.7 billion
for FEMA to assist SLTT partners and individuals affected by major
disasters and emergencies. This funding will support FEMA's continued
recovery efforts from the devastating Maui fire, Hurricanes Maria,
Fiona, and Ian, and other major disaster activity. In Maui our teams
are on the ground delivering assistance in Lahaina and across Maui. As
the roads are cleared and debris removed, as a temporary elementary
school has opened, and as survivors begin to rebuild their homes, FEMA
will continue to be there on the long road to recovery. The funding
Congress provides directly impacts our ability to ensure survivors have
the assistance they need to return to Lahaina and their community. The
budget provides approximately $3.2 billion in FEMA grants bolstering
SLTT community partnerships to improve the Nation's disaster resilience
and preparedness strategies and includes the previously-mentioned $385
million for the NSGP.
increasing coast guard presence in the indo-pacific region
The U.S. Coast Guard is a vital part of the administration's
national security vision. Increasing USCG's presence in the Indo-
Pacific region is critical to that vision, the investments detailed
below will enable a stable, free, and open region, and solidify the
United States as a trusted partner in the region.
The fiscal year 2025 budget provides $12.3 billion in net
discretionary funding to sustain current readiness, resilience, and
capabilities while building the Coast Guard of the future. The budget
expands efforts for the Coast Guard's two highest acquisition
priorities, the Offshore Patrol Cutter (OPC) and Fast Response Cutter
(FRC). The OPC replaces the Coast Guard's fleet of Medium Endurance
Cutters that conduct missions on the high seas and coastal approaches
while FRC funding expands the program of record and construction of two
FRCs in support of the Nation's Indo-Pacific Strategy. Of the $263
million provided to USCG, $200 million will increase the FRC fleet from
65 to 67 boats, which are well-equipped to engage with partner nations
throughout the region.
The budget also provides funding to support training, partnerships,
and meaningful engagement in the Indo-Pacific region. For example, it
includes funds for an Indo-Pacific based Coast Guard Marine
Transportation System (MTS) Assessment Team that will drive regional
economic prosperity by performing vital Ports and Waterways Safety
Assessments, Port Access Route Studies, and Waterways Analysis and
Management System Studies. Additionally, the budget also funds a
Maritime Engagement Team focused on bolstering partner-nation capacity,
and regional maritime advisors, liaison officers, attaches, legal
support, and foreign engagement personnel that will support the U.S.
presence and our interests in the region.
the 2024 presidential campaign and national special security events
The U.S. Secret Service (USSS) protects the President, the Vice
President, their immediate families, visiting heads of state, other
designated individuals, and the White House Complex, the Vice
President's residence, foreign diplomatic missions, and other
designated buildings. Additionally, the USSS coordinates security at
National Special Security Events, such as the State of the Union
Address, the United Nations General Assembly, and international summits
hosted in the United States, such as the upcoming NATO Summit. The
Service also protects the Nation's financial infrastructure by
investigating counterfeiting, identity theft, computer fraud, and other
financial security crimes.
This year, the USSS will increase protective details, travel, and
overtime related to the Presidential Campaign. The fiscal year 2025
budget includes $70 million to ensure the 2024 Presidential Campaign is
adequately resourced for the protection of major candidates, designated
nominees, their spouses, and nominating conventions. This funding
supports enhanced protection, security, travel, and overtime for the
2024 Presidential Campaign and includes resources to train USSS
personnel and other Federal partner agencies.
The President's budget includes $16.0 million to support planning
and prepositioning of assets needed for the protection of the 2026 FIFA
World Cup and $19 million for other NSSEs.
modernizing tsa pay and workforce policies
Every day, TSA personnel help millions of travelers reach their
destinations safely, fulfilling one of our Department's core missions
since our founding in the wake of the September 11 attacks. The TSA
workforce deserves to be fairly compensated at rates comparable with
their peers on the General Schedule pay scale. The fiscal year 2025
budget includes an additional $1.5 billion to continue the fiscal year
2023 initiative to increase TSA pay levels, making TSA pay comparable
to Federal Government employees in similar positions and enhancing
recruitment and retention efforts.
The budget resources TSA passenger volume growth expectations in
fiscal year 2025 to follow the historical growth rate of 4.5 percent
averaged over the 2014-2019 period, which equates to an average 3.1
million daily passengers in 2025. Increased volume equates to greater
risks to passenger safety. To mitigate this risk the President's budget
includes $174 million to adequately staff check points to meet the
demands of the increased passenger volume while maintaining minimal
wait times for passengers.
conclusion
The Department was founded to confront a threat environment that
has proven to be increasingly dynamic and diverse. The fiscal year 2025
President's budget builds on our successes to meet the ever-changing
threat landscape we face and prepares the Department to meet the
threats of tomorrow.
It is the privilege of my life to represent and serve alongside the
DHS workforce--a workforce that has time and again demonstrated
exceptional skill and steadfast commitment to keeping the homeland safe
and secure.
I am grateful to this committee for your continued support and the
opportunity to appear before you today. I look forward to working
together and to answering your questions.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Members will be
recognized by order of seniority for their 5 minutes of
questioning. I would like to say the Secretary has, I think, a
hard out today and that hard out is going to come up must
faster than we would want or desire. I understand he has got a
busy schedule.
Typically, my policy is to let people go beyond the 5
minutes if they are making a question and continuing a train of
thought. Unfortunately, today we are not going to be able to
allow that and I hate that. But as I have applied the rule
evenly to both sides I will now apply for today's hearing the 5
minutes with the gavel for both sides of the aisle.
So, it is 5 minutes and 5 minutes only because we want to
allow everyone here to get an opportunity to ask questions of
the Secretary. I would like to ask the staffs on both sides if
they would communicate this change for today to the individuals
who aren't present right now. I now recognize myself for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Secretary, you have issued guidance that directed DHS
personnel to essentially disregard the INA ``shall detain''
language meaning, you know, disregard laws passed by Congress.
You have created pathways for tens of thousands of migrants
from very specific countries to enter the United States
directly without any law passed by Congress and in violation of
the INA.
The Solicitor General, in arguments before the Supreme
Court, arguing on your and your boss' behalf, as well as
yourself in testimony to Congress, have said you have had
prosecutorial discretion, I think is the term that keeps
getting used, to disregard those laws when the resources are
overwhelmed. That has essentially been the argument that, you
know, ``shall detain'' language could not be adhered to because
the resources were overwhelmed. Is that generally correct?
Secretary Mayorkas. No, it is not, Mr. Chairman. Let me
assure you that we enforce the laws that Congress has passed
and that is the direction that I have given to the work force
throughout my tenure.
Chairman Green. Well, during the hearing or the court trial
Texas v. the United States, the Solicitor General made it very
clear that the reason the policies that you have written have
been written the way they have been written is because there is
some form of discretion allowed to make the choice that we are
not going to, you know, follow the ``shall detain'' and we can
get thousands and thousands of examples of where that didn't
happen.
We have a memorandum from you that basically says just
because it says this doesn't mean you have--that is a reason to
not or to detain someone. I want to ask this question, do you
know how many ICE detention beds were empty on average during
your tenure?
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chairman, let me be very clear that
we maximum the use of detention beds that are available.
Sometimes we are curtailed by using detention beds by reason
of----
Chairman Green. You----
Secretary Mayorkas. If I may, Mr. Chairman. By orders----
Chairman Green. But do you know the number? I just want to
know the number.
Secretary Mayorkas. By orders of court, for example certain
restrictions were used in terms of space and availability of
beds by reason of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Chairman Green. Well, let me just share what has been put
out in documents from your Department. In each year of your
tenure that--here have been, I would submit, thousands--well,
they are thousands of beds available per day.
Roughly 9,000 on average in fiscal year 2022, 3,000 a day
in fiscal year 2023, meaning while you assert that shall detain
is what you want to do, what you agree the law says, we are
leaving thousands of beds empty ever day. This is not counting
the various--I think it is in California, starts with an A, I
can't think of the name of the facility where the courts have
ordered you not to use those beds. We are not including those
in these counts.
It is thousands, at least 3,000 a day empty, and yet the
arguments before the Supreme Court and in your testimonies
before here to Congress have been that the resources are
overwhelmed and, therefore, we have to just catch and release
these people into the country. I mean in your opening statement
you said, we need more resources.
It is interesting, though, in that claim for more resources
so that we can adhere to the laws you are actually in this
budget decreasing the requested ICE detention beds. That seems
to me to be illogical, if the reason we can't enforce the laws
as they are written on the books is because we don't have
enough resources, there are thousands of empty beds, and we are
going to ask for less beds in this budget. I mean that doesn't
make any sense to me.
I would submit to you that it speaks to somewhat of an
intent to not adhere to that ``shall detain''. But, you know,
that is my perception on this.
Let me ask you this question: Just recently in your last
trip here you actually admitted that there was a crisis at the
Southwest Border. What changed?
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chairman, nothing changed. I have
recognized the enormous challenge that the Southern Border
presents ever since I began my tenure and actually well before
that then when I served as the deputy secretary----
Chairman Green. Wait, let me ask this question then. When
you came to Congress and said there was no crisis at the
Southern Border in your first few trips here, no crisis, there
is no--secure the border, secure. Nothing changed between then
and now you are saying it is a crisis?
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chairman, I have never minimized
the challenge that the Southern Border presents. I didn't
minimize it when I served as a Federal prosecutor for 12 years
from 1989 through 2001.
Chairman Green. I am going to gavel myself since I have 5
seconds left. I now recognize the Ranking Member for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. Again welcome, Mr.
Secretary. Mr. Secretary, Republicans have wasted little time
playing political games with our Southern Border while
rejecting any serious solution and voting against border
security funding.
If you are for it, you should support resources. If you are
against it, I assume you vote against it because you are not
for it. So, I don't know why it happens, but Democrats
historically have supported robust funding for DHS. Is DHS a
perfect agency? Of course not. None of our--we strive for
perfection but we understand resources are absolutely
important.
Republicans have tried to starve DHS personnel of the
resources needed to do their job. The Chairman said not another
dime for DHS. When it comes time to fund the Department I guess
addressing the surge in migration and stopping fentanyl and
human trafficking isn't worth 10 cents to the Republicans
charged with overseeing DHS.
Republicans have ignored or voted against every opportunity
to provide necessary resources to DHS. They voted no on the
2023 omnibus. They refused to consider the President's
supplemental request and they called the bipartisan Senate
border bill dead on arrival within minutes of the text being
released.
Disturbingly, just a few weeks ago two-thirds of the
Republicans on this committee voted against funding DHS and
border security. Republicans have taken their marching orders
from Donald Trump and he wants chaos at the border to help his
chances in this election. They want a show, not solutions.
Democrats are united in finding solutions and providing the
agents and officers of DHS with the resources needed to do so
safely and effectively.
Mr. Secretary, can you describe how the additional
resources in the President's emergency supplemental or the
bipartisan Senate border bill would help the Department address
the issues at the Southern Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Ranking Member Thompson, the
President's supplemental would provide us with vital resources
needed to hire additional personnel across the spectrum of our
work force that enforce the Southern Border and do so much
more.
The bipartisan Senate legislation would not only resource
our Department as we are needed to address a broken immigration
system but also, and very importantly, actually change the law
and authorize us to use tools that have long been needed to
address that broken immigration system. It would take a multi-
year asylum process and reduce it to as little as 90 days or
even less. That is a game-changer in terms of deterring illegal
migration to our border.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you. Let us go to election security. We
have elections coming up this November and, as you know, DHS is
responsible for securing critical infrastructure, including our
elections. Not only Russia attempts to interfere with the 2016
elections, officials from across the Trump administration
worked to counter efforts to undermine the confidence in the
election outcomes.
Unfortunately, after inciting a riot at the Capitol because
he wasn't reelected, Donald Trump spent 4 years making
legitimate election security work so politically toxic that I
am worried that the Federal Government is reluctant to support
election officials and other stakeholders the way it should hit
it this November.
Last week's baseless claim about voter fraud by the former
President and Speaker would only make the work of election
officials harder. Mr. Secretary, secretaries of state, local
election officials, and other stakeholders relied on DHS's
support to administer secure elections in 2020. Can you assure
us that DHS will bring the full range of its resources to
support the 2024 elections?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes, I can, Ranking Member Thompson.
Mr. Thompson. Yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired. I now
recognize the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and
former Chairman of this committee, Mr. McCaul, for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good morning. Mr.
Secretary, you took an oath to protect the country from enemies
both foreign and domestic. I believe in many respects you
violated that oath.
Let me start with the Immigration Nationality Act. It
states that, ``The government shall take into custody any alien
that has committed an aggravated felony. Those are dangerous,
violent criminals.'' As you know, you are an attorney, as am I,
``shall'' is mandatory language. It doesn't say maybe. It
doesn't say, well, whatever you think at the time. It says
``shall''.
Those are words by the Congress, mandatory language means
you shall detail. Yet in September 2021, your memo to your
Border Patrol agents titled, ``Guidance for Enforcement of
Civil Immigration Law,'' you instructed your Border Patrol
officers not to take prior criminal conduct into account when
taking enforcement action.
Whether you say whether a noncitizen poses a current threat
to public safety is not to be determined according to bright
lines or categories. Our personnel should not rely on the fact
of a conviction or the result of a database search alone. In
other words, you directed your own agents on the ground, on the
border to defy the laws of Congress, to release violent
criminals into our countries and you know what aggravated felon
means under the statute, but for those who don't, it means it
includes murderers, rapists, pedophiles, and drug traffickers
and God knows how many have been released into this country due
to this policy that you issued in September 2021.
My State took this up on appeal to the Supreme Court where
Justice Kavanaugh asked whether impeachment would be warranted
for an official who defied the laws passed by Congress.
President Biden's own Solicitor General replied that such steps
would be warranted, ``in the face of a dramatic abdication of a
statutory responsibility by the executive.''
In my view you have defied the law, you defied
Congressional intent and the best interest of the American
people and you made this country, sir, a far more dangerous
place, not to mention the hundreds of those in the terror watch
list who have gotten into this country. How do you respond?
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chairman, I have 3 points to make.
No. 1, you mischaracterized the enforcement guidelines that I
published.
Mr. McCaul. I read directly from them, sir.
Secretary Mayorkas. Second, we have removed more aggravated
felons each month than the prior administration did. Third, my
enforcement guidelines mirror to a great extent and in the
quoted language prior enforcement guidelines that other
administrations have issued. The fact of the matter is that we
enforce the law. We deem public security----
Mr. McCaul. All right. I am going to reclaim my time on
that. You are saying you enforce the law when you told your
agents don't take into account prior criminal conduct.
Aggravated felons, do not take into account the fact they maybe
have a murder conviction or a rapist conviction or--well, that
is what is under the statute, sir.
You told them, don't take that into account. You can say
you have the best record ever as a Secretary of Homeland. You
can say that but nobody believes it. I have got to tell you,
back home in my State of Texas very, very upset.
I want to close with 1833's Supreme Court Justice Story
said, ``Where a lord admiral has neglected to safeguard the
seas, that shall be deemed an impeachable offense.'' I believe
that is exactly the case here. You have neglected not just the
seas, but the air, land, and the seas, and you have destroyed
the fabric of this Nation.
My last question to you is, how many persons on the terror
watch list have gotten into this country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Mr. Chairman, I'd be pleased to provide
you with data subsequent to this hearing.
Mr. McCaul. Will you provide the names and backgrounds?
Secretary Mayorkas. Let me assure you that the security of
the American people is highest priority.
Mr. McCaul. Will you provide the names and the backgrounds
of any of the persons?
Secretary Mayorkas. I would be pleased to provide you with
whatever information you need in the appropriate setting.
Mr. McCaul. A bit of a non-answer but I will take that.
Thank you.
Chairman Green. The Chairman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Correa, the gentleman from California and the Ranking Member of
the Subcommittee on Border Security and Enforcement for his 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, welcome
today. My first question is, you did take an oath to protect
our country? Have you upheld that oath?
Secretary Mayorkas. I have, Congressman. That is, I believe
the fifth time I have taken the oath of office in my public
service career.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. I am the Ranking Member of the
Subcommittee for Border Security and Enforcement. I have made
it my mission to understand, learn the needs of the personnel
at the border, both of our borders, all of our borders. Been at
our Southern Border numerous times, spoken with your men and
women in green and blue uniforms.
It is clear that today we are facing challenges at home and
abroad like we have never faced before. We just returned, my
colleagues and I, from a trip to Africa. A common issue across
many countries we visited was refugees. Egypt today, according
to the president, is hosting 10 million refugees, just one
country alone.
Here we are talking about our budget, the budget for the
personnel you need, a budget for the resources you need,
Department of Homeland Security to protect our great country.
Yet I watch my colleagues on the other side of the aisle block
the President's emergency supplemental request and to even
refuse to consider the Senate's bipartisan border bill. In the
last few months, my colleagues on the other side of the aisle
have repeatedly threatened to shut down Government over the
Homeland Security budget.
Secretary Mayorkas, can you please explain to us in plain
terms what my colleagues on the other side, their refusal to
pass emergency supplemental requests, how does that put our
country's national security in danger?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, with the additional
resources we would be provided in the President's supplemental
budget request we would be able to advance significantly the
security of the border. We would have additional equipment,
additional technology, additional personnel in every facet of
border security.
Mr. Correa. You talk about additional personnel. Do we have
a shortage of personnel right now at our borders?
Secretary Mayorkas. We do, Congressman. We need additional
Office of Field Operations personnel to man our ports of entry.
We need additional Border Patrol agents----
Mr. Correa. Let us talk about that. Our ports of entry,
that is where most of the fentanyl coming through this country
enters through ports of entry. San Ysidro itself accounts for
about 70 percent of all fentanyl coming into our country. Yet
you are telling me we are short of personnel in these critical
junctures? Is that what you are telling me, sir?
Secretary Mayorkas. We are. We need additional field
personnel to equip those ports of entry with a staff that we
need to enforce our laws.
Mr. Correa. So, Secretary, let me go back and re-ask a
question that you did not finish answering that was asked by my
colleagues which is, the thousands of empty beds, how do you
explain that?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, you know, recently we've
been over capacity in our ICE detention facilities. There are
court cases that impose restrictions on our ability to use the
beds that we have been funded.
Mr. Correa. So, if the laws were to change, maybe some of
those court cases would not apply, could that be the case?
Secretary Mayorkas. I would want to get back to you on
that, Congressman. I will share with you that the President's--
I'm sorry, forgive me, the bipartisan Senate legislation would
have funded the Department of Homeland Security with 50,000
detention beds, far more than we are resourced this year and
even more so than we were resourced last year.
Mr. Correa. So, how would that affect the situation that my
colleagues on either side of the aisle are talking about, all
these individuals that could be essentially held at these empty
beds so to speak, adding to these empty beds, they talk about
all these people being released, would they be held at these
beds?
Secretary Mayorkas. As everyone recognizes, the more
detention beds that we are funded for, the more individuals
that we would be able to detain. The Supreme Court has quite
clearly recognized the fact that detention bed capacity for
which we have been funded is inadequate to comply to the letter
of the law.
Mr. Correa. Yes, and beyond that, the bigger picture here
is processing individuals at our borders that may or may not be
eligible for asylum, we are critical shorts in those resources
there. I do hope as we move forward we can address that issue.
I am out of time. Mr. Secretary, thank you for being here.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman, Mr. Higgins from Louisiana,
the Chair of the Subcommittee on Border Security and
Enforcement for 5 minutes.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Over the past year I
have found that many Members of Congress fail to grasp the
Founders' true meaning regarding the constitutional writ of
impeachment proceedings. Impeachment is not a criminal
proceeding. It may include violations of written law but it was
never intended to be bound by specific criminal violations of
statute.
In many ways impeachment proceedings are intended to be
guided by principles of conduct that are far more deeply etched
upon human history than any written law could ever be.
Embezzlement of money by an employee is a criminal act and is a
betrayal of trust. But betrayal of trust is not a statute.
The House Committee on Homeland Security advanced Articles
of Impeachment against Department of Homeland Security
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas. He has been impeached by the
people's house. These articles do not impugn the Secretary's
character nor list dissenting views on how to handle the crisis
at our border.
Instead, the impeachment articles against Secretary
Mayorkas carry the charge of high crimes and misdemeanors. It
is important that all Americans recognize the true meaning of
high crimes and misdemeanors. While some of my colleagues have
claimed that this charge is confined to specific violations of
criminal statute, let us not fail to recognize the Founders'
original intent and well-documented debate regarding the origin
and meaning of this term.
Article II, Section 4 of our Constitution reads, ``The
President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United
States shall be removed from office on impeachment for and
conviction of treason, bribery, or other high crimes and
misdemeanors.''
Our Founding Fathers used this phrase, ``high crimes and
misdemeanors,'' having 400 years of British Parliament
historical precedent, which did not limit itself to direct
criminal misconduct, but, more importantly, encompassed a
neglect of duty and abuse of power. This is not funny, Mr.
Secretary.
Literally, demeaning the office in high authority that had
been entrusted, enshrining this phrase in the Constitution, the
Founding Fathers put explicit trust in Congress to determine
what constitutes an impeachable offense and what is encompassed
in high crimes and misdemeanors.
Impeachment was never intended to be a criminal proceeding
but instead a review by the American people of a rogue
executive and a mechanism for accountability when all else as
failed. Secretary Mayorkas has not only betrayed the trust of
the American people, his service as Secretary has left a scar
on our Nation's soul that may never be removed.
The Articles of Impeachment brought against Secretary
Mayorkas passed the House and have now been delivered this
afternoon to the Senate. It is vital the Senate upholds its
Constitutional obligation to hold a fair impeachment trial.
The American people deserve accountability for the gross
misconduct of the Secretary's handling of our borders. It is
incumbent upon Members of Congress to enforce the authority
outlined by the Founding Fathers for impeachment.
Under Secretary Mayorkas, America has suffered. Over
300,000 Americans have died from cartel drug poisoning. Our
communities are crushed under the weight of 12 million illegal
aliens in the span of 3 years and crime has reached
unprecedented levels within American communities across the
country.
Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas' arrogant disregard for the
security and sanctity of the American people has brought
Congress to this point. He has brought unspeakable pain upon
the Nation. His service as Secretary will forever be shrouded
in shameful failure and generational trauma.
Alejandro Mayoras has been impeached by the House. He must
now be tried by the Senate and removed from office.
Mr. Chairman, I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Carter, the gentleman from Louisiana and the Ranking Member on
the Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and Law Enforcement
Intelligence, for 5 minutes.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member
Thompson. Thank you, Secretary Mayorkas, for joining us today.
As we review our fiscal year 2025 budget request, President
Biden's fiscal year 2025 budget request for DHS reflects
Democrats' commitment to put politics aside and work in good
faith to address security challenges facing our Nation.
Today's review is important so we can continue to find
solutions, not politics. Solutions that we as Americans should
want. We often have different approaches but what we see here
in the impeachment is nothing more than a witch hunt and an
opportunity to cloud the issue as evidenced by the fact that
the Senate has a measure that would bring us to a measure of
success, to move the ball forward.
But my colleagues in the House because of a directive by
the former President ``to not give President Biden a victory,''
our jobs are not to give Presidents victories. Our jobs are to
give the American people victories. Our jobs are to fight to
make sure that we have a secure border. Our jobs are here to
make sure that we see things through a lens not as Republicans
or Democrats but as Americans and to do what is right.
Unfortunately, that has not and is not happening.
I will go on record as predicting that the U.S. Senate will
not even take up these Articles of Impeachment. Why? Because
they are meritless, because they are baseless, and because they
are purely political in nature and they are not rooted in the
fairness, justice, or the American way.
So, I am going to pivot a little bit if we might because I
have--we have talked about this quite a bit, so I am going to
pivot to flood insurance.
Mr. Secretary, the last time you were here before this
committee I relayed my concerns about FEMA's Risk Rating 2.0,
and that it will leave many in my district, especially in low-
and moderate-income communities priced out of their homes by
premium increases.
You stated that you were reviewing and need to continue to
review Risk Rating 2.0 given the concerns that have been
expressed. Since then, I have only seen flood insurance prices
get worse. Given the urgency of the situation and the impact on
vulnerable communities can you provide the committee with an
update on how the Department is taking steps to help
communities that are struggling with FEMA's Risk Rating 2.0?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I will follow up with you
and provide you an update on Flood Insurance 2.0. I can assure
you that we are taking extraordinary measures through FEMA to
reach otherwise disenfranchised populations.
We have issued guidance and changed our policies to make
sure that minority and underserved communities have greater
access to our grant programs, to individual assistance, and to
other resources that FEMA provides in the wake of natural
disasters and to strengthen and protect communities. I will
provide you with an update with respect to Flood Insurance 2.0,
specifically.
Mr. Carter. One of the things that we have repeatedly asked
for both in this committee as well as in Transportation
Infrastructure for which I also serve and in individual
meetings in my office and in the office of the FEMA
administrator is the formula, what algorithm, what formula is
used to derive these rates?
We have consistently said that it is some algorithm but we
have yet to be shared what that is. What does it look like? How
do we explain to the people in our districts how these rates
are developed when we get a vague answer to that?
Mr. Secretary, I would greatly appreciate if you can drill
down and share with the American people what this formula is,
how it is derived, and, more importantly, how we can adjust it
to make sure that people are not being forced to make a
decision about being able to live in the home that they have
now paid for and they can no longer afford to insure because
the rates are higher than the note was when they had a
mortgage. This is untenable. I would ask that you would look
into that and share some meaningful answers, sir.
Secretary Mayorkas. I will do so, Congressman.
Mr. Carter. Thank you, my time is up.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Guest, the gentleman from Mississippi
and the Vice Chair of the Committee on Homeland Security, for
his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Guest. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I want
to point out what I highlighted last week when you testified.
You came in in your opening statement and you talk about your
budget being insufficient. You seek to place the blame on
Congress that we are not giving you the resources and your
Department the resources that you need. But last year in the
fiscal year 2024 budget which we just passed, Congress
appropriated you $61.8 billion in discretionary spending, which
was more than you asked for.
So, Congress has given you more money than you are asking
for, but you are repeatedly coming in to these hearings and you
are trying to say that you don't have the financial resources
that you need to carry out the job. Chairman Green mentioned
the detention beds, the detention beds which you and I talked
about last week are incredibly troubling in the fact that you
come in and you, once again, you ask for less detention beds,
significantly less detention beds than we funded in the fiscal
year 2024 budget.
You told me in that hearing last week that you agreed with
the Senate 50,000 detention beds, but yet you come in and you
ask Congress only to fund 34,000 when we currently are funding
41,500. You continue to seek to place the blame on us.
I am reading from the physical report 2023, ICE's annual
report. In that annual report, Mr. Secretary, a report which is
issued by your agency, on page 17 it says, ``Congressional
funding for ERO detention beds have remained relatively static
for several years and the detained population was limited as a
result.''
In answering a question from Mr. Correa, you talk about the
fact that the court says that there has been inadequate funding
for detention beds, and so how do you come in here and you ask
for less detention beds, but yet every time you testify, you
try to place the blame back on Congress? Because we are
actually funding more detention beds every year than you are
asking for, and at a time in which we see a record surge of
immigrants coming across the border, at a time in which you
have at least now finally admitted that there is a crisis on
the border.
But we are seeing reports every day in the media about
violent crimes committed by immigrants who are not in custody,
who are not detained but released into the interior, and yet
you come in here and as a key part of your budget you are
asking for substantially less detention beds. I find that
especially troubling, Mr. Secretary, as I look at this,
continue to look at the report that was provided by ICE in
which I see according to the fiscal year 2023 year-end report
that the not-detained docket--the docket that shows the number
of not-detained individuals who you have allowed in the
country, has now reached over 6.2 million people, 6.2 million.
I spoke just yesterday with the ICE director, Director
Lechleitner, and in my conversation with him I brought up the
fact of what was in this report. He told me, Mr. Secretary,
that that number is now over 7 million, that that report is
old, that that number is more than 7 million. Axios reported
just several weeks ago that by the end of this physical year,
fiscal year 2024, October 1, that that number is expected to
grow to 8 million.
So, we see this record number of immigration, the record
number of people that you as the Secretary are allowing to come
into the country, but yet we are seeing you do nothing to ask
for more detention beds. I find that troubling and I have to
believe that I am not the only Member of this committee that
finds it troubling that we are not asking for a sufficient
number of detention beds.
Mr. Secretary, I also had the opportunity to ask you last
week when you testified before the Appropriations Committee
about this news article, a new article reported by FOX News. I
have provided you some of the content when we met last week but
I wanted to show this to you. This is from an article dated
January 8, 2024.
It says, ``Mayorkas tells Border Patrol Agency that above
85 percent of illegal immigrants have been released into the
United States.'' It goes on there in the first paragraph, it
says, ``Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas on
Monday admitted to Border Patrol agency that the current rate
of release for illegal immigrants apprehended at the Southwest
Border is above 85 percent.''
It says, ``Mayorkas made these statements when meeting
privately with agents and that there were sources in the room
who heard that.'' It goes on to say that there were at least 3
agents who verified to FOX News that you made that statement.
So, Mr. Secretary, did you make the statement that it was
reported on January 8, 2024?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, as I mentioned to you last
week, I do not recall that exchange in an internal meeting with
the work force. Let me assure you that the security at the
Southern Border is our highest priority.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Thanedar, the gentleman from Michigan
and Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Secretary, clearly
you have a tough job. You are faced with a world-wide migration
challenge, a deeply broken immigration system, and limited
resources to address the challenges. Unfortunately, my
Republican colleagues don't seem to want to help to fix that
problem.
I admire your efforts to expand parole program for migrants
in countries facing extreme conditions, like Haiti and Cuba, as
well as to restore familiar reunification problems for families
facing wide-spread violence in Central America.
America is a nation of immigrants, as you know, and yet we
have a broken immigration system. In 1979, growing up in
poverty I was fortunate to have gotten admission into a Ph.D.
program in the United States to study. That would have changed
my life.
I went to the American Embassy in Mumbai, got there at 5
a.m. in the morning, stood in line only to be denied my student
visa. The Embassy continued to deny it for 4 more times, and
the fifth time the visa got approved only because the denying
officer was on vacation to the United States.
In our H-1B visas is an issue, our immigration country
quotas is creating such a stressful environment for families,
companies, technology companies that are unable to find a
skilled work force, countries like Canada and Australia are
taking away some of our skilled work force because of our
broken immigration system.
I want to see an orderly immigration process that benefits
the United States, that benefits our economy, and helps create
American jobs. How do you think Congress can help you to
achieve that?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the President on his very
first day in office presented Congress with a comprehensive
legislative package to fix what everyone agrees is our broken
immigration system, to advance that piece of legislation and to
advance the Senate's bipartisan legislation would transform our
broken immigration system and reform it. It hasn't been
reformed since 1996. It is long outdated and long broken.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I want to give
you an opportunity to respond to Congressman Guest's questions.
I think you may not have adequate time to respond if you so
choose to do.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we support the funding of
41,500 beds. We support the funding of 50,000 detention beds
that the Senate's bipartisan legislation provided. It is most
regrettable that that bipartisan legislation has not advanced.
We urge Congress to advance it. It would advance our border
security immeasurably.
Mr. Thanedar. I, Mr. Chairman, I yield my time to the
gentleman from New York.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Thanedar. We just have a few
seconds, Mr. Secretary. But I wanted to follow up on what
Chairman McCaul was talking about because he is citing the INA
``shall detain'' language in a memo that you issued in
September 2021. I want to give you an opportunity to explain
what it says in that memo because even in the quote that he
read, he said that aggravated felonies shall not be the only
consideration when deciding whether or not to seek detention.
So, can you explain what your guidance was in the face of
the reality that there are insufficient beds to comply with the
letter of the law?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the direction to law
enforcement agents was to use their discretion, their
experience to determine who presents the greatest public safety
treat and to detain those individuals, period.
Chairman Green. OK. The gentleman's time has expired.
Someone else can yield, of course, if they would like.
I now recognize, Mr. Bishop, the gentleman from North
Carolina and the Chair of the Subcommittee on Oversight, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Bishop. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Mayorkas,
you have frequently testified about the actions and efforts of
DHS over the course of the time you have been Secretary. Let me
just ask you about the results of your more than 3 years in of
tenure. Do you consider the results of your administration of
the Department of Homeland Security to be a success?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am incredibly proud of the work of
the men and women of the Department of Homeland Security,
Congressman. They risk their lives----
Mr. Bishop. Right. Do you consider it to be a success?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am incredibly proud of everything
they do.
Mr. Bishop. Yes. Do you consider it to be a success?
Secretary Mayorkas. I consider them to be a tremendous
success in advancing the safety and security of the American
people with the----
Mr. Bishop. Do you consider your administration of the
Department of Homeland Security to be a success?
Secretary Mayorkas. With the resources and authorities they
have, they have done an extraordinary job.
Mr. Bishop. In November 2022, I asked you whether you
continue to maintain that the border is secure. You said, yes,
and it is getting more secure every day. Do you still say so?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, with the resources and the
authorities that we have been provided, it is as secure as we
can make it.
Mr. Bishop. Under your orders, Department of Homeland
Security paroled Venezuelan Jose Ibarra into the United States.
He, of course, went on to a variety of crimes culminating in
beating a young woman to death in Georgia. The relevant statute
grants you authority to parole aliens into the United States,
``only on a case-by-case basis for urgent humanitarian reasons
or significant public benefit.'' Which was it in Mr. Ibarra's
case, humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit, that
you paroled him into the United States?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we abide by the law, we
apply our parole processes in obeyance of the law. The public
safety of the American people is highest priority and I would
be pleased to share case details with you on any case of
concern to you subsequent to this hearing. I don't have the
case details with me today.
Mr. Bishop. Well, I am not really asking for detail. I am
only asking for one simple fact, which is was it urgent
humanitarian reasons or significant public benefit that under
your orders Mr. Ibarra was paroled into the United States?
Secretary Mayorkas. My answer remains the same,
Congressman.
Mr. Bishop. You mean you would have to review something?
You would have to review something before you could provide
case details or you just can't say it in this forum?
Secretary Mayorkas. The former.
Mr. Bishop. So, no, you don't know?
Secretary Mayorkas. As I said, I do not have the details
with respect to that individual's case and I would be pleased
to provide them to you, Congressman.
Mr. Bishop. Mr. Secretary, news reports--or the Heritage
Foundation oversight project has released this document that is
allegedly a flyer distributed at a nongovernment organization
in Mexico called the Resource Center Matamoros, which
apparently--which is said to read in part, if translated,
reminder to vote for President Biden when you are in the United
States. We need another 4 years of his term to stay open.
I note by the--I understand this RCM has denied that this
is authentic. But of course, there are other competing reports
about it. But let me ask you this, what actions is the
Department of Homeland Security taking to ensure that
especially given the millions of illegal entries, including 2
million got-aways, that noncitizens are being prevented from
registering and voting unlawfully?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, individuals who are not
citizens of the United States cannot vote in Federal elections.
That's----
Mr. Bishop. That is not what I asked. I asked what actions
DHS is taking to ensure that that doesn't occur?
Secretary Mayorkas. Well, two things. No. 1, I believe that
it is State and local election officials that monitor the
eligibility of individuals. We do not oversee the election
enrollment process. What we do is enforce our borders and, in
fact----
Mr. Bishop. So, said shorter, nothing?
Secretary Mayorkas. In fact----
Mr. Bishop. How can Congress and the American people have
confidence that the outcome of close elections will not turn on
the votes of noncitizens who have registered and voted
unlawfully?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, election security is one
of our priorities. In the distribution of Federal grant funds
to State and local jurisdictions we have made election security
a priority and we have mandated----
Mr. Bishop. I will reclaim my time. Last point. I am just
curious, following up Mr. Guest, you asked for less detention
beds and you explained that you did that based on the level of
detention beds that would be needed under the Senate
``bipartisan bill.'' How is that bill bipartisan other than it
is supported by James Lankford? Is there another Republican in
the Senate or the House that supported that bill?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we continue to support the
bipartisan legislation that a group of Senators worked on for
months and----
Mr. Bishop. My time has expired, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Magaziner, the gentleman from Rhode
Island and the Ranking Member on the Subcommittee on
Counterterrorism and Law Enforcement and Intelligence, for his
5 minutes of questions.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here.
Our country faces a range of security threats from foreign
terrorist organizations, domestic extremists, cartels,
organized crime, and natural disasters just to name a few.
While you have been diligently doing your job along with your
colleagues at the Department to protect the American people in
the face of these challenges, our Republican colleagues in the
House have instead been playing politics culminating with the
political impeachment that had no legal basis.
I am sorry that some of our colleagues have chosen to make
you the target of political attacks instead of getting you the
tools that you need to do your job to keep people safe. I want
you to know that many of us are still willing to put politics
aside and work with you and work with each other on a
bipartisan basis to protect the homeland.
The President's fiscal year 2025 budget requests $62
billion for the Department, including hundreds of millions more
for staffing and technology to secure the Southern Border. It
also proposes $4.7 billion for a Southwest Border contingency
fund to provide resources to the Department when migration
along the Southwest Border warrants additional capacity. This
is the right thing to do and I hope that our Republican
colleagues will support this funding, unlike last year when
they delayed action on the President's supplemental funding
request for the border for months while they wasted time with
impeachment.
It is inexcusable that our Republican colleagues did not
pass the final fiscal year 2024 funding for the Department for
nearly 6 months, forcing the Department to work under multiple
CRs, reducing operations, and overstraining the work force of
the Department. I hope that fiscal year 2025 will be different.
Funding the Department of Homeland Security is also
critical because our Nation faces an increased threat from the
rise of domestic violent extremists. Now, we heard from you,
Mr. Secretary, and from FBI Director Wray last November during
the world-wide threats hearing that the top domestic terrorism
threat we face continues to be from racially- and ethnically-
motivated and anti-Government-motivated violent extremists.
Some of these are organized groups, like the group that
engaged in the plot the Governor of Michigan and some of the
groups who stormed the Capitol on January 6th in a violent
attempt to overturn a legal and lawful election. Others are
lone actors, like the individual who attacked Paul Pelosi. Many
of these individuals are shamefully inspired by and scapegoated
by Members of this Congress and by former President Trump.
But the Government Accountability Office has shown that
domestic terrorism-related cases has increased dramatically in
recent years. So, with this alarming fact in mind, I would like
to turn to you, Mr. Secretary. Can you tell us, what is the
Department of Homeland Security seeing with respect to the
threat from domestic violent extremists, particularly as we
grow closer to the election, and what steps are the Department
taking to address any potential threats to government bodies,
officials, and the public at large?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we are, as Director Wray
and I have expressed previously, in a heightened threat
environment. Indeed, individuals draw to violence because of
ideologies of hate, false narratives, anti-Government
sentiments are a significant concern of ours. We do a number of
things. We disseminate information and analysis to a State,
local, Tribal, and territorial law enforcement, and other
officials. We distribute grant funds. We are grateful for
Congress' support of those grant funds. We need those funds to
increase to enable local communities to protect and guard
themselves.
As I mentioned in my opening statement, we have a very
important targeted violence and terrorism prevention grant
program that enabled communities to employ best practice in the
identification of an individual who may be drawn to violence
and intervene before a tragedy occurs. Those are some examples.
Mr. Magaziner. Well, I thank you, Mr. Secretary, for that
and for in particular the support of State and local
enforcement agencies. As we saw on January 6th, it is often law
enforcement in uniform who are, you know, on the receiving end
of these assaults and this violence and we need to do
everything we can to support them against this threat.
So, I thank you very much and I am out of time, so I yield
back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Gimenez, the gentleman from Florida and
the Chair of Transportation and Maritime Security Subcommittee,
for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I find it amazing
that our Democratic colleagues from across the aisle are always
throwing money at the issue. Always it is money, money, money,
money, except that the real culprit here has been over 64
actions taken by the Executive branch that actually caused the
problem at the border.
Not once have I ever heard any of my Democratic colleagues
ask for why did the--why don't we start constructing the wall
again? Why don't we reinstitute Remain in Mexico policy, which
actually will take care of about 70 percent of the problem that
we have had?
Mr. Mayorkas, I believe in fiscal year 2021 we had a record
number of encounters at the border and I think only surpassed
by fiscal year 2022 when we had another record encounter at the
border and then surpassed again in 2023 when we had another
record for encounters at the border. Do you expect another
record in 2024?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I strongly encourage
Congress to pass the Senate's bipartisan legislation which
would make a significant difference and advance our security
interests at the Southern Border and the Northern Border.
Mr. Gimenez. Have you ever asked the President to
reconsider some of his 64 actions that have led to the crisis
that we have right now at the border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we are facing the largest
displacement of people around the world, including in our
hemisphere.
Mr. Gimenez. Have you ever asked the President of the
United States to reconsider any of the 64 Executive actions
that he has taken to address the crisis at the border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I am not familiar with the
64 to which you refer and I assure you that they are not the
cause of the largest displacement of people in the world,
including in our hemisphere and to include, of course a number
of people, a significant number of people fleeing the
authoritarian regime in Cuba, which both you and I have
personally experienced.
Mr. Gimenez. I think that authoritarian regime has been in
place for about 60 years and so it doesn't make sense to me
that somehow now, OK, they are all fleeing the authoritarian
regime in Cuba. You and I both left that authoritarian regime a
long time ago.
So, again, are you familiar with the President's Executive
Order to stop the construction of the wall on the Southern
Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. I most certainly am.
Mr. Gimenez. Did you--have you advised him to, maybe it is
a good idea to start construction again on the southern wall
and the wall on the Southern Border to stop the flow of illegal
immigration?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I do not believe it is. I
believe----
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Thank you. I mean I only have a certain
time. So, thank you. You said no.
Have you ever talked to the President about reinstituting
Remain in Mexico policy which many experts have said probably
will take care of 70 percent of the problem? Have you ever
talked to him about that?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the Remain in Mexico
program was implemented in January 2019, I believe. I believe
in 2019, the number of encounters at Southern Border exceeded
those in 2018 by almost 100 percent, if I have my data correct.
Mr. Gimenez. Yes, but the number of encounters in 2020 were
far less than the number of encounters in 2021. Would you say
that is correct?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, if you will recall what
occurred in 2020, two points. No. 1, the COVID-19 pandemic; No.
2, Remain in Mexico, in order to implement it you rely upon the
sovereign nation of Mexico's agreement. Mexico has
unequivocally stated it will not support any implementation of
Remain in Mexico, the success of which is quite dubious.
Mr. Gimenez. Interesting point. The only reason that they
will not support a--they did support the Remain in Mexico
policy and then you unilaterally withdrew it. It was not
because of Mexico asking you if you would stop it. You just did
it. All right.
So, I only have about 56 seconds left. We are currently
witnessing total chaos and disorder in Haiti. The United States
has already begun to evacuate citizens and it is collaborating
with regional partners to address the violence. Is the United
States patrolling or admitting Haitians into the State of
Florida and elsewhere that have not received a viable
background check?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we screen and vet
individuals before paroling them into the United States.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you and I yield my time back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I know in the past,
Mr. Secretary, we have pressed on and never given you a chance
for a break. I want to offer if you need a break or we can
press on.
Secretary Mayorkas. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I'm
prepared to press on.
Chairman Green. OK.
Secretary Mayorkas. I may revisit that at some point with
your indulgence.
Chairman Green. Absolutely. I just know last time we had
you in here, I think you went 4 hours straight and never got a
break and I felt bad about that. So, just I wanted to offer.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Jackson Lee,
for her 5 minutes of questions. OK. I am sorry. All right, we
will go with Mr. Ivey and the gentleman from Maryland----
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. Fire away for 5 minutes.
Mr. Ivey. Appreciate it. Mr. Mayorkas, thank you for being
here today and for the work that you do. You know, I have been
listening to my colleagues on the other side talk about
treading on the Constitution and a scar on our Nation's soul,
but it seems to me that the impeachment proceeding that was
moved forward out of this committee was the true scar on the
Constitution and really did tread on the Constitution.
It is interesting to me if we go back, I want to say the
fix was in almost before you got into the job. There was an
Article of Impeachment filed in August 2021. I am not even sure
you had finished unpacking entirely yet. But there was already
a movement to remove you from office.
Then we had the Chairman, as the Ranking Member mentioned
earlier, speaking to a group of donors and talking about this
is going to be fun, that referencing the impeachment of you,
and get the popcorn. That was almost a year ago.
Then we came to the actual hearings that were held here. I
think there were two. I had a little experience dealing with
impeachment proceedings in the House previously, back in the
1980's when I worked on the Judiciary Committee staff.
We didn't remove anybody from office with two hearings. In
fact, we gave people due process. They had a chance to present
evidence and the like. It was taken in a much more serious
manner than this was and then I have got to say, you know, we
heard another one of my colleagues sort-of try to reconstitute
what the standard is for impeachment.
You know, the language is pretty plain on its face, treason
and bribery and other high crimes and misdemeanors. There has
been an effort to try and recalibrate that because there is no
evidence of you committing treason, bribery, or other high
crimes and misdemeanors. So, they lowered the bar.
I want to read something briefly from one of your
predecessors, Mike Chertoff, who was the Homeland Security
Secretary under the Bush administration. He said in referencing
this the effort to impeach you, he wrote this back in January,
``I can say with confidence that for all of the investigating
the House Committee on Homeland Security has done, they have
failed to put forth evidence that meets the bar. That is why
Republicans aren't seeking to hold Mr. Mayorkas to the
Constitution's high crimes and misdemeanor standard for
impeachment. They make the unsupported argument that he is
derelict in his duty.''
Then with respect to that issue, the issue of trying to get
something done instead of continuing on with the theatrics of
impeachment former Secretary Chertoff says, ``I don't agree
with every policy decision the Biden administration has made.
There are aspects of immigration strategy that are worthy of
debate, but House Republicans are ducking difficult policy work
and hard-fought compromise. Impeachment is a diversion from
fixing our broken immigration laws and giving DHS the resources
needed to secure the border.''
Here today we've discussed the bipartisan Senate bill that
while we were moving forward with the effort to try and put
together an impeachment proceeding against you, at least my
Republican colleagues, you were working in the Senate along
with Senator Lankford and others to try and put together an
actual bipartisan bill to address the problems at the border.
That came forward.
It was killed by House Republicans when former President
Trump gave the word that he didn't want it to move forward and
we haven't had any work done on trying to find a bipartisan
effort to address these concerns since that day.
So, we got a lot of statements being made in here today
about the problems at the border and the budgets and issues
along those lines and you have already addressed some of the
budgetary issues, but I do want to say this, you know, I think
it is critical for the Senate.
They are going to--after we are done with this, these
theatrics will be over and they will march the Articles of
Impeachment over to the Senate and ask the Senate to remove you
from office after a trial. But I think the Senate has already
made it clear that that is not going to happen and it
shouldn't.
In fact, there shouldn't even been a trial over there
because this is such an adulterated process here and it is such
a scar on the history of the Constitution. It is the first time
in 150-plus years where there has been an effort to remove a
Cabinet member that has gone this far.
For good reason, the Senate should throw it out and make a
statement that this is not the kind of impeachment proceedings
that we expect from the House of Representatives. It certainly
isn't what I expected when I got here. I saw different when I
worked here 1980's. I saw how it was supposed to be done. This
is not how it was supposed to be done.
I did want to conclude on this note. Just a couple of
Members on the House Republican caucus, I don't want too broad
a brush, but Ken Buck of Colorado, this isn't just an
impeachment.
Mr. Guest. The gentleman's time has expired. I'm sorry, Mr.
Ivey. I know the Chairman has wanted to keep us on a tight
schedule.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Guest. I appreciate it. Thank you,
Mr. Mayorkas.
Mr. Guest. At this time I recognize the gentleman from the
great State of Texas, August Pfluger, for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary, is the
border secure?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, as I have articulated
earlier in this hearing----
Mr. Pfluger. Just a yes or no is fine. Is the border
secure, Mr. Secretary, today?
Secretary Mayorkas. With the authorities and the funding
that we have, it is as secure as it can be.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, we all know this is not a budget issue.
It is a policy issue. Is a terrorist attack inside the United
States of America imminent?
Secretary Mayorkas. Let me assure you, Congressman, that
the safety and security of the American people is our highest
priority.
Mr. Pfluger. Is it imminent?
Secretary Mayorkas. The same answer, Congressman.
Mr. Pfluger. Is a terror attack on the homeland of the
United States of America imminent today?
Secretary Mayorkas. Let me assure that you that we remain
vigilant----
Mr. Pfluger. Do you brief the President? Have you briefed
the President that a terror attack on the United States of
America is imminent?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me assure you that the
safety and security of the American people is our highest----
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, are you the principal advisor
on matters of Homeland Security to the President of the United
States?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am one of them, Congressman.
Mr. Pfluger. Have you briefed the President that there are
known or suspected terrorists still at large inside of the
United States?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me assure you, as I
have previously, that the safety and security of the American
people----
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, I am----
Secretary Mayorkas [continuing]. Is our highest priority.
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Going to--I would like to remind
you that you are under oath. Have you briefed the President of
the United States that there are people who match the terror
watch list that are still at large inside our country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I repeat my answer.
Mr. Pfluger. Is that a no?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman----
Mr. Pfluger. Have you not briefed the President?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I have briefed the
President----
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, let me ask you a question about
your previous testifying in November and I asked you then, I
said is every single person who matches the terror watch list,
have they been apprehended, and you did not give me an answer.
I will ask you again, those that have matched the terror
watch list, that have attempted to or have entered this country
illegally, are they detained, 100 percent of them?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me assure you once
again that individuals that pose a threat to our national
security or the safety of the American people are the highest
priority for detection and we execute----
Mr. Pfluger. Are they all detained?
Secretary Mayorkas. And we execute on that.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, are they all detained?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman?
Mr. Pfluger. Because Christopher Wray sat right next to
you. He had the courage to answer this question and he said no.
So, do you agree with Christopher Wray in his testimony in
November 2023 that not every single person who matched the
terror watch list has been detained? Do you agree with that,
his testimony?
Secretary Mayorkas. If you are referring to the terrorist
screen data set, the TSDS, we make public safety and national
security determinations and----
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, I think it is----
Secretary Mayorkas [continuing]. We do take----
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. Very important that you answer
this question. The American public deserves to know the answer.
Are there people who have matched the terror screening
database, the terror watch list, any acronym that you choose to
use, still at large and not apprehended and not detained in
this country as of today?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, if we determine that an
individual on the terror screen data set is a threat to
national security or public safety they are a priority for
detention and----
Mr. Pfluger. I understand they are a priority, but that
doesn't mean they are detained. So, are you going to testify
honestly under oath today? I would like to remind you you are
under oath while you are testifying today. Are there people
still at large that match the terror watch list?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, if an individual is on the
terror screening data set and they pose a threat to national
security or public safety they are a priority for detention.
Mr. Pfluger. Is our country at risk of a terror attack?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we are in a heightened
threatened environment as Director Wray----
Mr. Pfluger. Is that a yes?
Secretary Mayorkas. We are in a heightened threat
environment as Director Wray and I have both testified. It is
therefore why the personnel at the Department of Homeland
Security----
Mr. Pfluger. Have you briefed the President of the United
States on that heightened threat?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I have briefed the
President, as have others, on the threat landscape that the
United States is facing and that is driving the vigilance of
268,000 men and women in the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Secretary, you said earlier to my
colleague, Mr. Bishop, you would be willing to share the
details on any case, however you have not. We have been
repeatedly asking for those details, specifically asking for
details on the terror watch list and yet your Department has
not done that. Will you brief us in the next 7 days on the
actual metrics and details for the terror screening database
and who those people are? Will you brief us in an un-Classified
setting who those people are----
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman?
Mr. Pfluger [continuing]. In 7 days?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I would be pleased to
follow up with you in the appropriate setting.
Mr. Pfluger. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes Mr. Goldman from the State of New
York for 5 minutes.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Secretary Mayorkas,
thank you for being here once again to endure the completely
uncalled-for, unwarranted personal attacks from my Republican
colleagues.
I want to get into some of what they have been saying
because it is truly shocking that we are where we are. On the
one hand, my colleague from Florida says that all Democrats
want to do is throw money at the problem. Mr. Pfluger just said
this is a policy issue. It is not a money issue. OK.
Is the Senate bipartisan bill that you worked on along with
the second-most conservative Republican Senator in the Senate,
an Independent, and a Democrat that was endorsed by Senate
Republican leadership a policy bill or an appropriations bill?
Secretary Mayorkas. It is both. Congressman, it is both an
appropriation bill and an immigration reform bill in fixing
what everyone agree is a broken system. It would provide us
with new legal authorities that are much needed and would
really advance the security of the border.
Mr. Goldman. One of those critical revisions is in the
asylum process. I know this is not under your purview but do
you have any sense of how many asylum applicants ultimately are
granted asylum in this country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, it of course depends on
the demographics, but as a general rule I believe it is
approximately 20, 25 percent ultimately receive asylum, but I
would want to verify that statistic and I probably shouldn't
share it given my----
Mr. Goldman. It takes--understood. There are different
numbers but it takes at least 5 years and perhaps as many as 10
years for a case to be completely adjudicated. Is that right?
Secretary Mayorkas. It takes many years until a case is
finally adjudicated.
Mr. Goldman. So, let us just say, hypothetically, that we
had an asylum processing system that could process any
applications within 90 days, 6 months. Am I correct that that
means that 75 to 80 percent of the people who apply for asylum
would not get asylum and would be returned to their own
country?
Secretary Mayorkas. That would enable us to remove people
far more quickly, you are correct, and that would make a sea
change of a difference in our ability to enforce the Southern
Border of the United States.
Mr. Goldman. Is it your view that if that were the case
that there would not be an incentive for anyone who knows that
he or she may not qualify for asylum to come to this country
knowing that that person would be able to make an application
to get a work authorization and stay here for at least 5 years
to work. Is that correct?
Secretary Mayorkas. That is Congressman.
Mr. Goldman. That, of course, creates a tremendous
incentive for people to come across the border. The problem is
not our credible fear standard, the problem is not the policy
of asylum. The problem is that we don't have the resources to
process asylum applications as expeditiously as is necessary.
So, no one over here is talking about throwing money at the
problem. We are talking about solving the problem. In the
Senate, they tried to solve the problem. They tried not just
with appropriations but with a policy bill.
Unfortunately, the Republicans have put politics over our
border security. They want chaos in order to win an election
rather than to solve the problems. You don't have to take my
word for it. Let us quote Donald Trump who said that he
sabotaged the bipartisan deal to secure the border because,
``It made it much better for the opposing side.'' That he has
stated that he ``killed'' the deal.
Senator Lankford himself said that a top Republican told me
that if I try to move a bill that solves the border crisis
during this election year he will do whatever he can to destroy
me. He said, I do not want you to solve this during the
Presidential election.
There was a policy bill. There was a policy change that
would have significantly addressed the problems at the border
and instead, you all on the other side of the aisle sabotaged
it where you baselessly impeached the Secretary who is trying
to solve our problems at the Southern Border because you want
to win it. You want to win in November.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
Mr. Goldman. You don't want to solve the problem.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Garbarino, the gentleman from New York
for--the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Cybersecurity, for 5
minutes of questioning.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will remind my
colleague that the only bill that has passed before the House
is that addressed the border crisis was the one we passed here
H.R. 2. Nothing actually passed the Senate.
So, I mean, we have acted. The Senate has not. If they, you
know, if they want to send us a bill, let them. They haven't
been able to.
Secretary, I want to ask a question about the Nonprofit
Security Grant Program. Antisemitism is on the rise here when
this has been exacerbated by the horrendous acts of the terror
in Israel on October 7 and the war that has followed. This
program protects a lot of Americans. It has been essential for
securing places of worship and providing safe places for Jewish
Americans to practice their religion as is their Constitutional
right.
The current request is for fiscal year 2025, $385 million.
Seen what we have seen and knowing what you know the risk on
the ground, especially to these Jewish Americans, is $385
million enough?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, you know, we make
tradeoffs under the Fiscal Responsibility Act, but we certainly
believe that the Nonprofit Security Grant Program is in dire
need of additional funding for precisely the reason you
express. We are indeed in a heightened threat environment,
antisemitism, and violence born of it continues to be on the
rise as do other violent acts born of hate.
Mr. Garbarino. So, we think $385 million is enough to
protect the Americans at these facilities?
Secretary Mayorkas. We believe it is a significant advance
in the protection of our communities across the country.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. I want to move now to cyber work
force. GAO came out with a report which was kind-of startling.
CISA has for the entire defense in action on OT, operational
technology, for all of our critical infrastructure that sits
overseas, they have a response team I think of 11 people: 5
employees--or 4 employees and 7 contractors. That is grossly
under--that is definitely below the need of what we actually
need. What is the current cyber work force gap at the
Department of Homeland Security right now?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I'll have to get back to
you on the specific number but let me express my deep gratitude
on the part of CISA and our Department for your support of our
cybersecurity mission and all that we are seeking to do.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that and I do think CISA does a
great job, but when you see that what--they only have 11
employees that cover OT. You know they have a great use of the
cyber talent management system but we are repeatedly seeing
cyber attack, after cyber attack, after cyber attack. America
is starting to ask me what are we doing?
There is a work force problem. There is a work force
shortage. Eleven employees for just overseas OT. That is not
good. That is not good enough. I understand the request this
year for CISA is just a little over $3 billion to fully fund
the entire agency. There needs to be more focus. I have spoken
to Director Easterly about this, but you oversee the agency.
There needs to be more of a focus on cybersecurity.
I also have to say I see that CISA just released its notice
of proposed rulemaking for the CIRCIA rule, the budget requests

$115-, almost $116 million for its implementation, including
staff and technology. I have been in support of the CIRCIA
rule. I think it is--it could do great things for our defense,
cyber defense.
But now when you have competing rules like the SEC
legislation which you yourself has said is duplicative, I don't
know if there is a need for CIRCIA any more because nobody is
stopping the SEC from doing what they are doing and it is
causing a huge problem. CISA should oversee this--it under the
Department of Homeland Security.
I think I would like to see more from the agency, yourself
included, by pushing back on these duplicative rules, the SEC
rule and others that are proposed. The SEC current cyber
reporting bill that SEC put out is just 1 of I think 5 that the
Chairman Gensler has proposed.
There is actually a report out there that the bad actors
are using the SEC rule as a way to hack more people. This is
something that the administration is doing under the SEC. You
have said it before this rule is duplicative. I think you need
to--we have been saying it is bad. I think you need to go back
and tell the President that this rule has to stop.
My time is expired.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time is expired. I
understand, Mr. Menendez, you want to go next and Mr. Garcia
you are going to hold? OK.
So, I now recognize the gentleman from New Jersey, Mr.
Menendez, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Chairman. Mr. Secretary, thank you
as always for being here. We appreciate your willingness to
engage with us both in this setting and in individual offices
and conversations. I just feel it is important to address some
of the things that have been said here by our Republican
colleagues because they should not stand uncorrected.
First, it has been said by Chairman McCaul that you
violated your oath. I wholeheartedly disagree with that.
Chairman McCaul said you have made this country much more
dangerous. I disagree with that.
You and everyone at DHS works every single day to keep this
country and all of us protected. So, thank you and to all the
dedicated public servants who serve alongside of you for your
work.
Chairman McCaul had also said that you destroyed the fabric
of this country. I wholeheartedly disagree with that. Thank you
again for your service to this country.
Mr. Bishop said and questioned the success of your
administration. I want to refer back to what former Homeland
Security Secretary Chertoff said about the sham impeachment
hearings that we have had here, that House Republicans are
ducking difficult policy work and hard-fought compromise.
Impeachment is a diversion from fixing our broken immigration
laws and giving DHS the resources needed to secure the border.
That is the conversation that we should be having today.
So, if we are going to judge success, I would commend the work
that you and your colleagues have done, but I would question
the success of this committee and our oversight jurisdiction
and our failure to live up to our mandate.
I have two quick questions. We had discussed the Remain in
Mexico policy. You had said that that requires the cooperation
of Mexico. We have also heard about building a wall. Former
President Trump said that Mexico would pay for that wall. Has
Mexico agreed to pay for building of the wall?
Secretary Mayorkas. No, it has not, Congressman.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you for clarifying that point. Before I
move on to the substantive questions that you came here to
discuss, as you have had to I imagine spend an immense amount
of time and resources as the agency has had to preparing for
that impeachment proceeding that came through this committee
and I am proud to see you still standing and you will continue
to keep standing.
Just a reminder that Republicans have been more successful
at removing their own Members from positions, like former
Speaker McCarthy and now the process that seems to be under way
for removing Speaker Johnson. So, you keep hanging in there
while they keep removing their own Members from positions of
leadership.
I want to go into fentanyl, which is an issue that is of
grave concern to many of us. I want to talk about your work
combating fentanyl in our country. The Department of Homeland
Security is on the front lines executing President Biden's plan
and I want to commend you and the dedicated public servants at
DHS who stop more fentanyl and have arrested more drug
traffickers in the last 2 fiscal years than the previous 5
combined.
The President requested the emergency supplemental funds
for DHS in October of last year. It is now April and my
Republican colleagues have refused to even consider providing
these funds that will help combat drug trafficking.
Mr. Secretary, how will the supplemental funding requested
by the administration support your on-going efforts to combat
fentanyl?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the supplemental request
would provide two very important streams of funding at least.
One is for personnel, more investigators, more support staff
for those investigators, their ability to not only investigate
and apprehend traffickers and work both domestically and
internationally, but also to resource much-needed technology,
specifically the nonintrusive inspection technology which is so
remarkably effective at our ports of entry, which are the
primary avenues through which smugglers seek to move fentanyl
into our country.
Mr. Menendez. Absolutely. Democrats look forward to getting
you those resources so you can continue that important work.
The Department has done a commendable job stopping fentanyl
from entering our country. It is worth emphasizing again that
DHS has stopped more fentanyl and arrested more drug
traffickers in the last 2 fiscal years than the previous 5
combined as I previously mentioned.
Mr. Secretary, how does that administration's budget
request for fiscal year 2025 build on the successes of the last
2 years?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, it continues to fund our
personnel so that we can continue not only to implement the
strategic operations that we have under way but also to build
on those operations and develop new ones, deploy personnel to
different countries that are source countries and plus-up our
transnational criminal investigative units where our
investigators work with international partners to interdict not
only precursor chemicals, but also the equipment used to
manufacture fentanyl and the finished product itself.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you. I appreciate again all your
service to our country.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Ms. Greene, the gentlelady from Georgia,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Mayorkas, we do
not have a country without a secure border and we cannot have a
safe country, we cannot protect our own democracy without
protecting our elections. That is a fact.
The open border is the No. 1 issue across America in poll
after poll and that is exactly why this committee impeached
you.
Mr. Secretary, the oversight project released a bombshell
report last night on your connection to the dark money NGO
industrial complex of illegal immigration. I know you saw this
from one of my colleagues just earlier. They found flyers
through the Resource Center Matamoros refugee camp in Mexico
telling illegal aliens, reminder to vote for President Biden
when you are in the United States so we need another 4 years of
his term to stay open.
Eyewitnesses saw the flyers also being handed out to
migrants who were using RCM for assistance in coming to the
United States. In an audio recording the founder of RCM Gaby
Zavala--by the way we maybe should subpoena her to the
committee--agreed that they need to help as many people as
possible before President Trump gets reelected.
RCM is an operation that houses functions for the Hebrew
Immigrant Aid Society which helps migrants enter the United
States, and you are familiar with their work. We know that you
served as a former board member of this group that funds
illegal immigration. They are very proud of you, Mr. Secretary.
They congratulated you on your nomination.
You worked as a board member of an NGO that is working in
conjunction with other NGO's which are not only financing the
invasion of the country but also telling illegal aliens to vote
in the United States elections. They are telling illegal
aliens, not citizens to come vote for Joe Biden. That is your
boss.
This is corruption at the deepest level. As a matter of
fact, I would call it treason. It is treason because these
people have declared war on our citizens by raping our women,
our children, and murdering people, like Laken Riley. You are
familiar with her, right?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, our heart breaks for----
Ms. Greene. Are you familiar with Laken Riley?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am familiar with the case and----
Ms. Greene. You should have deported her so that she could
be alive today. Her parents would have appreciated that. Also,
Kayla Hamilton, who was brutally raped and murdered by a cartel
member. Her mother came and spoke to us. But you didn't deport
him either. You let him in the country.
You, Mr. Secretary, have allowed over 10 million illegals,
probably higher than that, it could be closer to 15 million, we
don't know, to invade our country. You have allowed the cartels
to make billions and billions. As a matter of fact, you are
probably the best business partner they could ever have. They
make all this money in human trafficking and drug trafficking
at our border.
You have allowed approximately 300 Americans to be murdered
every single day from fentanyl that comes across our border and
now you are aiding NGO's to steal our elections through your
budget.
I demand proof of citizenship in our elections and that is
something every single Member of Congress should care about. We
don't need illegal aliens voting in our elections. We are
supposed to be here talking about your budget, but we are
talking about how money is being used to make sure people come
into our country are able to get a Social Security number in
which they can register to vote.
On that note, Mr. Mayorkas, I demand that Chuck Schumer
holds your impeachment trial in the Senate because that is
exactly what we should be focused on right now.
Mr. Chairman, I yield the remainder of my time.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize Mr. Garcia, the gentleman from California,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr.
Secretary, for being here. I am sorry you had to listen to a
lot of misinformation right now and throughout this hearing.
I also, just for the record, you are here, you are doing a
very difficult job, even though some folks are trying to remove
you from office. We know that is not going to happen. The
impeachment sham against you is dead on arrival in the Senate.
So, I look forward to you continuing to do a very difficult job
for the country and for the administration.
Now, I want to just note, since you last testified we know
that Donald Trump has also become the presumptive nominee of
his party. Immigrants like you and me remember and understand
and know his dangerous rhetoric and the way he talks about
immigrants like us.
But I want to go back to his 2016 words. I think it is
important to put those back into the record. ``When Mexico
sends its people, they are not sending their best. They are not
sending you. They are not sending you. They are sending people
that have lots of problems and they are bringing those problems
with us. They are bringing drugs. They are bringing crime. They
are rapists.''
Now, it is interesting because you and I both know that
noncitizens are 60 percent less likely to actual commit crimes
than citizens. So, he is just using this xenophobic rhetoric to
demonize migrants that are trying in many cases searching for a
better life and running away from extreme violent conditions in
their home countries.
This rhetoric we know has continued. Trump calls immigrants
who enter the country often times ``animals''. He just did this
so recently. He said and I quote, this is a quote, ``Democrats
say, please don't call them animals. They're humans.'' Trump
said, ``I said, no, they're not humans. They're animals.''
This is dehumanizing rhetoric and it is wrong and not
acceptable. Now, Mr. Secretary, does this type of rhetoric fuel
violence here in the United States?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I am going to refrain from
opining on the words of a particular candidate given the Hatch
Act restrictions.
Mr. Garcia. No, I appreciate that. But I will say, though,
is his rhetoric is wrong and disturbing and his policies are
actually worse. We know that President Trump has said he would
immediately launch the largest domestic deportation operation
in American history.
I want to know--note and talk a little bit about something
that Donald Trump has also tried to characterize as we talk
about migrants. He and his--one of his main lieutenants,
Stephen Miller, has promised large-scale raids and actually has
suggested using National Guard troops, even sending National
Guard troops from Republican-led States into neighboring States
led by Democrats.
We are seeing now in Texas there is real risk there and,
certainly, if we see National Guards being used to this way in
the future. Could you give your opinion about the National
Guards being used in Texas?
Secretary Mayorkas. I'm sorry, can you repeat the precise
question?
Mr. Garcia. Based on what we are seeing now in Texas, do
you think there is risk, additional risk, that we could see
National Guard being used in a way that could be dangerous at
the border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the deployment of National
Guard can be an effective force multiplier when it is
coordinated with Federal authorities specifically the United
States Border Patrol. When it is not, it presents a risk to our
efforts to secure the border.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, Mr. Secretary, and I think we just
saw that recently play out in a very dangerous and disturbing
way.
Now, I also want to note something about the way the
incumbent President views migration and the way he views the
world. I think it is important to point out. We know that in
2016 Donald Trump launched his campaign by pointing out that
Mexicans are essentially rapists and murderers. We have seen
that already.
In 2018, he told Members of Congress in the Oval Office
when they discussed protecting immigrants from African
countries that he didn't want any migrants from what he called
``shithole countries,'' and that is his quote, not mine. Trump
then suggested the United States should instead bring more
people from countries such as Norway because apparently they
are nice immigrants. Let's not forget that he tried over and
over again to ban Muslims coming from this country as well. All
the while he continues to espouse extremism and violence by
claiming falsely that he won the 2020 election.
Now Trump continues with his view of the world to attack a
legal immigration system that actually works. We noticed that
visas fell every year during Trump's administration. There was
a hiring freeze of the U.S. Citizenship and Custom Immigration
Services and his administration has used every possible way of
disqualifying and denying visa.
Mr. Secretary, can you tell us how policies like denying
visas actually undermines our situation at the border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, individuals who qualify
for visas significantly contribute to the well-being and
advancement of this country and that is quite evident
especially in the economy arena. We've seen that with skilled
workers, nonskilled seasonal workers, agricultural workers, and
many other avenues. We are enriched by them.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you, sir. I think I am out of time here
so I will yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Gonzales, the gentleman from Texas, for
5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Gonzales. Thank you, Chairman, and thank you,
Secretary, for being here today. I don't want to talk about
you. I want to talk about the men and women that serve under
you and particularly some of the threats that they are dealing
with.
This transnational criminal organization, TDA, Tren de
Aragua, these Venezuelan gangs, they are growing in influence,
they are growing in criminal activity through out the country
and I believe they are a significant threat to our homeland. It
is not just regional. It is not just Miami. It is not just New
York. It is all over the place. So, my question is specifically
on HSI. What is Homeland Security Investigations doing to
tackle TDA?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, Homeland Security
Investigations and our sister agencies in the Federal
Government have an unprecedented attack against not only
transnational criminal organizations but domestic operations
here as well. I can provide you with details subsequent to this
hearing with respect to our efforts against that specific gang.
Mr. Gonzales. I would appreciate that. Is HSI part of FBI's
Transnational Anti-Gang Task Force?
Secretary Mayorkas. I believe it is.
Mr. Gonzales. This is something that I think that is
important that we use every leverage, every lever of government
tools both at the Federal, State, and local level to go after
these criminals. I am talking about hardened criminals, bad
actors that are in our communities. How do we find them? How do
we prevent them from committing crimes? Being part of that I
think HSI is going to be on the forefront of a lot of that.
I am going to talk about I represent a large part of west
Texas and oil and gas is a big part of that and I was on recent
swing through west Texas where they are seeing a rising amount
of oil theft, and I bring this up because some of this is
tied--a lot of this is tied to this open border crisis.
Some of these actors are not American citizens. There is
this--what do you do with someone? You pull someone over. They
are not a U.S. citizen, clearly this is where Homeland Security
should have a role to play in this.
So, once again, do you know if HSI is part of the Permian
Basin oil field theft task force?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I'll have to find out. I
do not know the answer to that specific question.
Mr. Gonzales. I think it would be important. If they are
not that they look into this. Once again, this is an
interconnection where it is, you know, how do you use every
lever and every tool and part of that if you pull someone over
and they are not a U.S. citizen, Homeland Security has a role
to play in that, to determine, who is this person, right? Why
are they here illegally? What do you do with them? What I am
seeing now is in some cases the local law enforcement will just
release them. There is no one to turn them over to. You can see
this train wreck coming a mile away where we have apprehended
someone that, once again, I am not talking about all people. I
am talking about a bad actor that would have been apprehended
committing a let us say low-level crime or another crime and
all of a sudden a year later, a month later they commit a
serious crime.
I want to get ahead of that and I believe HSI is going to
be a big part of working with the FBI and these local and State
task forces in order to get that done. I would ask that you
bring that to your attention because energy is a large--it is
critical infrastructure and it is important that we protect
that.
I am seeing this grow. I mean when I went through the swing
a year ago there were three counties that brought it up. I just
got down with this thing, every county brought it up, every
sheriff I am talking to is bringing it up and I am seeing the
threat grow. I am seeing it expand.
My last question is on the increase in Chinese nationals
that we see. I mean the numbers are astronomical, specifically
in California and some of those areas. What can we do? Is there
anything in particular that we can do to have a direct
conversation with China to get this to stop?
Clearly, this is an issue and it is a rising issue. China
is a difficult actor to deal with. Is there anything in
particular that Congress can do in order to prevent China from
sending its people over?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I'd like to consider what
legislative action would be warranted but I can assure you that
I share your concern with respect to the issue and have engaged
with my counterpart from the People's Republic of China. We
have, in fact, made strides in the removal of Chinese nationals
who do not qualify for relief in the United States.
Mr. Gonzales. I think there needs to be----
Secretary Mayorkas. I share your concern.
Mr. Gonzales. I think there needs to be more of that and I
think it needs to be more public. There needs to be more
highlighting of the fact that if you come here illegally from
China we are going to send you back.
With that I am going to yield back, Chairman, and I
appreciate it.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Suozzi, the gentleman from New York,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Suozzi. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I just
want to remind my colleagues that you have lived a great
American success story. You were a political refugee born in
Havana, Cuba, came to the United States of America, graduated
from law school, became a prosecutor for 9 years as an
assistant United States attorney.
You were appointed as the youngest U.S. attorney in the
Nation. You were the director of the U.S. citizenship program,
and deputy secretary of the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security. Now you have achieved this position as Secretary and
I want to thank you for your public service to our country.
I am new to Congress. I just got elected in February and I
was watching what was going on down here and it is like, you
know, you kind-of tune it out a little bit, all the back and
forth.
One of the things that I have talked about in my campaign
and certainly want to highlight here is that every problem we
face in our country is complicated. Nothing is simple and you
cannot solve complicated problems in an environment of fear and
anger where everybody is just yelling and screaming at each
other. It is impossible. You can never get to the meat and
bones of doing the work that is necessary.
That is why I was excited by the Senate bill, the
bipartisan compromise that you worked on along with Senators
Lankford and Murphy and Sinema, which didn't have everything I
wanted in it. But it was a compromise.
My colleagues, you know, let us say they get everything
they want. Let us say Trump is elected. Let us say they get the
Majority of the Congress. Let us say they get the Majority of
the Senate. I hope those things don't happen, but let us say it
all happens. Under no circumstances will they get enough votes
in the Senate to actually pass a bill. We will have to do
something bipartisan under any circumstances. You can't get a
bipartisan bill under any circumstances unless people work
together.
So, it is great that we got more money for the Customs and
Border Patrol agents to bring it up to 22,000 in this most,
2024 appropriation. We got more detention beds. But under the
Senate bill we would have gotten more Customs and Border Patrol
officers as well and we would have gotten more detention beds
and we would have gotten money for the wall and we would have
gotten money for technology and we would have gotten money for
a whole bunch of other things and there would have been some
serious policy changes.
So, I just want to use my last half of my time to ask you,
the thing I am most interested in and excited about is this
idea that we have to reduce the time it takes to adjudicate
asylum cases. It seems like that is the most important thing we
have to do because right now we have got all these people, you
know, there is a crisis, everybody is freaking out, so many
people coming over the border. It seems like it is calmer now,
but there will be a surge again I am sure between now and the
summer.
But if people have to wait 5, 6, 7, 8 years and they get a
work permit in the meanwhile, then that is going to encourage
more people to come. If we could cut down that period, as you
said earlier, I think you said 90 days. I have heard 6 months
from other people, if we could cut down that period to
adjudicate these asylum cases of which 80 percent of the people
will be denied asylum and many of whom will be then deported
immediately it will discourage other people from paying the
coyotes and coming over to do this stuff.
So, could you explain to me how we can reduce the time that
it takes? What is it going to take from this body to reduce the
time it takes to adjudicate the asylum cases from what is now
years down to a matter of months?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, you are correct that
reducing that time would change the risk calculus of intending
migrants and detour them from taking the dangerous journey and
spending their life savings in the hands of smugglers.
The Senate bipartisan legislation would have delivered on
that with the changes to the system, policy changes to the
system as well as ample resources for us to implement those
fixes.
Mr. Suozzi. Could you tell us some of the policy changes
that would happen that would make the asylum process--we have
another 45 seconds--would make the asylum process happen more
quickly so these can be--because what everybody when they get
adjudicates, 80, 70, 80 percent get denied and then they are
not eligible to be here. So, if we could speed that up we would
stop this from happening. What are the policy changes?
Secretary Mayorkas. Among the compromises that the Senate
bipartisan legislation included was raising the credible fear
standard, shrinking the disparity between that in initial
threshold screening standard and the ultimate merits standard.
It also resourced, Congressman, our system with 4,300 asylum
officers to adjudicate those cases much more swiftly.
Mr. Suozzi. Well, I want--I want to thank you again for
your public service. You know, I am saddened when I hear some
of the stuff that is being hurled about by different people. It
is upsetting. It is not productive. We have serious business to
do. These are serious problems and we don't want people
creating crimes and breaking the law. But we have got to work
together to solve it. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. LaLota, the gentleman from New York,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Secretary, do we
have a problem at the Southern Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. We certainly have a very significant
challenge, yes, we do.
Mr. LaLota. Previously you have characterized that as not a
crisis. Are you willing to say today that there is a crisis at
the Southern Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I have said now repeatedly
it is a crisis and I have never minimized the severity of the
challenge at the border regardless of the words that are used.
Mr. LaLota. Appreciate the evolution on that. With the
200,000 fentanyl deaths, 1.7 million noncitizens being paroled
into the country, and migrant crises in multiple cities
including New York City. How grave is the crisis at the
Southern Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the situation is grave. It
requires solutions and I strongly support and urge Congress to
pass the Senate's bipartisan----
Mr. LaLota. We are going to get into that in a moment, Mr.
Secretary. My colleague from the other side of the aisle from
the county to my west mentioned how some solutions are
complicated. I would offer on this there are some simple
solutions which ought to be implemented, and I find it
disingenuous that many folks from the other side of the aisle
often point to budgetary reasons as why we can't have a secure
border.
So, I want to talk about some nonbudgetary reasons,
including President Biden's policy choices, specifically his
Executive Orders that he has either issued or rescinded. I
think the clerk may have a copy of 64 different--we will get
you one, Mr. Secretary--64 different Executive Orders that
President Biden has issued that have either rolled back Trump-
era border policies that many agree have been successful or
implemented some that have made your job more difficult.
In the entirety of the 4 years in the Trump administration
there were 2.4 million encounters on the Southwest Border. In
the first 40 months of the Biden administration there were 7.6
million encounters at the Southwest Border. So, comparatively
speaking, 200 percent more in 20 percent less of a time.
Should the Department of Homeland Security endeavor to have
less alien encounters at the Southwest Border?
Secretary Mayorkas. In between the ports of entry we are
driving to reduce the number of encounters, yes, indeed we are.
Mr. LaLota. So, it is a goal of yours to have less
encounters?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes.
Mr. LaLota. Great. Do less encounters lead to less
noncitizens being paroled into the country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes, Congressman.
Mr. LaLota. Great. If there are less noncitizens paroled
into the country will there be less migrant crises like the
ones in New York?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the source of the
challenge in New York City is varied. One source of that is a
public official's decision to deliberately not communicate----
Mr. LaLota. I reclaim my time, Mr. Secretary. The question
was does less encounters at the borders lead to less migrant
crises? I am going to suppose, I am going to offer that the
answer to the question is yes. You may have a different
opinion.
The focus I would like to have on the Remain in Mexico
policy, which was when President Biden announced that he was
rescinding the Remain in Mexico policy, what do you think went
through the mind of a migrant from Central or South America,
many of whom come here for economic reasons? What do you think
went through the mind of that migrant who now know that if he
or she made it to the Southern Border that they would be
granted entry, more likely to be granted entry into the county?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I believe--I believe that
the Remain in Mexico policy throughout its duration, I believe
and I'll verify, this approximately 70,000 migrants ran through
it in the 2 years it was in operation. So, I do not--I think
that you are overemphasizing----
Mr. LaLota. Let me ask you a different question about
Remain in Mexico. Why do it? Why repeal Remain in Mexico? What
is the value to border security by repealing the policy?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, it was not an effective
policy. It was causing a tremendous amount of human tragedy
south of our border and because it was bad policy, it was
rescinded.
Mr. LaLota. So, your testimony is the increase, the 200
percent increase, of migrant encounters at the Southwest Border
in 20 percent less time is because of COVID?
Secretary Mayorkas. No, Congressman, I have not testified
to that. The situation and the reasons for it are quite varied.
The fact of the matter is that the world is experiencing
the greatest displacement of people since World War II and our
hemisphere is not spared that reality. And----
Mr. LaLota. I am going to reclaim my time.
Mr. Chairman, President Biden should go back to the
successful Trump-era border policies. The Senate should take up
H.R. 2, the only bill that has passed either chamber in this
town.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentlelady from Texas, Ms. Sheila
Jackson Lee, for 5 minutes of testimony--or questions.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Secretary, I appreciate your presence here
today, as do millions of Americans and Members of this
committee who are here seriously to do the work of the American
people.
Let me, first of all, speak the obvious since my colleagues
want to attribute more money, more money to Democrats. I am
very proud of my legislation, H.R. 3208, which has passed this
committee, cyber work force legislation that has been drafted,
which the committee favorably reported in July, it appears and
would also address the question that Mr. Garbarino was speaking
about, he has imparted, about your work force issue.
If we would pass a number of legislative initiatives we
might move you along further. This bill in particular talks
about cyber work force, which is one of my very serious issues.
Let us train them. Let us give them internships or access
and let us put them to work. I think if we did that, you would
have at least a portion of the battle where you would have a
staff that could begin working at Homeland Security. It is a
place that I have heard people are interested in working
primarily to defend their Nation. So, let us see if we can do
something constructive in this committee.
But I do want to address the question of dealing with the
Articles of Impeachment, willful and systemic refusal to comply
with the law. It is always difficult to ask someone to detail
their own failings, frailties. Do you believe, Mr. Secretary,
that you have failed to comply with the law? Where would you do
better in complying with the law on behalf of the American
people?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, I've been in public
service I think about 22 years. I've taken the oath I think 5
times, maybe 6. I've adhered to the oath to which I have sworn
and I have abided by the law each and every step of the way.
Ms. Jackson Lee. When the question was asked over and over
again, and this is for the American people, if you are still
tuning in about whether the Southern Border is secure, they
need that answer. So, I would ask the question as someone who
believes that you do the best with what you have and you work
hard and that we owe the American people the duty of a secure
border, what more would you do if that was the question and the
answer was that we need to do more? What more would you do to
secure the American border if you felt that was necessary and
that you wanted to tell the American people, this is what I
needed to have?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, we are dealing with a
fundamentally broken immigration system, that is our
fundamental problem. I would encourage Congress to pass a
bipartisan Senate legislation that would bring tremendously
advancing reform to the broken immigration system and it would
also resource our Department to execute those reforms
advantageously.
Ms. Jackson Lee. It seems a simple proposition to me.
Throughout the entire questioning that I have decided to sit
and listen I have heard no offering of a resolution by my
friends on the other side of the aisle. There is absolutely
nothing to answer to the second Article of Impeachment, breach
of public trust, and that is that we know that Congress has the
sole power of impeachment and that you shall be removed for the
breaching of trust, then what is that breach? What is your
belief is a breach of trust?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, I'm not aware of any and
let me assure you that I do not spend time on the impeachment
proceedings. I focus my attention exclusively on the work of
the Department of Homeland Security.
Ms. Jackson Lee. We do know that, and that is an answer
that I wish some of our colleagues who decided to not be here
for that to be able to listen.
We do know that Iran, for example, is a major proponent of
terrorism. They decided to exercise that definition by
bombarding Israel with 300 of the missiles that they decided to
use, the drones that they decided to use against an ally for
this horrible attack.
What then would you give as an answer? Did we the United
States generate an attack on Israel? Was that our doing?
Secretary Mayorkas. No, it was not, Congresswoman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Are we prepared to be supportive in
helping to defend our homeland?
Secretary Mayorkas. We most certainly are, Congresswoman.
We do that every single day through the extraordinary work of
268,000 men and women in our Department.
Ms. Jackson Lee. You haven't seen anybody stand up and
resign and say, I am frightened. I don't want to do this work.
I don't want to protect the homeland. Have you seen that occur
today?
Secretary Mayorkas. I have not and people risk their lives
every single day on behalf of our country, both in the
Department and other departments and, of course, in our
branches of the military.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Well, let me just yield, Mr. Chairman, and
just say that----
Chairman Green. The gentlelady's time has expired.
I now----
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. I see no--I see no reason----
Chairman Green. The gentlelady's time has expired and we're
having to----
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. For the gentleman to be
impeached.
Chairman Green [continuing]. Five minutes because of the--
--
Ms. Jackson Lee. I know he would want me to say that----
Chairman Green [continuing]. Time remaining.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. Mr. Chairman. I see no
reason----
Chairman Green. The gentlelady is not recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee [continuing]. For the gentleman to be
impeached.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady is not recognized.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I see no reason for the gentleman to be
impeached.
Chairman Green. I now recognize Mr. Ezell----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank----
Chairman Green [continuing]. The gentleman from
Mississippi.
Ms. Jackson Lee. I thank the Chairman. There is no reason
for him to be impeached.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Mr. Ezell. Secretary Mayorkas, your open border policies
have granted parole to a host of illegal aliens from regions in
the Middle East and West Africa that are known for hot bed for
terrorism. Clear to this administration's policies have
emboldened countries such as Iran, like what we saw over the
weekend with their attacks on Israel.
Can you tell me confidently to this committee that no
current or former Iranian Revolutionary Guard court members or
members of Islamic terrorist organizations have been granted
parole into the United States?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me assure you that an
individual who poses a threat to our national security is a
priority for detection and removal.
Mr. Ezell. What about anyone from the People's Liberation
Army of the Chinese Communist Party?
Secretary Mayorkas. Same answer, Congressman.
Mr. Ezell. Mr. Secretary, I want to switch DHS's violation
for Americans on free speech. Four months ago, the assistant
secretary of cyber for DHS testified that the oversight
subcommittee that, I quote, ``Countering disinformation that
threatens the homeland and providing the public with accurate
information in response are critical to fulfilling DHS
Congressionally-mandated missions.''
Secretary Mayorkas, do you believe Congress has given DHS
the authority to use censorship to counter disinformation?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we do not censor free
speech. We abide by the First Amendment.
Mr. Ezell. Secretary Mayorkas, the Fifth Circuit Court of
Appeals in Missouri v. Biden found that CISA, and I quote
again, ``Likely significantly encouraged the social media
platform's content moderation decisions and thereby violated
the First Amendment.''
Did you know your agency was pressuring social media
platforms to censor Americans?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, no, we do not censor
speech, we do not pressure platforms to do so, and I believe
the trial court's ruling was reversed in part by the Appellate
Court. I cannot speak further because I believe the litigation
continues.
Mr. Ezell. Documents recently obtained through the Freedom
of Information Act, FOIA, showed that DHS argued the agency has
the authority to regulate misinformation, disinformation, and
malinformation. However, the content of these documents has
been redacted.
I have questioned members of CISA regarding this and was
not satisfied with their response. So, I will ask you, what
Congressional authorities does DHS has in MDM space?
Secretary Mayorkas. Well, let me give you--some are real-
life examples of the work that we do, Congressman, because I am
sure you will support it. When human smuggling organizations
spread disinformation with respect to the policies of the
Department of Homeland Security, we publish accurate
information with respect to our policies.
When criminal organizations domestically in the wake of a
natural disaster spread disinformation to victims of that
natural disaster to deceive them to fall prey to those criminal
organization, we provide accurate information with respect to
what FEMA does and does not do.
When a foreign adversary spreads disinformation with
respect to the processes of our elections, for example, if you
don't make it to the voting booth on time on Tuesday, don't
worry, you can vote on Wednesday, we actually communicate
accurate information with respect to the election process in
coordination with State and local officials.
That is the type of work that we do and I know that you
endorse that work wholeheartedly given the fact that it is
about enforcing the law and making sure that people do not fall
prey to criminals who do not seek to enforce the law.
Chairman Green. Would the gentleman yield for a second?
Mr. Ezell. Yes.
Chairman Green. Mr. Secretary, are we--is DHS able to touch
each individual that the nefarious actors are touching? Now,
and I respect that what you just told us, but my concern is--
and I hope this is happening, but is DHS able to reach out to
all the bodies that the nefarious actors are engaging with with
the right information to oppose the negative information?
Secretary Mayorkas. We seek to disseminate the accurate
information as broadly as possible.
Chairman Green. Does that live on the site, the DHS site,
or is it in the social media platforms?
Secretary Mayorkas. We have web pages that disseminate and
broadcast that and we also use force multipliers, our State,
local, Tribal, and territorial partners, State, and local law
enforcement, et cetera, Congressman.
Mr. Ezell. That is fine.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time is expired.
I now recognize Mr. Swalwell, the gentleman from California
and the Ranking Member on the Subcommittee of Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure.
Mr. Swalwell. Mr. Secretary, welcome back and thank you and
the men and women at your Department for what they are doing
during this especially vulnerable time for the homeland. I know
it is probably not comfortable for you, you know, to have any
of us reference the impeachment that Speaker Johnson brought to
the floor. But I just want to get some dates right. Was it
February 13 when Speaker Johnson was finally able to get the
votes to impeach you, was that the date?
Secretary Mayorkas. I don't--I don't recall the date.
Mr. Swalwell. I think it was February 13. By the way, it
was kind-of a second-serve impeachment if we are using like a
tennis analogy. The first one was a fault, they couldn't get
the votes.
In pickleball you would have only gotten one serve and that
would have been it, but if it was tennis they got a second
serve and barely were able to do it. Today, it is April 16, so,
you know, I am not great a math, but I think that is 2 months.
Have the impeachment articles as we sit here today been sent
over to the Senate for a trial? Are you aware?
Secretary Mayorkas. I don't know whether something has
occurred while I have been testifying before this committee,
Congressman.
Mr. Swalwell. I only bring that up because, again, like we
were told there is this urgency, there is this crisis at the
border. We have got to do this now. We have got to, you know,
bring one of our, you know, colleagues who keeps suffering and
going through cancer treatments that we are all rooting for, we
have got to bring him out of those treatments so he can come
and be the pivotal vote so that we can get you impeached and
sent over to the Senate.
It has been 2 months, 2 months, and it still is not over at
the Senate. So, I don't think it is the urgency that we were
told. It seems like it was more the former President wanted us
to do this and so Speaker Johnson did it.
We seem to go wherever the former President wants us to go,
if that is on border policy, if that is on funding Ukraine, it
is not really an America First agenda. It's a me, me, me first
when it comes to the former President and then these guys get
kind-of dragged along, and that is why the articles, as we sit
here today, have still not been sent over.
But I want to talk a little bit about disinformation. Does
Russia or China or Iran or Venezuela have a right to free
speech in our elections as you see it?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am not sure I understand your
question, but----
Mr. Swalwell. Well, Americans have a right on social media
platforms to speak freely about our elections, but do you see
our adversaries as having a right to pollute our public forum
when it comes to speech?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, one of our--one of the
threat streams attacking the integrity of our elections is
disinformation from adverse nation-states, that includes the
People's Republic of China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea.
Mr. Swalwell. I also find interesting, you know, my
colleagues, some of them don't like that you are going after
disinformation, but one of our very able staffers just provided
me with a July 11, 2018, transcript in this room when the
former President Donald Trump was President and you have a
number of Republican Members who are arguing that it is
actually disinformation. That is the problem. You have multiple
Republican Members saying that disinformation is our foreign
adversary's tool of choice, as Mr. Rogers on this committee at
the time said.
Mr. Perry, we know Mr. Perry from January 6, he also goes
into identifying foreign disinformation as being the problem.
So, again, what we want the Department to do is not to choose
sides politically because we know that our adversaries, first
and foremost, they just want chaos so that they can go to their
authoritative--their authoritarian states and say this is why
democracy doesn't work. Look what is going on in America. They
are undermining it.
But would you say that, when you look at disinformation and
when you see disinformation, that it doesn't have a straight
line as far as benefiting one party or the other? That our
adversaries really more than anything just want chaos in
America?
Secretary Mayorkas. Adverse nation-states seek to attack
our Nation, our democracy, this country. We battle their
efforts every single day.
Mr. Swalwell. Well, again, Mr. Secretary, thank you for
what you do. We are grateful that you are in the chair that you
are in. It is not an easy to place to sit and I am confident
that there will be a swift acquittal if it ever gets sent over
to the Senate.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from New York, Mr.
D'Esposito, for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Secretary,
thank you for being here this morning, and now this afternoon.
Have you read H.R. 2?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, it has been a while since
I have, but I certainly reviewed the legislation.
Mr. D'Esposito. Were there any parts of H.R. 2 that you
agreed with?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I'd have to review it
again.
Mr. D'Esposito. It was the most comprehensive border
security bill that has been passed out of the House of
Representatives in decades. You are the Secretary of Homeland
Security. You are not certain or sure of any of the items in
that legislation that you would agree with?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, let me assure you that I
support the Senate's bipartisan legislation.
Mr. D'Esposito. I am not asking about the Senate's
bipartisan legislation. I am asking about H.R. 2, the only
piece of border security legislation that has been passed
through the House of Representatives.
We continue to talk about this bipartisan legislation, this
magical legislation that has yet to make it out of the Senate,
that doesn't have the support to make it out of that, but we
still have the administration, the Secretary of Homeland
Security telling us that we should support legislation that
can't get passed. You don't remember any parts of H.R. 2 that
you support?
Secretary Mayorkas. That is, Congressman, I can share with
you some of the grave infirmities of H.R. 2.
Mr. D'Esposito. OK. I am asking for the parts that you
support because my point is, is that back in May, House
Republicans out of this committee passed H.R. 2, the Secure the
Border Act. We sent it over to the Senate. That should have
begun the negotiation. That should have been the starting point
to secure our border.
I have heard colleagues on the other side of the aisle say
that people in America are ``freaking out that there is
chaos.'' Yes, people are freaking out. Yes, there is chaos
because Joe Biden and the Homeland Security has left our
borders wide open. That is why people are freaking out. There
is a solution. It was H.R. 2.
Do I agree with everything in there? Absolutely not. I
would assume you don't agree with a lot of things in there
either. Democrats didn't agree with things in there, but you
know what it was? It is the only piece of legislation that we
actually have. It is the perfect starting point. So, to my
colleagues on the other side who are talking about this magical
piece of legislation, we have it. It is H.R. 2. So, let us
start there.
Now, I am going to take it back home. So, time after time
this committee has listened to the devastating impact that the
border crisis has of course because of the policies that have
been implemented by you and President Biden. You have helped
make every State a border State, every county a border county,
and every city a border city, including my home in New York.
Now, a Democrat Mayor, who I don't agree with on
everything, but I agree with him on this, he said that, ``This
issue will destroy New York City.'' Now, I am proud to have
served in the NYPD as a detective and it has been absolutely
devastating to see the horrific challenges that law enforcement
are faced with throughout this country. I mean just recently we
saw NYPD cops who were attacked by an illegal migrant who just
got done robbing a Target.
Months ago, we saw NYPD officers brutally attacked in
midtown Manhattan, they actually were our guests at the State
of the Union, by illegal migrants. We saw it in the Bronx
recently where there was a 9-1-1 call made for a person with a
gun. When cops made their way into this home into the Bronx, it
was illegal migrants who had squatted there illegally and had
illegal guns and illegal narcotics.
Then just days after in my district, in Roosevelt Field
Mall there were two migrants who committed larceny in a store,
were arrested by the Nassau County Police Department and guess
what the address was that they gave? That home in the Bronx
where the guns and the narcotics were found. So, I am going to
ask you, can you tell me at what part of this budget request
would better support law enforcement?
Secretary Mayorkas. Oh, Congressman, quite a number of
parts. The additional personnel request, the funding for
additional law enforcement personnel in the Department Homeland
Security.
Mr. D'Esposito. Do you know that in H.R. 2 that there was
money in there for additional law enforcement?
Secretary Mayorkas. In addition, Congressman, the grant
funds that we are seeking to distribute to State and local law
enforcement through the Homeland Security grant program, the
Urban Area Security Initiative, and other programs.
Mr. D'Esposito. So, everything that you just mentioned was
part of H.R. 2. So, it seems like you do know what you agree
with in that legislation and, to my point, that is exactly
where we should start. So, I urge my colleagues on the other
side of the aisle, let us work on this as Americans. H.R. 2 is
our starting point.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time----
Mr. D'Esposito. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Ms. Clarke from New York for her 5 minutes.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to
thank you, Mr. Secretary, for your hard work, your dedication,
and your fidelity to our Nation. It is inspiring.
Notwithstanding all of the challenges that my colleagues on
the other side of the aisle present to you. At the end of the
day, you have kept the homeland safe during your tenure and we
are grateful for that. I want to respond to a false allegation
raised by some of my Republican colleagues about noncitizens
voting in Federal elections.
First of all, Federal law already prohibits noncitizens
from voting in Federal elections and there is absolutely zero
evidence that there is significant violations of that law.
Republicans efforts to make it harder to vote will
disenfranchise low-income and minority voters and will do
nothing to make our elections more secure.
Instead, we should focus on the real threats to our
election security, which include foreign interference efforts,
which I know Secretary Mayorkas is committed to addressing.
Additionally, I am deeply disturbed by Congresswoman Greene's
attacks on HIAS, originally known as the Hebrew Immigrant Aids
Society, an organization that has been supporting refugees for
over 140 years.
Baseless conspiracy theories about HIAS fueled the
antisemitic murder of 11 individuals at the Tree of Life
Synagogue in Pittsburgh. It is disgraceful to see the same kind
of misinformation repeated in this committee. So, I wanted that
on the record.
Mr. Secretary, last month CISA issued the Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking for mandatory cyber incident reporting and
I congratulate the Department on this important milestone.
Now that the MPRM is out, DHS must redouble its efforts to
harmonize incident report rules across Government. The
Department's Cyber Incident Reporting Council, sir, will play a
critical role in that process. Secretary Mayorkas, sir, issued
a report containing recommendations regarding the harmonization
Cyber Incident Reporting rules last September.
What actions has the CIRCIA taken since the report was
released to promote harmonization? What more can the CIRCIA be
doing to promote harmonization?
Secretary Mayorkas. Thank you very much, Congresswoman, for
your question. We are working with Federal departments and
agencies across the administration to execute on the imperative
of harmonizing our reporting rules. Not only that,
Congresswoman, we are working with our international partners
so that harmonization would not be restricted to the domestic
environment but the international arena as well.
Ms. Clarke. That is good news. As part of the
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, Congress provided $1
billion in grants to State, local, Tribal, and territorial
governments to strengthen their cyber defenses. This program is
based on bipartisan legislation I authored with my colleagues
on this committee.
Unfortunately, this funding expires in fiscal year 2025,
which could mean State and local governments cut their
cybersecurity spending even as they continue to face serious
cybersecurity threats, including from foreign adversaries like
China and Russia.
It is my hope that this committee will work together to
extend the vital program so we can build our initial
investment. Secretary Mayorkas, do you agree with me that State
and local governments will continue to need Federal support as
they defend their cyber intrusions? Will you commit to working
with me and this committee to reauthorize the State and Local
Cybersecurity Grant Program?
Secretary Mayorkas. I do and I will, Congresswoman.
Ms. Clarke. Wonderful. Mr. Secretary, just one other note
of concern and that is with the nation of Haiti. You should
have received a letter or have been CC'd on a letter regarding
the concern about individuals being returned at this stage who
could be sent into harm's way, into famine, into the myriad of
challenges that nation continues to face in this moment. I look
forward to speaking with you further about this. It is a major
concern for many constituencies, many families across this
Nation of Haitian descent.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Would the gentlelady yield?
Ms. Clarke. Yes, sure. Yes, I will yield.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you so very much. I wanted to follow
your line of questioning very quickly, which is a very
important line of questioning and that is to ensure that we get
fixed, Mr. Secretary, what is broken. Sometimes we have
equipment, technology that is not working correctly.
I would like to submit into the record and ask unanimous
consent ``Healthcare.gov: Ineffective Planning and Oversight
Practices Underscore the Need for Improved Contract
Management.'' Will you continue to access getting out
equipment, refunded or improved, so that we can work with the
equipment that will help you do the job?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes.
Chairman Green. So, ordered and it is entered into the
record, and the gentlelady's time has expired.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you. I thank you for yielding.
Chairman Green. Absolutely.
I now recognize the gentlelady Ms. Lee from Florida for 5
minutes of questioning.
Ms. Lee. Secretary Mayorkas, I would like to continue the
discussion about the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security
Agency and specifically the Chemical Facilities Antiterrorism
Standards program that is overseen by CISA. The CFAS program,
would you please describe for us how your budget provides
continued support for the CFAS program?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, I will have to remind
myself of these specific funding for that program. That funding
is very important and of course it has been in tremendous peril
recently. We strongly support the continuation of the CFAS
program. It enables us to ensure that high-risk chemical
facilities are as secure as they need to be.
Ms. Lee. And would you agree that a continuation of that
program is an important part of the mission to protect critical
infrastructure?
Secretary Mayorkas. I would, Congresswoman.
Ms. Lee. Would you also encourage our friends and partners
over in the Senate to take up the bill that was passed by the
House and is currently there awaiting their consideration and
action?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, I look forward to
reviewing that bill again but we do indeed consider the CFAS
program to be very important.
Ms. Lee. I would like to then return to the subject of CISA
and its role in elections infrastructure and its efforts of
help State and local election officials protect elections
infrastructure. Specifically, there, could you describe what
CISA does to help State and local elections officials defend
against threats from foreign adversaries and domestic
adversaries to that infrastructure?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, one of the things we do
is provide training with respect to the threat, to be able to
identify the threat. We share best practices. We have marked
election security as one of the 6 priority areas in some of our
Homeland Security grant programs to ensure that State and local
jurisdictions devote needed resources to a fundamental need of
our country and that is to safeguard the integrity of our
election processes.
Ms. Lee. Moving to the question of breaches and cyber
attacks, what effort is CISA making to bolster its own internal
cybersecurity? I know they were victim to a recent cyber
attack. Can you describe for us the efforts internal to CISA on
cybersecurity?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, so that is a priority
for the Department as a whole. Our chief information officer
and that team is consistently working day-in and day-out to
enhance our security.
In addition, CISA works to enhance the cybersecurity of the
Federal civilian domain. It issues binding operational
directives based on what it learns from particular incidents to
ensure that agencies and departments are patching or protecting
themselves against detected vulnerabilities.
This is a very significant mission area of ours. The
cybersecurity threat factor is not, unfortunately, diminishing.
Ms. Lee. Related to HSI, I would like to go back to that
subject which you addressed earlier as it related to some
transnational gang activities. But specifically, within your
budget I would like to discuss HSI and its operations related
to child exploitation and human trafficking. Your budget calls
for additional funding there to help HSI investigators to
combat human trafficking. Does it now?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes, it does.
Ms. Lee. Would you explain for us the types of activities
and role that HSI takes specifically as it relates to the
exploitation and trafficking of children?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman, I named crimes of
exploitation 1 of our 6 mission priorities for the first time
in the Department's history.
Tomorrow I will be with HSI, Homeland Security
Investigations, in New York City, launching a new campaign
against on-line child sexual exploitation and abuse. This is a
scourge that is not only Nation-wide but it's global in nature.
More than 36 million tips were presented to enforcement
authorities across the world, domestically more than 63,000 of
them reflected in imminent or grave threat. The extent of this
crime cannot be overstated.
The work of HSI in combating it is heroic both in
disseminating, education, and awareness, in investigating the
crimes, in rescuing victims, and holding perpetrators
accountable.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Luttrell, for
5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Luttrell. Good afternoon, Mr. Secretary. My colleague
has just kind-of initiated the conversation that I wanted to
have with you as well. You're having discussions with HSI,
HIDTA, DPS. Out of the State of Texas one of the biggest issues
that they are confronted with is their ability to navigate
aggregated data on the criminals that are moving the
individuals into sex trafficking space.
Are you comfortable with the amount of money that you are
asking for in the cyber risk, cyber threat domain, and
artificial intelligence and machine learning space? Because
they are two different entities that need to work very well
together. My concern is that the right hand is not talking to
the left. We need to expand the ability for our agents to
process the data and in the budget proposal there is only $5
million for the new AI office. Are you happy with that number?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, we are pleased with
receiving additional funding when it comes to crimes of
exploitation. I must tell you that if I had a wish list the
amount of money would be greater, the amount of personnel that
we could dedicate to this would be greater.
This scourge, this heinous crime is of extraordinary
breadth and depth of depravity and we work every day. It is
remarkable what our personnel do to combat this with our State
and local partners as well as our international partners.
This is one of the top issues that is raised when I am
engaging in the international arena with our Five Eyes partners
as well as our European colleagues.
Mr. Luttrell. I hate to speak for the body itself, but I
think we are really hungry and have a good appetite for the
expansiveness of AI in this space. This is where I am going to
tell you to be hyperaggressive in order to save these women and
children that are in this problem set.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congresswoman--Congressman.
Mr. Luttrell. Damn, that is the third time you have done
that to me.
Secretary Mayorkas. I know.
Mr. Luttrell. I don't even know where to go with that. I
was hoping you weren't going to do that.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman?
Mr. Luttrell. I mean, we can go into the pronouns and all
that stuff just----
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, three strikes and I'm out.
I understand that.
Let me share with you that we are indeed harnessing AI to
advance the mission in the fight against on-line child sexual
exploitation. At the same time AI presents a risk because the
perpetrators use it to advance their depraved criminality. So,
Congressman, this is something that we are harnessing for good
and fighting against bad.
Mr. Luttrell. That is where I was going earlier, when do we
have the ability to touch the individuals that are being
touched by the bad actors? I am hoping we do and I know that is
a very aggressive problem set.
I am going to roll right on to immigration and the Senate
bill, I never even saw it. So, just give me a little latitude
on this one. I think you are the 14th Homeland Secretary if I
counted that. Is that correct? You are number 14?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am the 7th confirmed.
Mr. Luttrell. Seventh confirmed. OK. I don't know where I
got 14. I thought it was in Wikipedia. Whatever. OK. Mr.
Hunter, this Deputy Secretary Hunter, who was in front of the
Border Security Subcommittee a few weeks ago and we were
talking immigration issues, immigration policy, and I had
asked, task requested because in your opening statement you
said Congress has not reformed immigration since the 1990's.
Well, it is our job to pass legislation, but the subject-
matter experts of immigration live underneath your umbrella. I
consider you--are you subject-matter expert in immigration,
sir?
Secretary Mayorkas. I am, I certainly am admiring of those
who know much more than I.
Mr. Luttrell. My ask was--and I was--Mr. Suozzi and Mrs.
Ramirez were in agreements with this, it would seem that the
front-line operators are the best to address the immigration
issue and where the blockade is, where the choke point is.
Has a policy ever been written from the Department and sent
up to Congress? Because I have never seen one. So, I am asking
you, have you done that in your tenure as Secretary?
Secretary Mayorkas. Have I, myself submitted policy
recommendations?
Mr. Luttrell. No. Rewritten the policy that Mr. Garcia
holds up frequently in our hearing that you can't even read. It
is the absolute problem. Has the Homeland Security Department
itself said, you know what, here is the problem set? Congress
can't get anything done for the last 20-something years. We are
going to write it for you, submit. This is the best course of
action. Has Homeland Security done that?
Secretary Mayorkas. There are two powerful examples. No. 1,
on his first day in office, President Biden presented
legislation to Congress. Second, I had the privilege and the
honor of sitting beside the bipartisan group of Senators who
worked out a compromise that I urge Congress to pass.
Mr. Luttrell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Alabama, Mr. Strong, for
5 minutes of testimony--excuse me--questioning.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Secretary Mayorkas, thank you for
being here to speak on the fiscal year 2025 Presidential budget
request. The President's budget request reflects the
administration's priorities, correct?
Secretary Mayorkas. It does, Congressman.
Mr. Strong. I would like to talk about the threats to
homeland and DHS that we see according to your budget request.
I was pleased last year that you acknowledged the threat that
unmanned aircraft systems poised at our Southern Border saying
in part, and I quote, ``Drones are being used in a myriad of
ways, a number of different ways to create a public safety
risk.''
You and I agree on this point. The cartels use the drones
at the border is alarming, from using them to track the
movement of Border Patrol agents, to providing overwatch for
human smuggling, to transporting narcotics, and even outfitting
them with explosive payloads.
For each drone that the CBP flies, the Mexican cartel flies
17 based on the last information I got. This issue hasn't
improved since last year. In fact, last month in a Senate
hearing, NORAD commander General Guillot testified that the
number of drone incursions alarmed him, saying that he has
``talked to CBP,'' who are responsible for UAS incursions at
the border, and they put the number of incursions at thousands.
He went on to say that he sees the potential of a threat posed
by drones to the national defense as only growing.
Secretary, is counting the illicit use of drones at the
border a priority for DHS and CBP?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, it certainly is.
Mr. Strong. It is very concerning and very confusing to me,
this is your budget request for CBP's counter-UAS program. You
see it right behind me. Zero, not one penny, not one penny and
the threat is unbelievable.
As the use of drones by bad actors at our border evolves
and continues to bring a threat to our homeland, it is
unconscionable that you wouldn't request a single penny for CBP
to carry out its counter-UAS mission. You requested zero.
Thousands of UAV flights into U.S. airspace by Mexican cartel
have the--you know, we have got the ability to block, drop, or
intercept these drones.
Moving on. I want to revisit the ICE detention bed issue
that my colleagues have mentioned today. As illegal aliens
continue to pour across the Southern Border, your fiscal year
2025 budget request funding for just 34,000 ICE beds, barely
half of the 60,000 beds requested by the Trump administration
in fiscal year 2021.
In May 2021, you testified in a House subcommittee hearing
that you are ``concerned about the overuse of detention.'' Is
it safe to presume that this is why you want to cut bed space
and release illegal aliens on the streets of America?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, it is not my desire to cut
detention beds.
I should say returning to the counter-UAS authorities, we
are seeking to harness artificial intelligence to amplify the
strength of our counter-UAS capabilities.
Mr. Strong. Well, I'll tell you, this right here on the
UAS, we have the technology. As a matter of fact, in my
community where I live in Huntsville, Alabama, where we could
block them, drop them, or intercept them. It is being used in
the Ukraine. It is being used in Israel. The only thing is that
capability, you have got to request it to make sure that it
happens.
So, I promise you, I hope that we can come to a reason
because when those UAVs are coming into America, setting down,
dropping fentanyl, being stuffed full of cash, and flying back
to the Mexican cartel, it is totally unacceptable, and I take
you for your word that you are going to do something about it.
If Congress is willing to fund even more ICE bed space or
near Trump-era levels would this be a solution to detaining
more illegal aliens?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, the greater the detention
capacity, the greater our ability to detain more people. The
bipartisan Senate legislation funded 50,000 detention beds and
that's a powerful example.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Mr. Secretary, at the
beginning of 2022, you testified the Congress that you had
operational control of the border. Then the following hearings
you backtracked to alter the definition of operational control.
Now, in 2024, in a hearing last week, you testified that we
have a crisis at the Southern Border. Are you finally admitting
to what the American people have known to be true that your
border policies don't work?
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the gentleman from Oklahoma, Mr. Brecheen,
for 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. Brecheen. I thank the Chairman. Mr. Secretary, I am
really concerned about REAL ID compliance. I want to shift the
narrative to discuss that, which would be a part of the budget
implementation.
REAL ID, you know, under your administration says by 2025
there will be compliance. It was designed, supposed to build
confidence in the identity of travelers post-9/11 to protect
our U.S. citizenry. That is how it was sold when it was past
years ago.
Under your leadership the Department is going to start
implementing this, the Transportation Security Administration,
TSA, will be prohibited from accepting driver's license and
identification cards that don't meet certain standards, Federal
standards.
You said that you are continuing to work closely with U.S.
States to meet the REAL ID requirements and so here is where I
am going to take this. I have heard from two Illinois State
lawmakers that illegals in their States, they have got
verification, are now able to obtain REAL ID-compliant driver's
license.
I want to reiterate that in Illinois, illegal aliens now
can get ID-compliant driver's license with--by checking the box
on ``employment authorization document,'' which is one of the
subsets on the State website that is required by the State of
Illinois as an option. It can be obtained by this illegal but
it comes under the parole, which has been something that has
been implemented by you and this administration.
So, with that parole, this employment authorization
document box can be checked.
This, in my opinion, and I think most Americans would say
this totally undermines REAL ID compliance given the lack of
background checks that goes into knowing who these people are.
There is a real lack of information. Yes, you can do some
INTERPOL. Yes, you can do some background checks. But you have
in terms of the United States' ability to understand who these
people really are, we don't.
Is REAL ID compromised? I believe it is and I think this is
a glaring fault in the system, and so I am going to go to a
quick question to you, yes or no. Should illegal aliens get
REAL ID driver's license?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I look forward to
following up with you on the integrity of the REAL ID program
as it is envisioned and we are phasing in. That has been a
program----
Mr. Brecheen. Because I've got limited time, Mr. Secretary,
yes or no, should REAL ID--should illegal aliens have the
option, in your opinion, to get REAL ID-compliant driver's
licenses? Yes or no.
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I look forward to
following up with you on----
Mr. Brecheen. OK. I wish you had a no on that.
The next question. Should illegal aliens vote as in
Illinois and New York we know that they are voting? Should
illegal aliens be allowed to vote in this country, yes or no?
Secretary Mayorkas. It is my understanding that illegal
aliens cannot vote in Federal elections.
Mr. Brecheen. OK. But are they allowed to vote? The answer
is yes, in New York and in Illinois they are allowed to vote.
So whether it is Federal elections or--that is not my question
to you a while ago. I would love your answer. Should they be
allowed to vote?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, that policy issue is
outside the remit of the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Brecheen. OK.
Secretary Mayorkas. It is our obligation----
Mr. Brecheen. I need to move on for time, I am sorry.
Mr. Secretary, you have contended that ``the entire
hemisphere is gripped with a level of migration that is
unprecedented in recent history.'' You said that more or less
today in your opening statement.
I think that this avoids accountability for the invasion of
our Southern Border. I think it shifts the blame on random
events. But if that narrative is to be understood or followed,
what are those events? I mean I look around the world and I go
in South America. Was there some tsunami, was there a hurricane
that I was not aware of? But the answer is no.
It ultimately is, for those who have the context of the
``Wizard of Oz,'' it is like the wizard is standing at the
microphone saying, disregard the man, as the curtain is being
pulled back by the little dog, Toto, disregard the man standing
behind the curtain pulling levers and spinning wheels. I mean,
I think the American people have this figured out.
The migration is because there has been an advertisement
under this administration, come into this country. You know, I
come from the Sooner State, in Oklahoma, the Sooner State.
History designates a legal land run occurred in the 1880's.
This was not for illegals. It was for legal citizens.
History will remember this time, I believe, in the past 3
years as Biden's land run for illegals, paid for by U.S.
taxpayers. Taxpayers are being asked to give their treasure and
their children's treasure of the future for this. The FAIR
organization says it costs us $4,000 for every illegal
immigrant.
A gold rush to transport illegals to the city of their
choice, free emergency health care. Then once these people have
a child, there is cash payments in the form of Earned Income
Tax Credits, thousands of dollars, food stamps once they have a
child. Food stamps once they have a child, once they have a
child, again, Medicaid on top of the food stamps.
So, here is where I am going with this, does your budget
propose, which I will contend it does, especially the one that,
you know, we are deeming as the slush fund, allow for dollars
to go into countries as far south as Panama for NGO's,
nongovernment organizations, to promote people coming to our
country and in effect telling military-aged men to go north
young man, go north?
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Crane from Arizona for 5 minutes of
questioning.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, it is
interesting because I hear my colleagues on the other side
aisle consistently talk about how we can't agree on anything
over here on the Republican side of the aisle, you know, and
there is some truth to that. There has been, you know,
definitely some debates, some arguments within our own party.
But one thing that we can agree upon is that you are doing
a horrible job, sir, and that you needed to be impeached.
That is pretty wild seeing as how we have been able to
agree upon very few things with the margin that we have, but we
could all come together, look at the data, hear the stories
back in the district, listen to the family members that have
been destroyed because of your complete dereliction of duty,
and we all agree that you needed to be impeached.
Secretary Mayorkas, did you swear an oath to protect and
defend the Constitution of the United States?
Secretary Mayorkas. Yes, I did, Congressman.
Mr. Crane. Yes? How many times have you done that?
Secretary Mayorkas. I certainly can identify 5 when I----
Mr. Crane. OK. Thank you.
Secretary Mayorkas [continuing]. Was sworn in----
Mr. Crane. Are you aware of Article IV, Section 4? Do you
know what that--do you know what that article is?
Secretary Mayorkas. There may be more than 5 instances. I
just want to be clear to the best----
Mr. Crane. OK. Yes, OK. Great. Article IV, Section 4, are
you familiar with that article?
Secretary Mayorkas. When I was sworn in as an assistant----
Mr. Crane. OK. Since you are not going to answer, it is
called the invasion clause. Do you know what the invasion
clause says, sir?
Secretary Mayorkas. The second time was when----
Mr. Crane. The Federal Government will protect and defend
each State from invasion. OK? Since you don't seem to be
getting it, I had our staff here bring up this graph here. This
is you. This is the last administration. Again you, last
administration. That looks like an invasion on a graph.
We have heard from the people that have sat here and
testified in these chambers about their family members being
raped and murdered by people that weren't supposed to be here
that your administration allowed to be here and then didn't
keep track of, didn't deport, didn't detain.
Tell me, sir, how you haven't allowed an invasion into this
country?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, I am incredibly proud to
support the men and women of the Department of Homeland
Security who enforce the laws of the United States every single
day, many of whom risk their lives to secure our borders.
Mr. Crane. Yes, despite your horrific leadership, yes, they
do. I am proud to know many of them as well. They are great
people. But we all know that. We all know what the morale is
like in the Border Patrol right now and it is horrible. I hear
from Border Patrol agents every day.
Again, sir, my question is, how have you not violated your
oath to protect and defend the Constitution of the United
States specifically Article IV, Section 4, which says that you
as Homeland Security will protect each State from invasion,
again, you, last administration? How can you make that
argument?
Secretary Mayorkas. I work every day quite proudly to
advance the security of the border and support the men and
women of the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Crane. You may be working every day, but it seems as if
you are working for the other side of the aisle. It seems as if
you are working for our enemies and that is exactly what the
American people see. That is exactly why they supported us
impeaching you and that is exactly why you had so many Members
of this conference that is often divided come together to
impeach you, sir.
Let me ask you this question, Secretary Mayorkas, do you
think our enemies are stupid?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, you can launch whatever
false and deplorable accusations----
Mr. Crane. Do you think our adversaries are stupid, sir?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, our adversaries vary in
capability and we address the defense of the United States and
the interest of the United States accordingly.
Mr. Crane. No, you are not. OK. You are not doing that. As
a matter of fact, do you think it is possible that maybe some
of our adversaries, the most dangerous ones, like the Chinese,
the North Koreans, the Iranians, the Russians, et cetera, might
employ unconventional warfare and send their soldiers because
our border is wide open through the Southern Border without a
uniform, without firearms, with instructions to wreak havoc in
this country once they are here, once you have allowed them to
be here? Do you think that is possible, Secretary Mayorkas?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, over the last 11 months we
have removed or returned 630,000 people, more than any fiscal
year since 2013. And our----
Mr. Crane. Well, you are bragging about how much you have
returned, but you don't want to brag about how many you have
let in, do you?
Secretary Mayorkas. Congressman, individuals who arrive and
claim asylum are placed in immigration enforcement proceedings.
If they do not qualify for relief under our laws, we seek to
remove them in enforcing our laws.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
The Members of the committee may have some additional
questions for you, Mr. Mayorkas, Mr. Secretary, and we would
ask that you would respond to those in writing.
I think there were several during that we--the time kind-of
fell and I will let those Members send those to you for you to
follow up on.
Pursuant to committee rule VII(D), the hearing record will
be held open for 10 days. I think the Ranking Member has a
unanimous consent request and also closing statements. So, I
will let you do those together, Mr. Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, I
ask unanimous consent that portions of the July 18, 2018,
hearing transcript referred by Mr. Swalwell be inserted in the
record.
Chairman Green. So, ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Chairman Green. You are recognized for your closing
remarks.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much. I would like to thank
Secretary Mayorkas for agreeing to testify before this
committee today, despite on-going baseless, partisan attacks
against him. Mr. Secretary, you have done what I consider a
good job at defending this administration given the constraints
that you have to operate from in terms of resources.
The Secretary's willingness to appear in support of the
Department's needs demonstrate his character as a truly
dedicated public servant. I am not sure I can say the same for
colleagues on the other side of the aisle who prefer a ranting
while steadfastly refusing to provide the authority and
resources the Department needs.
Well, you can't have it both ways. You can't look the brave
DHS employees in the face and claim you support them when you
refuse to put your vote where your mouth is. Yet this is
exactly what my Republican colleagues have done this entire
Congress. It is appalling.
DHS only received funding for fiscal year 2024 due to
overwhelming Democratic support, just like in 2023. Yet
Republicans tried to claim that it is you, Secretary Mayorkas,
that is undermining border security. This hypocrisy is
astounding.
The hearing which was supposed to be about the DHS budget
has become yet another MAGA border hearing. I did not hear one
Republican colleague raise concerns about whether FEMA will
have the funding needed to respond to an increasing number of
deadly national disasters, nor did they engage with DHS's work
to defend against legitimate threats to our 2024 election.
Instead, choosing to waste time drumming anti-immigrant
sentiment with unfounded allegations. Nor did they want to
discuss how the Department is responding to domestic terrorist
attacks that have left American communities scared and
outraged.
DHS is tasked with handling all of these issues and more,
yet my Republican colleagues seem more interested in pretending
to be outraged than doing the hard work of governing. This is
simply the way to get things done. It takes complete and utter
compromise, like we saw in the Senate where they drafted a
bipartisan bill that would have imposed the toughest set of
border security reforms we have ever had.
The fact that MAGA Republicans rejected the proposal out of
hand and instead pursued a baseless and unconstitutional
impeachment against you, Mr. Secretary, tells the American
people all they need to know.
The leader of the Republican party, Donald Trump bragged
about killing this legislation because it would have helped
President Biden. Republicans in both the House and Senate have
said they will not pass this legislation to improve border
security in an election year. Republicans are saying the quiet
part out loud. They will not support the Department and fix the
border because it benefits them politically.
Secretary Mayorkas, I appreciate your willingness to engage
with this political circus and again advocate for the needs of
the Department.
The other thing I want to mention is that we didn't get to
talk about AI. Cybersecurity is, as you know, within part of
our mission. We share it with a couple of other committees. But
it is the new frontier that we have to be front and center to
defend all our systems.
So, I look forward to working with the Department on our AI
defenses going forward. The work that you and DHS employees do
is critical. I want to assure that it is this committee's real
value by some Members of this committee.
With that, Mr. Chairman, I yield back. Thank you again, Mr.
Secretary.
Chairman Green [continuing]. Closing statement. Before I
start I would like to clarify a couple of things that have been
addressed in today's hearing, and I will be brief, Mr.
Secretary.
You know, the fact that immigration laws haven't been
updated doesn't mean we don't get to follow the immigration
laws on the books. I would agree with you, we desperately need
some update to our immigration laws. Those don't occur in this
committee. That actually happens over in Judiciary. So, I mean,
I appreciate the continual mention that that needs to be
addressed, but it doesn't obviously cater or even allow a
variance of any kind in laws that have already been passed by
the body. It doesn't excuse violation of the law.
I would also like to clarify something that is, quite
frankly, I think dishonest, at least disingenuous, suggest that
because someone or a group of this side of the aisle or that
side of the aisle, you know, votes one way or another on a
budget that you are not for, you know, spending money to
increase border security.
For example, if you vote against a budget that decreases
Customs and Border Patrol and then you turn around and vote for
a budget that increases dollars for Customs and Border Patrol,
it is dishonest to say that that side who voted that way voted
to cut spending to Customs and Border Patrol. Yet we have heard
that multiple times today. That is just flat dishonesty. If
that is all you have got to say to support or defend the
actions at the Southern Border, well, I guess that tells
everybody the truth about what is really going on.
Another point I would like to clarify, someone made a
comment that impeachment hearings earlier were 2 hearings. It
was a 10-month, 5-phased investigation of oversight with
subpoenas that were never complied with, by the way. So, this
notion that there were 2 hearings is just false.
About legislation on addressing border security, you know,
the process is pretty simple in the Constitution and the rules
of the committee or the House and Senate. You know, we passed a
bill. We sent it to the Senate. They could amend it. We go to
conference committee. We do that every year on the NDAA.
If that leadership of the Senate really wanted to do
something they would have picked that bill up that was sent
over over a year ago. In terms of, you know, the budget
discussion today and AI and all this other stuff, multiple
Members talked about this stuff.
I want to make sure I clarify because, you know, you just
don't get to say, you know, this happened and this happened and
some kind of Jedi mind trick and tell the American people that
the people here on this side of the aisle didn't talk about AI.
Ms. Lee talked about AI, about human trafficking. Mr. Garbarino
talked about AI, cybersecurity.
I mean, it is just somewhat infuriating that people just
think they can say something that is not true and everybody is
going to believe it. So, I want to correct the record on that.
I have to be candid, your 2025 budget request I think
undermines our country's ability to handle national security.
I think this idea of cutting Customs and Border Patrol,
creating some slush fund that you guys get to decide on your
own how to use, is really contrary to the whole founding
principles of us doing a budget here, sending it to you guys,
you all have to keep that budget. That was what our Founders
envisioned.
So, creating slush funds, that is just--it is against the
whole foundation to the Constitution. So that is why things
like that aren't supported in this budget or budgets that do
get voted on in authorizations. Underfunding Customs and Border
Protection facilities I think is just going to result in an
increased flow of migrants across the border.
When we catch and release and do those kinds of things it
is a motivation. People come because it is an incentive to
come. That is why it is important for us not to see cuts to
those. We know a lot of the dollars in this slush fund are
going to do nothing but continue the policies that you have
been doing, which is just ushering more people in.
I think the interesting number to me, you know, that if you
look at the curve on known got-aways, as you pull people off
the border to process the known got-aways number actually
flatlines or decreases a little bit because they are not out
there to see the known got-aways. Right? So, they don't see
them because they are not out on the border. They are actually
processing people.
So, I think that unknown number just increases massively
because I--you know, that is speculation on my part, but it is
good common sense. That is a number we have no clue how big
that number is, but we brought it in this committee many times
and have shown the videos, you know, from ranchers where folks
are wearing camouflage.
You have seen the carpet shoes, I am sure, Mr. Secretary
that have been piled up in Arizona just inside the border and
the backpacks, which we know are full of fentanyl. During your
tenure as Secretary a record number of illegal aliens have
crossed into the country, too many of whom have connections,
many of whom have connections to transnational criminal
organizations.
You are from California originally. The very good reporting
on how the Honduran cartels have linked up with the gangs in
San Francisco and created this nexus is shocking. It has all
happened on your watch.
Most recently, of course, and it has been mentioned here,
an illegal alien murdered a college student, Laken Riley,
paroled by your Department into the country and left a trail of
crime in his path. She is just one of thousands of Americans
that have been murdered or otherwise victimized by illegal
immigrants.
The most gut-wrenching part of her murder is that it could
have been prevented if you and your administration had chosen
to enforce the laws on the books. But that young woman is dead
simply because the laws weren't followed. Mr. Secretary, the
number of known got-aways that I have talked about, already
that number has trailed off because we are not on the border
looking anymore.
I don't want to imagine that undetected number. It just
scares me to death. It seemed to scare Mr. Wray--or Director
Wray. He talked about that when he was here testifying. You
claim that your budget will address the issues we face at our
border, but if we look at the numbers, the math doesn't add up
to me. Fiscal year 2025 DHS seeks to hire only 350 new Border
Patrol agents. I don't think that number is enough and that is
why all the authorization we have sent over, it has been
significantly higher than that despite what has been said here
today by others who like to misrepresent what really happened.
When you testified in the Senate and Senator Capito asked
you how you will reach your hiring goals, you couldn't give a
sizable answer. The truth is, Mr. Secretary, morale at DHS is
at an all-time low because of the working conditions and these
are your policies that have created that.
We have been committed to providing strong oversight to the
Department and, most importantly, the actions that you have
taken as a leader. We have investigated those policies. We have
investigated those failures. We look forward and we hope that
we can work together on those issues that I mentioned at the
beginning: cybersecurity, ports, the vulnerability of our
supply chain and a lot of those areas we do agree on. Where
there is overlap, where do agree, we are going to move those
things forward as quickly as we can.
So, I look forward to doing that with you and your team.
This committee is focused on strengthening our cyber work force
and I have got a bill that I personally am leading and helping
put together. We will get a copy of it to Director Easterly and
make sure she gets eyes on it and others from your Department.
We will want your help on that and I think you will like
the bill that we are putting together.
That really ends my comments for the day and again I thank
you for coming. I understand the emotions of being here today.
Without objection, the committee does stand in adjournment.
[Whereupon, at 1:18 a.m., the committee was adjourned.]

A P P E N D I X  I

----------

Questions From Chairman Mark E. Green, M.D. for Honorable Alejandro
Mayorkas
Question 1. Last month, a Chinese illegal immigrant was arrested
after driving onto a Marine Corps base in California without
authorization and ignoring orders to leave. Chinese nationals
encountered at the Southwest Border this year are up over 900 percent
compared to just fiscal year 2022. Do you think there could be more
threats among the 1.7 million inadmissible aliens you have paroled and
the nearly 2 million who have evaded apprehension at the border? Yes,
or no?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Don't you think America's adversaries, such as China,
would want to exploit our Southwest Border if it means they will be
released into the country?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. Since fiscal year 2021, the Border Patrol has
apprehended more than 351 individuals at the Southwest Border whose
names appear on the terrorist watch list. We also know from several
recent reports that agents have inadvertently released illegal aliens
who later turned out to be on this list because agents did not have
sufficient information at the time of release. In fact, I sent you a
letter earlier this month asking why known terrorists are being
released into the United States.
Are vetting procedures sufficient to assure the American people
that they are safe from terrorists and gang members coming across the
border? Yes, or no?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4a. How many terrorists or violent criminals are currently
in the interior of the United States because they were not properly
identified when they were initially processed by Customs and Border
Protection (CBP)?
Question 4b. How many of these criminals and suspected terrorists
are you actively tracking down to arrest and deport?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5a. What has happened to the 350+ individuals on the
terrorist watch list apprehended by CBP?
Have they all been removed from the United States?
Question 5b. Are they still in U.S. Custody?
Question 5c. Have they been released into the interior?
Question 5d. If so, how many?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 6. You are using programs like CBP One and the
Congressionally-unauthorized Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela
parole program to facilitate illegal immigration. Many of those you are
letting in using this latter program are from failed states or
countries that have poor relations with the United States, such as Cuba
and Venezuela.
Are you able to conduct a meaningful background check on a foreign
national who has never entered the United States if you do not have
access to those countries' criminal records?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 7. Do you have access to criminal databases of countries
of which we do not have relations? Yes, or no?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 8. How do you search records in real time for those who
come from countries that do not maintain digitized records?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 9. Can you provide a list of countries with databases that
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has real-time access to in
order to conduct searches during processing and how comparable those
databases are to U.S. criminal databases?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 10. You told Congress last week that sanctuary cities or
States should work with U.S.A. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) to arrest and deport individuals that pose ``a threat to public
safety or national security.'' I agree, they should. Yet, ICE, under
your leadership, has arrested and removed far fewer of these threats.
In fiscal year 2019, 86 percent of ICE arrests were of criminal aliens,
and 90 percent in fiscal year 2020--during COVID! That dropped to just
32 percent in fiscal year 2022 and 43 percent in fiscal year 2023. In
fiscal year 2019, 91 percent of ICE interior removals involved criminal
aliens, 92 percent in fiscal year 2020. This dropped to 61 percent in
fiscal year 2022 and 49 percent last year.
Why should you expect these sanctuary cities to arrest more
criminals when they see you doing the opposite?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 11. How can we take these comments seriously when you have
placed a 3-year hold on onboarding new local law enforcement agencies
under the 287g program to help ICE track down and arrest criminal
aliens?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 12. Secretary Mayorkas, this fiscal year alone, the Border
Patrol has recorded more than 22,000 apprehensions of Chinese nationals
illegally crossing the Southwest Border. That's a 1,000 percent
increase from the entirety of fiscal year 2019. Gloria Chavez, Chief
Patrol Agent for the Rio Grande Valley Sector, told us last year that
agents must use a taxpayer-funded translation service to interview
these individuals, which can take 6 to 7 hours each. That represents as
many as 154,000 man-hours just interviewing Chinese nationals. We have
heard of Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) special agents being
relegated to handing out sandwiches at detention centers, now we have
Border Patrol agents relegated to translating instead of locating and
apprehending illegal aliens.
Do you think this rising, unprecedented number of Chinese nationals
crossing the Southwest Border illegally is a national security threat?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 13. Are Border Patrol agents tied up with translating when
they could be protecting the homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 14. In the budget request, DHS asks for an additional $1.4
billion for the Shelter and Services Program through the border
supplemental, which will fund non-governmental organizations (NGO) that
help facilitate this border crisis. You have stated that some of those
dollars will go to local jurisdictions to cover the costs your crisis
has forced on them.
Why don't you put those dollars toward more detention and removal
resources so that those jurisdictions are less burdened in the first
place?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 15. What is the number of known got-aways, or people who
evaded Federal law enforcement so far, this fiscal year?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 16. Do you have any idea of how many of those got-aways
were carrying fentanyl, which is responsible for killing thousands of
Americans?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 17. In a recent House Appropriations Committee hearing on
the budget, you stated that ``A separate $265 million would be used by
United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) to bolster
refugee processing as we continue to expand lawful pathways . . . ''.
Is it your intent to secure DHS funding to expand and expedite
alien processing versus securing our Southwest Border?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 18. I am concerned by the ease with which undocumented,
unvetted individuals who have entered the United States illegally are
able to utilize documents given to them by DHS to board commercial
flights. This presents a significant security vulnerability to
passenger aviation, as terrorists or other bad actors could utilize
this vulnerability to board a flight or access a crowded airport.
Is DHS allowing migrants who have crossed illegally into the United
States to utilize DHS documents to board commercial aircraft without
going through the Transportation Security Administration's (TSA)
passenger vetting process?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 19. I am concerned about TSA's slow time line for the
development and deployment of new technology at security checkpoints.
Currently, TSA is projecting that it will have all its new Checkpoint
Property Screening Systems (CPSS) and second-generation Credential
Authentication Technology (CAT-II) machines fully deployed in fiscal
year 2042 and fiscal year 2049, respectively. This year's DHS budget
proposes funding for the purchase of 83 new CPSS and 133 CAT-II
machines.
What impact will this have on the planned completion dates of full
deployment of these systems?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 20. Aside from additional Congressional appropriations,
what can DHS do to help accelerate these slow time lines?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 21. The crisis at the Southwest Border has turned into a
large-scale humanitarian disaster. A large percentage of aliens are
indebted to the cartels who bring them here, and many are physically
abused or threatened. In fiscal year 2020, 250 aliens were found dead
at the border. In fiscal year 2021, that number nearly doubled to 560.
And it was reported that in fiscal year 2022, the number was up to
nearly 900.
How many were reported in fiscal year 2023?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 22. Who is responsible for these deaths, and do you feel
any sense of responsibility for the policies that lead to their deaths?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 23. In fiscal year 2020, Border Patrol rescued, or saved
from harm, nearly 1,200 aliens from drowning, dehydration, and
starvation while they were attempting to cross the Southwest Border. In
fiscal year 2021, that number more than doubled to 3,400 rescued aliens
and it was reported that in fiscal year 2023, the number was up to
7,100.
How have these efforts affected CBP's work and resources?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 24. In fiscal year 2020, CBP encountered 34,100
unaccompanied minors at the Southwest Border. In the subsequent 3
fiscal years, that number was never below 137,000.
Why is the Border Patrol finding hundreds of thousands of
unaccompanied minors at our borders?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 25. Can you explain how your policies are not encouraging
parents in other countries to send their children on the dangerous
journey to the United States, considering that is what seems to be
occurring?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 26. How are your policies not encouraging coyotes to
continue to abandon minors at the border?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 27. In the fiscal year 2025 budget, your target is 75,000
ICE arrests of criminal aliens in the United States.
Why is the target of arrest of criminal aliens so low? Shouldn't
the Department's target be 100 percent of all criminal aliens?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 28. Seventy-five thousand is 40 percent less than the ICE
arrests under the Trump administration in 2019. Shockingly, 75,000 is
17 percent lower than in 2020 under the Trump administration, which was
at the height of COVID when most people weren't even leaving their
homes!
How do you justify such shockingly low ICE arrests of criminal
aliens?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 29. Since January 2023, the number of criminal aliens you
have released into the country has increased by more than 210,000, to
over 617,000. This is a massive increase. It is unsustainable and it is
a danger to our country.
Americans want to know--why are you only allowing ICE to arrest
75,000 instead of hundreds of thousands of arrests?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 30. In last year's supplemental funding package, DHS
requested $4.7 billion for the Southwest Border Contingency Fund
(SWBCF). Because of how this is structured, it would be harder to track
and oversee than traditional appropriations.
Mr. Mayorkas, how do you propose that would certify that encounter
rates have reached a point that would trigger the Southwest Border
Contingency Fund?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 31. Having an open-ended Contingency Fund seems to provide
financial incentive to components and NGO's for increased encounters at
the Southwest Border.
How does access to this fund provide any incentive to reduce
encounters?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 32. The President's Proposal for the SWBCF notably does
not include additional resources for border barrier system and
technology.
Would you say that border barrier system and associated technology
is an essential part of our border security?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 33. Which office would control the distribution of funds
if the SWBCF were triggered?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 34. Language in the budget explicitly prohibits DHS from
using this money to acquire, maintain, or extend border security
technology or capabilities.
If the money is meant to help CBP deal with the crisis, why are you
prohibiting them from doing so?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 35a. CBP reports that there have been more than 200,000
border crossings each month for most of the Biden presidency, and
December 2023 saw the highest numbers at over 300,000 encounters just
along the Southwest Border. CBP reports that aliens from far away
adversarial countries, such as China and Russia, are arriving at our
Southwest Border in never-seen-before numbers.
Do you think Biden's open border policies and rhetoric have
encouraged this mass flow of migrants from all over the world,
including adversarial countries?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 35b. Can you be sure that these aliens from adversarial
countries do not pose a national security threat to the United States?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 36. How many of those encountered are expelled on grounds
of espionage, terrorism, or threat to the American homeland?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 37. How does the budget request for DHS reflect this
heightened threat landscape?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 38. Fiscal year 2025 includes the Presidential election in
November. While DHS has an important role to play in protecting cyber
and physical infrastructure, DHS, and specifically the Cybersecurity
and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), should not tread into First
Amendment territory with efforts to curb mis-, dis-, and mal-
information.
Will any of DHS's budget go toward mis-, dis-, and mal-information?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 39. How does DHS plan to use resources requested under
this budget for election-related activities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 40. Are you stating that DHS currently has a working
relationship to receive criminal background information on Haitian
nationals from the prison gangs with their de facto leader ``Barbeque''
who runs large parts of Haiti?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 41. Three weeks ago, the large container ship M/V Dali
crashed into Baltimore's Francis Scott Key Bridge resulting in the
deaths of 6 individuals and the suspension of vessel traffic in and out
of the Port of Baltimore. According to news reporting, when asked about
new regulations following the crash, CISA, the Coast Guard, DHS, and
the Department of Transportation (DOT) pointed elsewhere for
jurisdiction. Chad Sweet, former chief of staff to the first DHS
Secretary for the United States, Michael Chertoff, told CNBC recently
that this passing of regulatory responsibility is a ``gap'' in national
security revealed by the bridge collapse.
How can this ``gap'' in national security caused by a burdensome
bureaucratic structure be remedied to prevent future disasters and
security threats at our ports?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 42. Secretary Mayorkas, the devastation caused by the
destruction of Baltimore's Francis Scott Key Bridge illuminates both
the importance and fragility of the maritime sector, a major component
of our critical infrastructure and supply chain.
How is DHS working to protect our maritime infrastructure,
specifically through cybersecurity, from state adversaries like the
People's Republic of China (PRC) and non-state actors including
terrorist organizations who may see this event as an opportunity or may
be inspired to target port operational technology?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 43. The vast majority of ship-to-shore cranes used at
American maritime ports are manufactured by the Shanghai Zhenhua Heavy
Industries Company Limited (ZPMC), a state-owned Chinese company
controlled by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). We have already seen
attempts by the CCP to take advantage of this vulnerable access point
to U.S. ports. In 2021, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
discovered intelligence-gathering equipment on board a vessel
delivering ZPMC cranes to the Port of Baltimore.
How is DHS, the Coast Guard, CISA, and other DHS components working
with other maritime stakeholders to ensure terminal operators are
prepared to deter and counter threats?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 44. In February, the White House released an Executive
Order on port security and the Coast Guard released a Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) on Cybersecurity in the Marine
Transportation System. Both will look at reporting requirements, which
CISA is also doing under the Cyber Incident Reporting for Critical
Infrastructure Act of 2022 (CIRCIA) NPRM.
How does the budget ensure that CISA's efforts to implement CIRCIA
and the Coast Guard's efforts to develop regulations for ports are
harmonized?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 45. President Biden's campaign maintains a TikTok account.
However, your own Department has rightfully banned the use of the app
on Government devices.
Do you see TikTok, and other CCP-affiliated platforms such as Temu,
as a danger to U.S. national security?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 46. Would you advise the Biden administration or Biden
campaign not to use TikTok given the security risks?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 47a. Chief Patrol Agent Anthony Good told this committee
last year that they ``cannot vet them all,'' when it comes to Chinese
nationals illegally crossing the border. He added concerns that
information can be hidden regarding a person's agenda, ideologies, or
reasons for coming. Our committee has been informed that some of these
Chinese nationals have ties to the People's Liberation Army and the
CCP.
Are you aware that a leaked CBP memo from last year even revealed
that Border Patrol agents have been instructed to ask far fewer vetting
questions for Chinese nationals crossing the border illegally?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 47b. Is it possible there are now direct links to the CCP
within the United States that, if not already, could be mobilized to
conduct espionage and surveillance against the United States?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 48a. I want to focus on cybersecurity for a moment,
another key priority of this committee. DHS is tasked with protecting
our critical infrastructure, specifically through cybersecurity, from
adversaries like China and Iran who are seeking opportunities every day
to target our infrastructure. On February 7, CISA released an alarming
advisory about the ``pre-positioning'' of Volt Typhoon, a PRC state-
sponsored actor, in the information technology (IT) environments of
several critical infrastructure sectors, including energy,
communications, and water systems.
Can you please describe the distinct steps CISA has taken to
address the threat posed by Volt Typhoon?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 48b. More broadly, how does your budget position DHS to
get ahead of threats to critical infrastructure like Volt Typhoon?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 49a. The Joint Cyber Defense Collaborative (JCDC) has been
a priority CISA initiative for this administration. However, Congress
has received little information about how the JCDC functions, plans,
and engages with stakeholders. As a result, we are only left with
largely negative industry feedback about its value and a scathing
Politico article, which included a quote that said JCDC ``has been dead
for a while now.''
Make the case for the JCDC. Why should it receive any funding if
industry partners do not see its value?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 49b. Why is funding the JCDC a better investment than
existing efforts in CISA that will be eliminated or reduced to support
the JCDC?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 50. How does CISA's budget ensure the United States can be
a proactive, instead of a reactive, cyber defender?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 51a. The NPRM states that ``While CISA agrees that there
could be some point at which the number of reports submitted begins to
yield diminishing marginal returns, CISA believes that, due to advances
in technology and strategies for managing large data sets, the
potential challenges associated with receiving large volumes of reports
can be mitigated through technological and procedural strategies.''
How does this budget request fulfill the assumption that CISA will
have the right technologies to receive and process the information it
will collect under CIRCIA?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 51b. How does the budget ensure that these technologies
will ensure information collection is useful and not an additional
burden on industry?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 52. It was reported earlier this year that you admitted to
Border Patrol agents in Texas that roughly 85 percent of illegal aliens
apprehended were released into the interior. In the first 2 years of
the Biden administration CBP released over 3 times the number of aliens
than under the Trump administration. Jason Owens, Border Patrol chief,
told our committee during an official interview: ``there are more
people probably that are being released on their own recognizance to
await their immigration hearing than I have seen in my career.'' That
is astounding and terrible for America! He also said illegal aliens are
turning themselves in because they believe, ``they're going to be
processed and given a notice to appear so that they can await their
immigration hearing in the United States.'' This is a racket! It's your
racket. You have incentivized criminality. Anthony ``Scott'' Good,
Chief Patrol Agent of the El Paso Sector, told us, ``I would say that
the more people that are released, the more there is a draw.''
Do you agree with your most senior Border Patrol agents that
detention is a necessity, and that mass-release of illegal aliens is
encouraging more to cross illegally?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 53. Last year Yuma Sector Chief Patrol Agent Sean McGoffin
told the committee that it is a ``matter of border security policy to
maintain detention'' on illegal aliens until their immigration case is
heard. Let me say this: your Department has prioritized releasing
illegal aliens into the public, dangerously jeopardizing homeland
security.
Do you agree with Chief McGoffin's assessment?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 54. You have previously stated--falsely, I would add--that
your policies of mass-parole are above-board and have been used by
prior administrations. This is despite your directing more than 1.7
million paroles in just over 3 years--unprecedented. We all know
there's no way you can be issuing these paroles on the required case-
by-case basis, as the law mandates. Even Bill Clinton's former
Immigrations and Naturalization Service (INS) commissioner has said
your use of mass parole is unprecedented.
Do you take responsibility for your directives of mass parole?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 55. The DHS budget only asks for enough funding for 350
new Border Patrol agents. However, in your supplemental budget request
last year, you asked for roughly 1,300 new agents.
Can you explain the discrepancy, or does it show that your
supplemental request was just partisan, political posturing to make it
look like you were acting seriously about the border crisis?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 56. In your fiscal year 2025 budget, you request $16
million to support the planning and prepositioning of assets needed for
the protection of the 2026 FIFA World Cup, which will be hosted in
North America. The World Cup will bring thousands of people from across
the world to the United States and an event this size poses many
challenges such as: the threat of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS)
attacking a crowd, the trafficking of narcotics, sex trafficking, and
an increased threat to our law enforcement officers who work tirelessly
to protect the American people. Your track record is abysmal. Under
your leadership, we have seen 7,444,308 migrant encounters at the
border; 85,000 children missing when they were transferred from CBP to
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS); and historic amounts
of migrants from countries such as Venezuela and China. Americans are
dying on your watch.
What steps are you taking to ensure these failures do not continue
and all threats are mitigated during the FIFA World Cup?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 57. I am not convinced that you are doing everything in
your power to protect the American people. I hope that come 2026, you
are no longer the Secretary of Homeland Security. The Biden
administration continues to play games when it comes to ICE detention
facilities throughout the country. In fact, it appears that you are
coordinating with the Department to minimize detentions and maximize
non-detentions.
Why is the Department prioritizing non-detentions of illegal aliens
in ICE custody?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 58. The Adelanto detention facility in southern California
has the capacity to hold roughly 2,000 illegal aliens at a time. You
have refused to challenge an outdated court order issued during the
pandemic keeping you from sending more illegal aliens to the facility.
Will you challenge this court order?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 59. Have you reached a determination on what to do with
the facility? If not, why not? If so, when?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 60a. You have lauded the CBP One app as a key tool in your
``migration management'' plan. Over 501,000 individuals have made
appointments to present at Southwest Border ports of entry. According
to data shared with the committee, 96 percent of 278,000+ inadmissible
aliens who scheduled appointments through the app from January 12,
2023, through September 30, 2023, were issued a ``Notice to Appear''
and released into the United States on parole.
Can you tell the committee how many individuals have been released
on parole into the United States after making an appointment on CBP
One?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 60b. Can you guarantee that every individual paroled after
making an appointment on CBP One does not pose a national security
threat that might have been missed in any vetting that was done?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 61. The fiscal year 2025 DHS budget proposes ending the
diversion of the Aviation Passenger Security Fee (PSF), or 9/11
Security Fee, to the Treasury. The 2024 appropriations package ended
half of the diversion and returned the $800 million to DHS. The fee,
which is collected from commercial airline passengers, was intended to
help fund TSA's security operations at airports. However, a portion of
the funds are still diverted from TSA to pay for unrelated Government
spending.
If the PSF diversion is ended, will the entirety of the fee be used
to pay for TSA operations as originally intended? If not, does DHS have
plans to utilize these funds for other purposes or other DHS component
agencies?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 62a. In 2019, the Trump administration implemented a
policy requiring DNA testing of family units apprehended at the
Southwest Border. The policy was implemented to determine whether
groups presenting themselves to Border Patrol as ``family units'' were
actually related or simply grouped together by the cartels smuggling
them across. At the time, as many as 30 percent of adults arriving at
the border with minors were not biologically or legally related. CBP
ended this testing last year and the committee was told that testing is
now only done on an ``ad hoc basis.''
Are you aware that your budget request does not ask for any new
funding to support DNA testing?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 62b. Why would you end a vital method of ensuring that
unaccompanied children are not being abused and exploited by the
cartels?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 63. The Department's initial schedule for the
implementation of the Homeland Advanced Recognition Technology (HART)
system, which aims to consolidate all biometric identity information
across the Department, was scheduled to reach full program completion
by June 30, 2024, according to its May 2019 initial plan.
Is the Department still expecting to reach this deadline?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 64. On September 12, 2023, the Government Accountability
Office (GAO) published a report on the implementation of the HART
system, finding that the Department would require a third re-baseline
that would again drive up the costs of the system. The President's
fiscal year 2025 budget request states that DHS will transition from
the Automated Biometric Identification System (IDENT) to the HART
system by fiscal year 2025.
How can the Department ensure the transition occurs on time, given
that it has already faced 3 postponements?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 65. Of the 9 recommendations in the GAO report, all 9
remain open.
Does the Department have any time line in place to implement the
recommendations provided by GAO?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 66. Mr. Secretary, we are expecting a rewrite of
Presidential Policy Directive-21 (PPD-21), which outlines the roles and
responsibilities of each Sector Risk Management Agency (SRMA).
How does the budget reflect new responsibilities that CISA may need
to assume under PPD-21 as an SRMA and as National Coordinator of SRMAs?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 67a. Funding for the National Risk Management Center
(NRMC) was cut by over $20 million in this budget request, including
what appears to be more than half of the funding for risk management
research and development.
Can you please walk us through decisions to reduce funding for the
NRMC, and how it plans to fully execute its priorities: SRMA analytic
support, analytic capability development and integration, and election
security?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 68. Last month, Robert Wells, assistant director of the
Counterterrorism Division at the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
told the committee that the agency believes Iran is capable of a
``variety of attack options against U.S. targets, to include cyber
operations intended to sabotage public and private infrastructure.''
As the world descends into the realm of cyber warfare, how is DHS,
and CISA specifically, ensuring preparedness across critical
infrastructure, both those operated by private and public entities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 69. From 2001 to 2021, Qatar donated $4.7 billion to
institutions of higher education in the United States.
How is DHS working to combat the malign influence of regimes like
Qatar, which is affiliated with Hamas, at institutions of higher
education--especially as this could help spread antisemitism that is
then used to inspire home-grown terrorism that bolsters Iran proxies,
such as Hamas and Hizballah?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 70. The committee heard from Office of Intelligence and
Analysis (I&A) stakeholders in a recent roundtable, in which
bureaucratic barriers to timely info sharing were mentioned.
How is I&A working to coordinate better with State and local
authorities in the wake of uncovered plots by Iran proxies to
assassinate former U.S. national security officials, and other growing
domestic threats from the Islamic Republic?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 71. Over the past several decades, the PRC has taken an
increasingly aggressive posture on the world stage. The PRC has
committed humanitarian violations, supported the traffic of illicit
fentanyl, and established predatory economic practices to edge ahead in
its peer competition with the United States. In response to this
aggression, the United States has drastically scaled back any funding
it provides to the PRC.
At this time, does the Department provide any funding to the PRC?
If so, how much funding is provided and for what reason? If you can't
answer this, will you answer where you think we should be funding the
PRC in any way?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 72a. In late March of this year, numerous hackers linked
to the CCP launched a series of cyber attacks targeting U.S. officials,
journalists, and American and British corporations. This led to the
U.S. Department of Justice charging 7 hackers, all of whom are believed
to be living in China. On March 6, 2024, the New York Post reported
that your Department is spending $3 million on a private law firm to
defend you in the on-going impeachment process. That equals the salary
of roughly 70 new Border Patrol agents. Clearly you believe defending
yourself is more important than defending the border.
Can you confirm that the approximate amount that American taxpayers
are paying for a private law firm to defend you against charges is $3
million?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 72b. Do you deserve such a benefit since you are willfully
and systemically refusing to comply with the law?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 73. What kind of message do you think it sends to your
Border Patrol agents when you're calling for more resources from
Congress, but also spending Department funds for your own political
survival?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 74. Do you take responsibility for the nightmare your
decisions are putting Border Patrol agents, CBP officers, and ICE
Office of Removal Operations (ERO) officers, and HSI special agents
through?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 75. In January 2024, ICE arrested an illegal alien in
Minnesota who belonged to the Somali terrorist group al-Shabaab. The
individual had lived freely in the country for nearly a year after
being caught and released by Border Patrol crossing the border in San
Ysidro, California, in March 2023.
Rep. Pfluger asked you this question last year, but I am going to
ask again because I think the American people deserve an answer: Do you
or do you not have a policy to detain all inadmissible aliens on the
terrorist watch list without exception?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 76. FBI Director Chris Wray hinted before this committee
that there may be more out there--are there others we don't know about
today?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 77. The DHS budget zeroes out funding for Non-Intrusive
Inspection (NII), despite your repeated requests for NII funding in
last year's border security supplemental.
Is stopping the flow of fentanyl a priority for your Department?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 78. Why aren't you asking to fund NII in this year's
official budget?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 79. CISA's tabletop exercises are a core service the
agency provides to the critical infrastructure community to ensure the
security and resilience of our Nation's vital functions. It is also one
of the most in-demand services. However, CISA Exercises appears to have
taken a budget cut in fiscal year 2025.
How is the Department planning to meet the growing demand for
tabletop exercises?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 80. In May 2022, you told a Senate committee that
detention ``has been misused in the immigration system for many
years.'' Do you stand by this statement?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 81. CBP spends millions of dollars on the CBP One app to
fast-track aliens into the interior. In August 2023, it was reported
that the cartels had hijacked the app using Virtual Private Networks
(VPN) to register individuals for appointments even if they were not in
northern Mexico, as your policy requires. The report also notes you
were briefed about these vulnerabilities.
Did you know the cartels were using the app in this manner?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 82. Just a few days prior, you told the House Judiciary
Committee under oath that the app, ``cuts out the smuggling
organizations that impose such tragedy and trauma on vulnerable
individuals purely for the sake of profit,'' but this report shows that
cartels were making money from the app.
Were you lying to the Judiciary Committee? Didn't this app just
open new revenue streams for the cartels?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 83. Are there still vulnerabilities in the app that are
being exploited by the cartels?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 84. Since January 2021, around 2 million illegal alien
got-aways have evaded Border Patrol and entered the country. Most
recently in fiscal year 2023, at least 600,000 illegal alien got-aways
were recorded.
Do you think it's possible that some of these 2 million got-aways
are on the terrorist watch list? [IF NO]--Please explain to the
committee how you know for a fact that none of the 2 million got-aways
are on any terrorist watch list or criminal database?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 85. Does DHS have a plan to locate all the got-aways,
especially violent criminals or those who may be on the terrorist watch
list?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 86. Can you guarantee the American people that known or
suspected terrorists are not amongst these got-aways?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 87. In the fiscal year 2025 budget request, the President
requested $100.5 million for the Science & Technology Directorate's
(S&T) Border Security Thrust Area. Within this program, S&T has led
efforts to develop new digital forensic tools to protect children from
on-line sexual abuse.
Can you elaborate on how the Countering Child Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse program will help protect children from sexual abuse?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 88. The Budget Overview stated that ``New child
exploitation cases are growing exponentially with seized images often
exceeding 900,000 each week.''
As you have worked with HSI, do you know the cause of this
increase?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 89. Are you working on an Artificial Intelligence (AI)
tool to sift through images and evidence, or what kind of technology
are you considering?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 90. How is this program different from the Transnational
Organized Crime and Counter Networks program, which, according to the
Budget Overview, will also target ``crimes of human trafficking, forced
labor, and child sexual exploitation.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 91. The fiscal year 2025 Office of Countering Weapons of
Mass Destruction (CWMD) Budget Overview stated that the Biological
Detection for the 21st Century (BD-21) program was rendered
``obsolete'' after a capabilities assessment.
What did the assessment reveal about the BD-21 program? Why was it
rendered obsolete?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 92. CWMD is transitioning from BD-21 into an Environmental
Biodetection (EBD) Capability Development and Maturation project. The
fiscal year 2025 President's budget requests $7.8 million for this new
project.
How will the EBD program differ from BD-21?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 93. What will CWMD do to ensure that new biodetection
technology is efficiently acquired to improve the detect-to-warn time
line?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 94. Based on your awareness--however limited that may
actually be--of what is going on at our Southwest Border, would you
acknowledge that the Mexican cartels are using the flood of millions of
illegal aliens to essentially facilitate the importation of even more
fentanyl into the United States??
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 95. A GAO report titled ``Office of Intelligence and
Analysis Should Improve Privacy Oversight and Assessment of its
Effectiveness'' states that I&A has not produced or submitted required
reports on the feedback it collects from customers. The Homeland
Security Act of 2002 requires I&A to produce these reports and submit
them to Congress. Furthermore, I&A failed to complete periodic
compliance reviews between January 2017 and September 2022 because
officials stated that they ``did not document all the reviews they said
they completed.'' Finally, GAO stated that ``I&A's performance measures
generally do not align with its strategic goals; therefore, I&A is
unable to assess progress toward its strategic goals.'' I&A is
responsible for providing timely and accurate intelligence to various
DHS components and State, local, Tribal, and territorial partners.
However, we could talk for hours about the failures and inefficiencies
present at I&A.
What are you doing to ensure that these inefficiencies are
addressed during your time as Secretary?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 96. In your fiscal year 2025 budget request for I&A there
is a budget increase to $348,302,000 from fiscal year 2024, which was
$316,640,000.
How will these additional funds assist the Office of Intelligence
and Analysis since they have struggled to execute its statutory
mission?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Questions From Honorable Delia C. Ramirez for Honorable Alejandro
Mayorkas
Question 1. What does USCIS need to continue decreasing backlogs
and fulfilling our promise as a Nation of welcome and possibility?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 2. Do you think the Biden administration's calls for $1.4
billion for Shelter and Services Program (SSP) funding in the
supplemental, and no specific carveout in fiscal year 2025, is
sufficient to meet the needs of impacted border and interior
communities?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 3. What is DHS's plan to better coordinate a unified
integration and care response for new arrivals with other Federal
agencies, State and local governments, and community-based
organizations?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 4. Why does the President's fiscal year 2025 budget
request include $2 billion to sustain 34,000 ICE immigration detention
beds and $360 million for ICE's non-community-based alternatives to
detention models that require intensive supervision and surveillance
versus $15 million for the Case Management Pilot Program? Research
shows community-based case management alternatives to detention are far
more cost-effective, costing less than $50 a day per person versus $164
per ICE detention bed. They are extremely effective, as more than 95
percent of participants comply with immigration requirements. And they
are far less retraumatizing than other alternatives to detention that
function as non-physical prisons and, of course, far more humane than
detention.
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.
Question 5. What percentage of ICE ERO's budget is allocated toward
language services for individuals who are detained and have limited or
no English proficiency?
Answer. Response was not received at the time of publication.

A P P E N D I X  I I

----------

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

______

President Biden's New Plan To Regulate AI
now comes the hard part: congress
By Sara
[emailprotected]

Oct 31, 2023, 2:45pm EDT
Since the widespread release of generative AI systems like ChatGPT,
there's been an increasingly loud call to regulate them, given how
powerful, transformative, and potentially dangerous the technology can
be. President Joe Biden's long-promised Executive Order on the Safe,
Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence
is an attempt to do just that, through the lens of the administration's
stated goals and within the limits of the executive branch's power. The
order, which the president signed on Monday, builds on previous
administration efforts to ensure that powerful AI systems are safe and
being used responsibly.
``This landmark executive order is a testament of what we stand
for: safety, security, trust, openness, American leadership, and the
undeniable rights endowed by a creator that no creation can take
away,'' Biden said in a short speech before signing the order.
The lengthy order is an ambitious attempt to accommodate the hopes
and fears of everyone from tech CEOs to civil rights advocates, while
spelling out how Biden's vision for AI works with his vision for
everything else. It also shows the limits of the executive branch's
power. While the order has more teeth to it than the voluntary
commitments Biden has secured from some of the biggest AI companies,
many of its provisions don't (and can't) have the force of law behind
them, and their effectiveness will largely depend on how the agencies
named within the order carry them out. They may also depend on if those
agencies' abilities to make such regulations are challenged in court.
Broadly summarized, the order directs various Federal agencies and
departments that oversee everything from housing to health to national
security to create standards and regulations for the use or oversight
of AI. These include guidance on the responsible use of AI in areas
like criminal justice, education, health care, housing, and labor, with
a focus on protecting Americans' civil rights and liberties. The
agencies and departments will also develop guidelines that AI
developers must adhere to as they build and deploy this technology, and
dictate how the government uses AI. There will be new reporting and
testing requirements for the AI companies behind the largest and most
powerful models. The responsible use (and creation) of safer AI systems
is encouraged as much as possible.
The Biden administration made sure to frame the order as a way to
balance AI's potential risks with its rewards: ``It's the next step in
an aggressive strategy to do everything on all fronts to harness the
benefits of AI and mitigate the risks,'' White House deputy chief of
staff Bruce Reed said in a statement.
What the order does . . .
The order invokes the Defense Production Act to require companies
to notify the Federal Government when training an AI model that poses a
serious risk to national security or public health and safety. They
must also share results of their risk assessment, or red team, testing
with the government. The Department of Commerce will determine the
technical thresholds that models must meet for the rule to apply to
them, likely limiting it to the models with the most computing power.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology will also set
red team testing standards that these companies must follow, and the
Departments of Energy and Homeland Security will evaluate various risks
that could be posed by those models, including the threat that they
could be employed to help make biological or nuclear weapons. The DHS
will also establish an AI Safety and Security Board comprised of
experts from the private and public sector, which will advise the
government on the use of AI in ``critical infrastructure.'' Notably,
these rules largely apply to systems that are developed going forward--
not what's already out there.
Fears that AI could be used to create chemical, biological,
radioactive, or nuclear (CBRN) weapons are addressed in a few ways. The
DHS will evaluate the potential for AI to be used to produce CBRN
threats (as well as its potential to counter them), and the DOD will
produce a study that looks at AI biosecurity risks and comes up with
recommendations to mitigate them.
Of particular concern here is the production of synthetic nucleic
acids--genetic material--using AI. In synthetic biology, researchers
and companies can order synthetic nucleic acids from commercial
providers, which they can then use to genetically engineer products.
The fear is that an AI model could be deployed to plot out, say, the
genetic makeup of a dangerous virus, which could be synthesized using
commercial genetic material in a lab.
The Office of Science and Technology Policy will work with various
departments to create a framework for screening monitoring synthetic
nucleic acid procurement, the DHS will ensure it's being adhered to,
and the Commerce Department will also create rules and best practices
for screening synthetic nucleic acid sequence providers to ensure that
they're following that framework. Research projects that include
synthetic nucleic acids must ensure that providers adhere to the
framework before they can receive funding from Federal agencies.
The order has provisions for preserving Americans' privacy,
although it acknowledges that the ability to do so is limited without a
Federal data privacy law and calls on Congress to pass one. Good luck
with that; while Congress has put forward various data privacy bills
over the years and the need for such regulations seems more than clear
by now, it has yet to get close to passing any of them.
Another concern about AI is its ability to produce deepfakes: text,
images, and sounds that are impossible to tell apart from those created
by humans. Biden noted in his speech that he's been fooled by deepfakes
of himself. The EO calls for the Department of Commerce to create and
issue guidance on best practices to detect AI-generated content. But
that call is a far cry from having the technology to actually do so,
something that has eluded even the leading companies in the space.
. . . and why it's not enough
Even before the order, Biden had taken various actions related to
AI, like the White House's Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights and
securing voluntary safety commitments from tech companies that develop
or use AI. While the new Biden EO is being hailed as the ``first action
of its kind'' in US government history, the Trump administration issued
an AI EO of its own back in 2019, which laid out the government's
investment in and standards for the use of AI. But that, of course,
predated the widespread release of powerful generative AI models that
has brought increased attention to--and concern about--the use of AI.
That said, the order is not meant to be the only action the
government takes. The legislative branch has work to do, too. Senate
Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, whom Biden singled out for praise during
the order signing, attempted to take the reins in April with the
release of a framework for AI legislation; he's also organized closed
meetings with tech CEOs to give them a private forum for input on how
they should be regulated. The Senate Judiciary subcommittee on privacy,
technology, and the law put forward a bipartisan framework in
September.
Rep Don Beyer (D-VA), vice chair of the House's AI Caucus, said in
a statement that the order was a ``comprehensive strategy for
responsible innovation,'' but that it was now ``necessary for Congress
to step up and legislate strong standards for equity, bias, risk
management, and consumer protection.''
While the Biden administration repeatedly claimed that this is the
most any government has done to ensure AI safety, several countries
have also taken action, most notably in the European Union. The EU's AI
Act has been in the works since 2021, though it had to be revised to
incorporate generative AI and the US reportedly isn't thrilled with it.
China created rules for the use of generative AI last summer. The G7 is
currently figuring out a framework for AI rules and laws, and just
announced that they've reached an agreement on guiding principles and a
voluntary code of conduct. Vice President Kamala Harris will be in
England this week for an international summit on regulating the
technology.
As for whether the order managed to be all things to all people,
the general response seems to be cautious optimism, with the
recognition that the order has limits and is only a start. Microsoft
president Brad Smith called it ``another critical step forward,'' while
the digital rights advocacy group Fight for the Future said in a
statement that it was a ``positive step,'' but that it was waiting to
see if and how agencies carried the mandates out.
``We face a genuine inflection point,'' Biden said in his speech,
``one of those moments where the decisions we make in the very near
term are going to set the course for the next decades . . . There's no
greater change that I can think of in my life than AI presents.''

[all]
