- OPEN BORDERS, CLOSED CASE: SECRETARY MAYORKAS' DERELICTION OF DUTY ON THE BORDER CRISIS

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

OPEN BORDERS, CLOSED CASE: SECRETARY
MAYORKAS' DERELICTION OF DUTY ON THE
BORDER CRISIS

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

JUNE 14, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-17

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
54-093 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2023

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk
Sean Jones, Legislative Clerk

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee of Homeland
Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     9
Prepared Statement.............................................    11

Witnesses

Mr. Chad Wolf, Executive Director & Chief Strategy Officer,
American First Policy Institute; Former Acting Secretary of
Homeland Security:
Oral Statement.................................................    14
Prepared Statement.............................................    15
Mr. Joseph B. Edlow, Managing Member, The Edlow Group; Former
Acting Director for U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services:
Oral Statement.................................................    20
Prepared Statement.............................................    22
Mr. Rodney S. Scott, Senior Distinguished Fellow for Border
Security, Texas Public Policy Foundation; Former Chief of U.S.
Border Patrol:
Oral Statement.................................................    29
Prepared Statement.............................................    31
Ms. Eleanor Acer, Director, Refugee Protection, Human Rights
First:
Oral Statement.................................................    34
Prepared Statement.............................................    36

For the Record

The Honorable Mark E. Green, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee of Homeland
Security:
DHS Order of Secession.........................................    12
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
GAO Decision, August 14, 2020..................................    48
GAO Decision, August 21, 2020..................................    54
Article........................................................    56
The Honorable J. Luis Correa, a Representative in Congress From
the State of California:
Press Release..................................................    59
The Honorable Marjorie Taylor Greene, a Representative in
Congress From the State of Georgia:
Memo from Customs and Border Protection........................    79
The Honorable Yvette D. Clarke, a Representative in Congress From
the State of New York:
Report From the Haitian Bridge Alliance........................    86

OPEN BORDERS, CLOSED CASE: SECRETARY MAYORKAS' DERELICTION OF DUTY ON
THE BORDER CRISIS

----------

Wednesday, June 14, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Washington, DC.
The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:02 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Mark E. Green
[Chairman of the committee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Green, McCaul, Higgins, Guest,
Bishop, Gimenez, Pfluger, Garbarino, Taylor Greene, Gonzales,
LaLota, Ezell, D'Esposito, Lee, Luttrell, Strong, Brecheen,
Crane, Thompson, Jackson Lee, Payne, Swalwell, Correa, Carter,
Thanedar, Magaziner, Ivey, Goldman, Garcia, Ramirez, Menendez,
Clarke, and Titus.
Chairman Green. The Committee on Homeland Security will
come to order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the committee in
recess at any point.
Without objection, the gentlewoman from Texas, Ms. De La
Cruz, is permitted to sit on the dais and ask questions to the
witness.
Before I start my opening comments today, I would like to
make a few administrative notes.
First, and most importantly, today is the United States
Army's birthday. We have purchased a birthday cake to the
United States Army and it is in the joint room for both
parties, Members, and staff to enjoy. Please, as you are having
a piece of cake, reflect on the 248 years of men and women who
have served our great Nation in the United States Army.
Also, before we start today, I want to point out that this
is an oversight hearing, and it is the beginning of several
that will follow. I am guessing that the party that holds the
White House will differ in their opinions to the party not in
the White House. That is OK. I am certain we can all conduct
ourselves without disrupting the decorum of this committee by
using unparliamentary words to attack an individual's
character. You can attack behavior, you can attack decisions,
you can engage in debate, you can say doing this or that makes
no sense, you can even say something is stupid, but you just
can't say that an individual is stupid. I understand that it is
a subtle difference, but it has been the standard of this
committee for many Chairmen before me and it will be enforced
by me too.
Last, next week we will hold our first joint meeting of all
the cyber-related subcommittees. The intent is to begin a
paradigm shift in how we approach cybersecurity in a
bipartisan, multi-committee fashion. We need a whole-of-
Government approach. We need to break down the silos in
Government and in Congress, industry, and especially the
administrations. Cyber folks love this idea. All Members of our
Cyber Subcommittee should attend. It is a breakfast and we will
host some of the Nation's brightest cybersecurity experts. I
encourage all Members of the Committee of Homeland Security to
engage and attend. The cyber border is just as important as any
other border.
In July we are going to hold--another administrative note
here--we are going to hold a substantive markup that we also
hope will be bipartisan, tentatively aiming for the first week
back in session in July. We need to move early in July to deal
with the reauthorization of the Chemical Facility Anti-
Terrorism Standards Statute, or CFATS. It is my hope we can do
this and other legislation in a bipartisan way.
Now for the business of the day. The purpose of this
hearing is to receive testimony on Secretary Mayorkas'
dereliction of duty.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
On February 2, 2021, Alejandro Mayorkas was sworn in to be
the United States Secretary of Homeland Security. He swore an
oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United
States and faithfully discharged the duties of his office.
Since then, the American people have suffered from a national
security, humanitarian, and public safety disaster at the
Southwest Border. A disaster that has turned every city into a
border city, and every State into a border State.
In just over 2 years, under Secretary Mayorkas, more people
have entered our country illegally than in the 12 years of the
Obama and Trump administrations combined. This includes more
than 5.2 million apprehensions at the Southwest Border, more
than 6.1 million apprehensions, factoring in America's Northern
and Maritime Borders, and at least 1.5 million known gotaways,
illegal aliens who slip across our border without being caught
and are now at large in the United States. This should terrify
every American.
Based on Border Patrol statistics of criminal aliens they
do catch, those gotaways could include as many as 1,180 aliens
guilty of DUIs, 285 guilty of sexual assault, and more than 3
dozen guilty of murder. Last fall, an illegal alien struck and
killed Florida Sheriff's Deputy Mike Hartwick before fleeing
the scene. The alien had entered the country illegally in
October 2021 in Texas, and was sent back to Mexico. But at some
point reentered our country as a gotaway.
An unknown number of national security threats are pouring
across our border each and every day. Since October of last
year, Border Patrol has reported nearly 10,000 arrests of
Chinese nationals that have illegally crossed the Southwest
Border, and the number continues to increase every month. I
have confirmed that some of the Chinese nationals coming in
have ties to the Chinese Communist Party and the People's
Liberation Army. They have been released into the United
States.
That is all I can share at this point. We will be holding a
Classified briefing in the near future on this for all Members.
DHS has no way to verify the identities and backgrounds of
these individuals. They are almost always quickly released into
the interior of our country to do who knows what. This is the
height of madness. Releasing unvetted individuals from our
Nation's most dangerous adversaries into our local communities.
That is what Secretary Mayorkas is doing with each and every
one of these individuals Mayorkas is putting our national
security at risk. U.S. law states that one of the foremost
duties of the Secretary of Homeland Security is to control and
guard the borders of the United States, but Secretary Mayorkas
has surrendered control of our Southwest Border to the Mexican
cartels. Today nothing comes in or out without the cartel's
knowledge and tacit approval. They have seized full control,
pushing not just historic numbers of illegal aliens across, but
record amounts of drugs like fentanyl, which killed more than
71,000 Americans in 2021. A horrific new record. Fentanyl is
now the leading cause of death for Americans ages 18 to 49.
American children are attending the funerals of their friends
who have died of fentanyl poisoning. According to one recent
study, more than 1,500 kids under the age of 20 died from
fentanyl poisoning just in 2021, more than 4 times as many as
in 2018.
Secretary Mayorkas has put all families at risk, even
families visiting from overseas. The Lavenir family from France
tragically lost their 19-month-old daughter Enora to fentanyl
poisoning when on vacation in Florida. This beautiful little
girl was exposed to fentanyl left behind by the previous
occupant of their rental unit. How can any family in America
feel safe when a stay in a hotel or an Airbnb could end up with
the death of a child?
The devastating consequences don't stop there. Some other
highlights of the Secretary's open borders policy include the
following: more than 350,000 encounters of unaccompanied
minors. The administration has since lost control of at least
85,000 of these children. Tragically, many of them are being
trafficked, abused, and exploited. According to a damning New
York Times investigation, many of these children are being
forced to do dangerous jobs that violate the U.S. child labor
laws, all because of Mayorkas' decision to stop vetting the
sponsors. From October 1 to 2020 to March 2023, Border Patrol
recorded nearly 28,000 arrests of illegal aliens with criminal
backgrounds, approximately 6,000 more total arrests than the
previous 4 physical years combined. These numbers do not
include data from States like Texas, which has apprehended
hundreds of thousands of illegal aliens and recorded more than
27,000 arrests of criminal illegal aliens itself. In fiscal
year 2021, Border Patrol discovered 568 dead migrants at the
Southwest Border, nearly double the 254 found in fiscal year
2020. In fiscal year 2022, the number jumped to 853. More than
1,700 migrants have died on U.S. soil while trying to enter
this country illegally on Mayorkas' watch--people he encouraged
to make the journey. Mayor Adams of New York recently stated
that more than half of the hotel rooms in New York City are now
filled with illegal aliens. Cities like Chicago are putting
illegal aliens ahead of their own citizens, allocating millions
of dollars to house and care for those arriving to their city,
infuriating residents and neighbors like South Shore, who won't
get those resources. In May, Chicago Mayor Lightfoot stated, we
simply have no more shelters. Medicaid spending on emergency
medical services for illegal aliens more than doubled in fiscal
year 2020 to fiscal year 2021, from around $3 billion to more
than $7 billion. This suffering and death falls squarely on the
shoulders of the Secretary of the Department of Homeland
Security, Alejandro Mayorkas, a man who has been derelict in
his duty to protect America.
Since his first day in office, Secretary Mayorkas has
intentionally undermined America's immigration laws and
meaningful border security enforcement and in its place,
implemented an extreme agenda of open borders. The vast
majority of those crossing our borders illegally are coming not
because of COVID-19, climate change, or because CBP doesn't
have enough funding. They are coming for economic reasons, and
they are coming in record numbers because Mayorkas left the
door open, unlocked. Those individuals typically possess no
legitimate claim to asylum, and under prior administrations,
both Democrat and Republican, most would have been quickly
deported. The difference now, Mayorkas and his policies. Yet
not once has he taken responsibility for this mess.
The mountain of evidence this committee has gathered proves
that Alejandro Mayorkas has been derelict in his duty as the
Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security. Upon assuming
office, he immediately went to work reversing and tearing down
the effective border policies of the last two administrations,
replacing them with an open borders policy of mass catch-and-
release. He has also repeatedly violated laws passed by this
Congress. To date, our investigation has uncovered nearly a
dozen violations of statutes and court orders. Consider just a
few examples. The evidence shows that Mayorkas has repeatedly
violated the law that prohibits mass parole of aliens into the
country. The statute makes clear parole is only to be granted
on a case-by-case and temporary basis for an urgent
humanitarian reason or significant public benefit. Instead,
Mayorkas has done the opposite, directing and overseeing a
release of hundreds of thousands of aliens via mass parole in
just 2 years through various programs, including, more
recently, his CBP One App. The evidence also shows Mayorkas has
violated the clear language of the Immigration and Nationality
Act, requiring illegal aliens to be detained while their claims
are resolved. At his direction, millions of illegal aliens have
been released into the country through a program called
Alternatives to Detention, via other mass parole, or with a
notice to appear in court. DHS's own data shows that when
illegal aliens are not detained at all, or are only detained
for a short time, then released into the interior, they are
almost never removed.
Mayorkas and his defenders like to claim that we simply
don't have detention space for the historic number of illegal
aliens being drawn to the border by his disastrous policies,
which is the epitome of circular reasoning. You don't get to
break the law in order to fix the consequences of your reckless
decisions.
The evidence further shows Mayorkas has also violated the
laws regarding the deportation of illegal aliens. Illegally
entering the United States is a criminal deportable offense.
Mayorkas has decided enforcing that law is just optional.
Passed by Congress but he can just make it optional. First, he
has issued guidance making it harder for ICE to detain and
deport the vast majority of illegal aliens in this country. As
a result, deportations have plummeted, and the number of
illegal aliens on ICE's non-detained docket has grown by more
than 2 million people in just 2 years. It gets worse. Mayorkas
has flagrantly violated the laws requiring him to detain
criminal illegal aliens. His own acting ICE director, Tae
Johnson, told Congress in April that ICE had actually been
releasing hundreds of criminal illegal aliens into the country,
into our communities.
When I last checked, the United States was a Nation of
laws. We expect our leaders to follow the laws that Congress
passes, and those who fail to do so should be exposed and face
the consequences. The Constitution is clear. Congress writes
the laws, and officers like Mr. Mayorkas are sworn to enforce
them. No one is above the law, not even the Secretary of
Homeland Security. His failure to uphold his oath and follow
the law has been the driving force behind the disaster at the
border.
Mayorkas has consistently made statements to Congress and
the American people that demonstrate either dishonesty or gross
incompetence, perhaps even both. He said at least 19 separate
times some variation of the border is secure, even telling
Members of this committee in 2021 that the border was no less
secure than previous. He also claimed to have operational
control of the border per the definition of the Secure Fence
Act of 2006. Border Patrol Chief Raul Ortiz confirmed to this
committee in March that DHS, in fact, did not have operational
control of the border. Only after this did Mayorkas backtrack
and tell the Senate later in March that no Secretary has ever
had such control per the definition.
Mayorkas has claimed his policies are not responsible for
the crisis, but they are. He claimed he was handed a dismantled
system--he wasn't. He claimed that DHS is promptly expelling
illegal aliens--they aren't. Our investigation has unearthed
nearly 80 occasions on which Mayorkas has been outright
dishonest or misleading, and other instances in which he has
displayed unacceptable ignorance about the basic aspects of the
on-going crisis.
Dereliction of duty is a serious matter. I spent 24 years
in the Army, I know what it means. It means someone has either
wilfully or negligently failed to do their duty or has done
such a poor job that there is no reasonable excuse. When that
individual is the Cabinet Secretary who swore to defend the
Constitution in the homeland, the charge is even more serious.
Again, today marks the United States Army's 248th birthday.
As a West Point graduate, as I said, I served 24 years. I know
what dereliction of duty is when I see it and as a commissioned
officer, I was responsible for holding those guilty of it
accountable. There is zero doubt in my mind that Secretary
Mayorkas has been derelict of his duty.
As the people's elected representatives, this committee has
a duty to investigate Mayorkas and bring any wrongdoings to the
American people. What we have found thus far is damning. To
date, our investigation has discovered that he has violated the
laws of the United States, abused the authority of his office,
and betrayed the public trust through repeated dishonest and
misleading statements to Congress and the American people,
while also demonstrating gross incompetence. I cannot imagine
why President Biden, who is charged with defending the American
people as Commander-in-Chief, would continue to tolerate this.
Our investigation will show the President why he should
fire Mayorkas immediately or own this failure himself.
This isn't about politics or policy or disagreements, it is
about law and order and the safety of the American people. It
is about whether a Cabinet Secretary has followed the law,
upheld his oath, and been faithful to the public trust. The
American people want answers to this crisis. They deserve the
truth. Unfortunately, Alejandro Mayorkas has been derelict in
his duty as the United States Secretary of Homeland Security.
The cartels are thriving, migrants are suffering, and Americans
are dying. Their blood is on Secretary Mayorkas' hands. I hope
every Member of this committee works together to fix this
disaster.
[The statement of Chairman Green follows:]
Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, M.D.
setting the stage
On February 2, 2021, Alejandro Mayorkas was sworn in as the United
States Secretary of Homeland Security. He swore an oath to support and
defend the Constitution of the United States and faithfully discharge
the duties of his office. Since then, the American people have suffered
from a national security, humanitarian, and public safety disaster at
the Southwest Border--a disaster that has turned every city into a
border city and every State into a border State.
record crossings and consequences
In just over 2 years under Secretary Mayorkas, more people have
entered our country illegally than in the 12 years of the Obama and
Trump administrations combined. This includes:

More than 5.2 million apprehensions at the Southwest Border;

More than 6.1 million apprehensions factoring in America's
Northern and Maritime Borders; and

At least 1.5 million known gotaways--illegal aliens who slip
across our border without being caught and are now at large in
the United States.
This should terrify every American.
Based on Border Patrol's statistics of criminal aliens they DO
catch, those gotaways could include as many as 1,180 aliens guilty of
DUIs, 285 guilty of sexual assault, and more than 3 dozen guilty of
murder.
Last fall, an illegal alien struck and killed Florida sheriff's
deputy Mike Hartwick before fleeing the scene. The alien had entered
the country illegally in October 2021 in Texas and was sent back to
Mexico, but at some point re-entered the country as a gotaway.
An unknown number of national security threats are pouring across
our border each and every day. Since October of last year, Border
Patrol has reported nearly 10,000 arrests of Chinese nationals that
have illegally crossed the Southwest Border, and the number continues
to increase every month. I've confirmed that some of the Chinese
nationals coming in have ties to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and
the People's Liberation Army (PLA).
That's all I can share at this point, but we'll be holding a
Classified briefing in the near future on this for all Members. DHS has
no way to verify the identities and backgrounds of these people. They
are almost always quickly released into the interior of our country to
do who knows what.
This is the height of madness--releasing unvetted individuals from
our Nation's most dangerous adversaries into our local communities.
That's what Secretary Mayorkas is doing.
With each and every one of these individuals, Mayorkas is putting
our national security at risk.
cartels and fentanyl
U.S. law states that one of the foremost duties of the Secretary of
Homeland Security is to control and guard the borders of the United
States. But Secretary Mayorkas has surrendered control of our Southwest
Border to the Mexican cartels. Today, nothing comes in or out without
the cartels' knowledge and tacit approval.
They have seized full control, pushing not just historic numbers of
illegal aliens across, but record amounts of drugs like fentanyl, which
killed more than 71,000 Americans in 2021--a horrific new record.
Fentanyl is now the leading cause of death for Americans ages 18-49.
American children are attending the funerals of their friends who have
died of fentanyl poisoning. According to one recent study, more than
1,500 kids under the age of 20 died from fentanyl poisonings in 2021,
more than four times as many as 2018.
Secretary Mayorkas has put all families at risk--even families
visiting from overseas. The Lavenir family from France tragically lost
their 19-month-old daughter Enora to fentanyl poisoning when on
vacation in Florida. This beautiful little girl was exposed to fentanyl
left behind by a previous occupant of their rental unit.
How can any family in America feel safe when a stay in a hotel or
Airbnb could end up in the death of their child!
other consequences
The devastating consequences do not stop there. Some other
``highlights'' of this Secretary's open borders policies include the
following:

More than 350,000 encounters of unaccompanied minors. The
administration has since lost track of at least 85,000 of these
children. Tragically, many of these children are being
trafficked, abused, and exploited.

According to a damning New York Times investigation many of
these children are being forced to do dangerous jobs that
violate U.S. child labor laws. All because of Mayorkas'
decision to stop vetting sponsors.

From October 1, 2020, to March 2023, Border Patrol recorded
nearly 28,000 arrests of illegal aliens with criminal
backgrounds, approximately 6,000 more total arrests than the
previous 4 fiscal years combined.

These numbers do not include data from States like Texas,
which has apprehended hundreds of thousands of illegal aliens,
and recorded more than 27,000 arrests of criminal illegal
aliens itself.

In fiscal year 2021, Border Patrol discovered 568 dead
migrants at the Southwest Border, nearly double the 254 found
in fiscal year 2020.

In fiscal year 2022, the number jumped to 853. More than
1,700 migrants have died on U.S. soil while trying to enter the
county illegally on Mayorkas' watch--people he encouraged to
make the journey.

Mayor Adams of New York City recently stated that more than
HALF of the hotel rooms in New York City are now filled with
illegal aliens.

Cities like Chicago are putting illegal aliens ahead of
their own citizens, allocating millions of dollars to house and
care for those arriving in the city, infuriating residents of
neighborhoods like South Shore who won't get those resources.
In May, Chicago Mayor Lightfoot stated, ``We simply have no
more shelters.''

Medicaid spending on emergency medical services for illegal
aliens more than doubled in from fiscal year 2020 to fiscal
year 2021, from around $3 billion to more than $7 billion.
mayorkas is responsible
This suffering and death fall squarely on the shoulders of the
Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security--Alejandro Mayorkas, a
man who has been derelict in his duty.
Since his first day in office, Secretary Mayorkas has intentionally
undermined America's immigration laws and ended meaningful border
security enforcement, and in its place implemented an extreme agenda of
open borders.
The vast majority of those crossing our borders illegally are
coming not because of COVID-19, ``climate change,'' or because CBP
doesn't have enough funding.
They're coming for economic reasons, and they're coming in record
numbers because Mayorkas has left the doors of our country unlocked and
wide open.
These individuals typically possess no legitimate claim to asylum
and under prior administrations--both Democrat and Republican--most
would have been quickly deported.
The difference now?
Mayorkas and his policies. Yet, not once has he taken
responsibility for this mess.
mayorkas' policies/violations of law
The mountain of evidence this committee has gathered proves
Alejandro Mayorkas has been derelict in his duty as the Secretary of
the Department of Homeland Security.
Upon assuming office, he immediately went to work reversing and
tearing down the effective border security policies of the last two
administrations, replacing them with an open-borders policy of mass
``catch and release.''
He has also repeatedly violated laws duly passed by Congress.
To date, our investigation has uncovered nearly a dozen violations
of statutes and court orders.
Consider just a few examples:
(1) The evidence shows Mayorkas has repeatedly violated the law
that prohibits mass parole of aliens into the country. The
statute makes clear parole is only to be granted on a case-by-
case and temporary basis, for an urgent humanitarian reason or
significant public benefit.
Instead, however, Mayorkas has done the opposite, directing and
overseeing the release of hundreds of thousands of aliens via
mass parole in just 2 years through various programs, including
most recently his CBP One mobile app scheme.
(2) The evidence also shows Mayorkas has violated the clear
language of the Immigration and Nationality Act requiring
illegal aliens to be detained while their claims are resolved.
(3) At his direction, millions of illegal aliens have been released
into the country through a program called ``Alternatives to
Detention,'' via other mass parole, or with a notice to appear
in court. And DHS's own data shows that when illegal aliens are
not detained at all or only detained for a short time and then
released into the interior, they are almost never removed.
Mayorkas and his defenders like to claim that we simply don't have
detention space for the historic number of illegal aliens being
drawn to the border by his disastrous policies, which is the
epitome of circular reasoning. You don't get to break the law
in order to fix the consequences of your reckless policy
decisions.
(4) The evidence further shows Mayorkas has also violated the laws
regarding the deportation of illegal aliens. Illegally entering
the United States is a criminal, deportable offense. Mayorkas
has decided enforcing that law is optional.
First, he has issued guidance making it harder for ICE to detain
and deport the vast majority of illegal aliens in this country.
As a result, deportations have plummeted, and the number of illegal
aliens on ICE's Non-Detained Docket has grown by more than 2
million in just 2 years.
It gets worse. Mayorkas has flagrantly violated the laws requiring
him to detain criminal illegal aliens. His own acting ICE
director, Tae Johnson, told Congress in April that ICE had
actually been releasing hundreds of criminal illegal aliens
into the country! Into our local communities!
When last I checked, the United States was a Nation of laws. We
expect our leaders to follow the laws that Congress passes, and those
who fail to do so should be exposed and face consequences. The
Constitution is clear--Congress writes the laws, and officers like
Mayorkas are sworn to enforce them. No one is above the law, not even
the Secretary of Homeland Security.
His failure to uphold his oath and follow the law has been the
driving force behind the disaster at the border.
mayorkas has been dishonest
Mayorkas has consistently made statements to Congress and the
American people that demonstrate either dishonesty or gross
incompetence. Perhaps even both.
He has said at least 19 separate times some variation of ``the
border is secure,'' even telling a Member of this committee in 2021
that the border is ``no less secure than it was previously.''
He has also claimed to have operational control of the border per
the definition of the Secure Fence Act of 2006. Border Patrol Chief
Raul Ortiz confirmed to this committee in March that DHS in fact did
NOT have operational control of the border.
Only after this did Mayorkas backtrack and tell the Senate later in
March that no Secretary has ever had such control per that definition.
Mayorkas has claimed his policies are not responsible for the
crisis--THEY ARE.
He claimed he was handed a ``dismantled'' system--HE WASN'T. And he
claimed that DHS is promptly expelling illegal aliens--THEY AREN'T.
Our investigation has unearthed nearly 80 occasions on which
Mayorkas has been outright dishonest or misleading, and other instances
in which he has displayed unacceptable ignorance about basic aspects of
the on-going crisis.
conclusion
Dereliction of duty is a serious matter. It means someone has
either willfully or negligently failed to do their duty or has done
such a poor job that there is no reasonable excuse.
When that individual is the Cabinet Secretary who swore an oath to
defend the Constitution and the homeland, the charge is even more
serious.
Today marks the United States Army's 248th Birthday. As a West
Point graduate, I proudly served for 24 years.
I know dereliction of duty when I see it, and as a commissioned
officer, I was responsible for holding those guilty of it accountable.
There is ZERO doubt in my mind that Secretary Mayorkas has been
derelict in his duty!
As the people's elected representatives, this committee has a duty
to investigate Mayorkas and bring any wrongdoings to the American
people. What we have found thus far is damning.
To date, our investigation has discovered that he has violated the
laws of the United States, abused the authority of his office, and
betrayed the public trust through repeated dishonest and misleading
statements to Congress and the American people, while also
demonstrating gross incompetence throughout his public statements.
I cannot imagine why President Biden, who is charged with defending
the American people as commander-in-chief, would continue to tolerate
this.
Our investigation will show the President why he should fire
Mayorkas immediately or own this failure personally.
This isn't about politics or policy disagreements. It's about law
and order, and the safety of the American people.
It's about whether a Cabinet Secretary has followed the law, upheld
his oath, and been faithful to the public trust.
The American people want answers to this crisis. They deserve the
truth.
Unfortunately, Alejandro Mayorkas has been derelict in his duty as
the United States Secretary of Homeland Security.
The cartels are thriving. Migrants are suffering. And Americans are
dying. Their blood is on Secretary Mayorkas' hands.
I hope every Member of this committee works together to fix this
disaster.

Chairman Green. I now recognize the Ranking Member, the
gentleman from Mississippi, Mr. Thompson, for his opening
statement.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Chairman, Americans have gotten used to political
theater from Congressional Republicans, but this hearing is a
new low. You don't have to look further than the title to know
that the hearing is a sham. Calling a hearing and saying case
closed before you have heard any testimony is not legitimate
oversight. It is obvious this hearing isn't really about border
security. It is not even really about Secretary Alejandro
Mayorkas or the Department of Homeland Security. It is about
partisan politics. It is about House Republican leadership
catering to its most extreme MAGA members who want to impeach
someone, anyone at all. It is about trying to make good on GOP
backroom deals to elect a Speaker, raise the debt ceiling, and
stave off of mutiny in the Republican ranks.
If the hearing title alone doesn't make it obvious, just
look at who the Majority has invited to testify. The last time
this committee called Mr. Wolf to testify, he was serving in a
role as Acting Secretary of Homeland Security. He was asked to
testify to the committee's annual hearing on threats to the
homeland, but he refused to appear. He was subpoenaed and
ultimately defied that subpoena, Mr. Wolf was a no-show at a
hearing to inform Congress on terrorist threats facing our
Nation. But he comes to the Hill twice in the last week to
appear before the Judiciary Committee and here today to engage
in political gamesmanship. Perhaps Mr. Wolf is also trying to
distract from his abysmal tenure at DHS, a tenure that included
the Department's intentionally taking children from their
parents at the border, changing and delaying a report on
Russian interference in the 2020 election, and misusing DHS
personnel to crack down on peaceful protesters in Portland. As
it turns out, he was even serving unlawfully as Acting
Secretary, having been appointed outside the Department's
succession orders. In fact, Mr. Wolf was the fifth person to
run DHS and the second to do so unlawfully in less than 3 years
under President Trump. A stark reminder of the chaos and
dysfunction of that administration.
I expect that today's Republicans will try to rewrite the
history of the Trump administration and its border security and
immigration policies. But the truth is, under the last
administration, DHS took children from their parents, forced
individuals fleeing violence and persecution to wait in Mexico,
and expelled unaccompanied children at our border. The truth
is, the last administration dismantled our lawful immigration
system to the point where it could barely function. The
policies were not only terribly cruel, but also incredibly
ineffective. They didn't address fundamental border security
challenges, fix our broken immigration system, or respond to
the on-going global migration phenomenon. Instead, they made
the problem worse. For example, the number of encounters at the
border jumped sharply after President Trump implemented Title
42, and they made vulnerable people suffer. That is the mess
the Biden administration inherited. That is what Secretary
Mayorkas has had to deal with since taking office.
Mr. Chairman, legitimate oversight follows the facts. The
facts are that the Biden administration's plan to address these
challenges are working. The number of Border Patrol encounters
have plummeted by 70 percent since the Biden administration
ended Title 42 last month, the number of overall border
encounters have dropped by 50 percent in that time, due in
large part to DHS's hard work under Secretary Mayorkas'
leadership. The Biden administration has re-established lawful
pathways for migrants to access the asylum system. It has also
utilized parole on a case-by-case basis for those fleeing
certain totalitarian or communist regimes in our hemisphere. At
the same time, it has made clear that our borders are not open
and those arriving outside lawful pathways will be sent home.
Recent deportation and removal numbers reflect that hard
reality for many.
Unlike its predecessor, the Biden administration is
enforcing border and immigration laws in an orderly, humane
way, consistent with precedents set by prior administrations of
both parties. Some may not like that, but those are policy
differences and nothing more. You don't impeach a Cabinet
Secretary because you don't like their policies and you
certainly don't impeach a Cabinet Secretary to appease extreme
members of your political party. Secretary Mayorkas is
fulfilling his duty under the law and to the American people.
If the Republican Majority doesn't like what he is doing, they
should work with Democrats to pass bipartisan border security
and immigration reform legislation. Apparently, they prefer
political theater and sloppy, inaccurate, ``report'' instead.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thompson follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
June 14, 2023
Americans have gotten used to political theater from Congressional
Republicans, but this hearing is a new low. You don't have to look
further than the title to know this hearing is a sham. Calling a
hearing and saying ``case closed'' before you've heard any testimony is
not legitimate oversight. It's obvious this hearing isn't really about
border security. It's not even really about Secretary Alejandro
Mayorkas or the Department of Homeland Security. It's about partisan
politics.
It's about House Republican leadership catering to its most extreme
MAGA Members, who want to impeach someone--anyone at all. It's about
trying to make good on GOP backroom deals to elect a Speaker, raise the
debt ceiling, and stave off a mutiny in the Republican ranks.
If the hearing title alone doesn't make that obvious, just look at
who the Majority has invited to testify. The last time this committee
called Mr. Wolf to testify, he was serving in the role of Acting
Secretary of Homeland Security. He was asked to testify at the
committee's annual hearing on threats to the homeland, but he refused
to appear. He was subpoenaed and ultimately defied that subpoena.
Mr. Wolf was a no-show at a hearing to inform Congress on terrorist
threats facing our Nation. But he's come to the Hill twice in the last
week to appear before the Judiciary Committee and here today to engage
in political gamesmanship. Perhaps Mr. Wolf is also trying to distract
from his abysmal tenure at DHS--a tenure that included:

the Department intentionally taking children from their
parents at the border,

changing and delaying a report on Russian interference in
the 2020 election,

and misusing DHS personnel to crack down on peaceful
protestors in Portland.
As it turns out, he was serving unlawfully as Acting Secretary,
having been appointed outside the Department's succession order.
In fact, Mr. Wolf was the fifth person to run DHS and the second to
do so unlawfully in less than 3 years under President Trump--a stark
reminder of the chaos and dysfunction of that administration.
I expect that today Republicans will try to rewrite the history of
the Trump administration and its border security and immigration
policies. But the truth is, under the last administration, DHS took
children from their parents; forced individuals fleeing violence and
persecution to wait in Mexico; and expelled unaccompanied children at
our border. The truth is, the last administration dismantled our lawful
immigration system to the point where it could barely function.
These policies were not only terribly cruel, but also incredibly
ineffective. They didn't address fundamental border security
challenges, fix our broken immigration system, or respond to the on-
going global migration phenomenon. Instead, they made the problem
worse--for example, the number of encounters at the border jumped
sharply after President Trump implemented Title 42. They made
vulnerable people suffer. That is the mess the Biden administration
inherited, and that is what Secretary Mayorkas has had to deal with
since taking office.
Legitimate oversight follows the facts, and the fact is that the
Biden administration's plans to address these challenges are working.
The number of Border Patrol encounters have plummeted by 70 percent
since the Biden administration ended Title 42 ended last month. The
number of overall border encounters have dropped by 50 percent in that
time, due in large part to DHS's hard work under Secretary Mayorkas'
leadership.
The Biden administration has reestablished lawful pathways for
migrants to access the asylum system. It has also utilized parole on a
case-by-case basis for those fleeing certain totalitarian or communist
regimes in our hemisphere. At the same time, it has made clear that our
borders are not open and those arriving outside of lawful pathways will
be sent home. Recent deportation and removal numbers reflect that hard
reality for many.
But unlike its predecessor, the Biden administration is enforcing
border and immigration laws in an orderly, humane way, consistent with
precedent set by prior administrations of both parties. Some may not
like that, but those are policy differences and nothing more.
You don't impeach a Cabinet Secretary because you don't like their
policies. You certainly don't impeach a Cabinet Secretary to appease
extreme Members of your political party. Secretary Mayorkas is
fulfilling his duty under the law and to the American people.
If the Republican Majority doesn't like what he's doing, they
should work with Democrats to pass bipartisan border security and
immigration reform legislation. Apparently, they prefer political
theater and a sloppy, inaccurate ``report'' instead.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Ranking Member.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted to the record.
I would like, without objection, to enter into the record
the DHS Order of Secession, which shows that Mr. Wolf had the
authority to serve as Secretary.
Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

Chairman Green. I am pleased to have a distinguished panel
of witnesses before us today on this overdue discussion.
I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise their right
hand.
Let the record reflect that the witnesses have answered in
the affirmative.
[Witnesses sworn]
Please be seated. You are done. OK.
I would like to now formally introduce the witnesses. Mr.
Chad Wolf serves as America First Policy Institute's executive
director, chief strategy officer, and the chair for the Center
of Homeland Security and Immigration. Prior to joining AFPI,
Mr. Wolfe was the former Acting Secretary of the U.S.
Department of Homeland Security. During his time at DHS, he
successfully navigated numerous global and domestic challenges
to the Nation's security, including COVID-19, civil unrest,
numerous border and immigration crises, historic natural
disasters, and threats to global aviation security. Prior to
his service at DHS, he spent over 10 years in the private
sector helping clients manage risks, and before that, worked
here on Capitol Hill. He has received the U.S. Secretary of
Transportation 9/11 medal, the U.S. Secretary of Homeland
Security Distinguished Service Medal, and the National
Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal.
Mr. Joe Edlow has an extensive distinguished background in
immigration policy. He most recently served as acting director
of U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. Prior to that
position, he served as the chief counsel for USCIS. Before his
time at USCIS, Mr. Edlow worked on immigration issues in
various capacities under the Trump administration, including
with the Executive Office of the President and the Justice
Department's Office of Legal Policy. He served from 2008 to
2015 as assistant chief counsel for the U.S. Immigration and
Customs Enforcement. He possesses significant experience on
Capitol Hill as well, including stints with the House Judiciary
Committee and former Representative Raul Labrador of Idaho.
Mr. Rodney Scott is a law enforcement officer and the
former chief of the United States Border Patrol, where he
served from January 2020 to August 2021, under both President
Trump and President Biden. Scott has served in the Border
Patrol and CBP since 1992. Throughout his career, Mr. Scott
held roles such as assistant chief in CBP's Office of Anti-
Terrorism in Washington, DC, as well as the division chief and
director for the Incident Management and Operations
Coordination Division at CBP headquarters.
Ms. Eleanor Acer is a senior director for Refugee
Protection at Human Rights First, where she oversees Human
Rights First's research and advocacy on issues relating to
refugee protection, asylum, and the human rights of migrants.
Ms. Acer served on the American Bar Association's Commission on
Immigration as the vice chair of the Refugee Council USA from
2006 to 2008, and currently serves on its board. Ms. Acer
received her JD from Fordham University School of Law and her
BA in history from Brown University.
I thank all the witnesses for being here today, and I now
recognize Mr. Wolf for 5 minutes to summarize his opening
statement.

STATEMENT OF CHAD WOLF, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR & CHIEF STRATEGY
OFFICER, AMERICAN FIRST POLICY INSTITUTE, FORMER ACTING
SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY

Mr. Wolf. Chairman Green, Representative Thompson, thank
you again for the opportunity to testify today.
By any objective measure or metric, the United States is
facing the worst humanitarian and national security crisis
along our Southern Border in our Nation's history. Today's
border security system is unrecognizable from the America First
policies of the Trump administration, or even those in place
during previous administrations. In all candor, this is the
first administration of either political party to deliberately
take steps to diminish the security along our Southern Border.
Here's the situation along the border today. This country
has experienced the largest mass scale catch-and-release policy
that has resulted in more than 4.5 million illegal aliens,
including 1.5 million known gotaways, being allowed into
American communities. That is a population larger than every
major U.S. city except for New York City. There have been more
than 200 known or suspected terrorists apprehended at the
Southern Border, compared to just 11 during the Trump
administration. The border is effectively controlled by the
Mexican cartels. Fentanyl is coming across the border in record
amounts and is the leading cause of death of young Americans.
More migrants have died during their journey than ever before.
Three hundred thousand eighty children and counting have been
trafficked or smuggled across the Southern Border and abused
physically, mentally, and in some cases sexually along the
horrendous journey.
In the last 2 years, this administration has lost contact
with more than 85,000 children after releasing them to
sponsors, many of them unvetted. Tens of thousands of children
have been subjected to indentured servitude and harsh forced
labor situations.
Last, we are seeing a concerted effort to facilitate
illegal aliens into the country at ports of entry through an
unlawful parole program and a CBP One app to disguise or
otherwise hide the extent of the crisis from the American
people.
I understand the difficulty and complexity of running the
Department of Homeland Security, but it is clear to me and to
millions of Americans that this is a crisis by design and one
that was avoidable. I'm here today as a veteran of DHS, having
served at the Department in two Presidential administrations
spanning over 7 years, holding 8 senior-level positions that
culminated in serving as the acting secretary, but perhaps most
importantly, earning the respect of the Department's law
enforcement officials along the way. While I look forward to
today's discussion, as you have already heard, some Members
will choose to attack me because I am critical of the
administration's actions surrounding this crisis.
This is what you will likely hear, this is what you have
heard. They will claim I ignored a subpoena to appear before
this committee in 2020. What they have failed to provide you is
the relevant context, that I gave this committee over 2 months
of dates for that hearing and for my availability, and that a
hearing was never scheduled, or that it would have been
improper for me to testify after President Trump nominated me
to be DHS Secretary. They will attack me because of questions
surrounding the Department's order of succession and how it
affected my role as Acting Secretary, a role that I am very
proud of. To the extent they mention policies they will fixate
over a short-lived zero tolerance from 5 years ago while
staying completely silent about the historic and on-going
migrant child trafficking crisis facilitated by this
administration.
The reason we see a border in crisis, in chaos, is simple.
The Biden administration has dismantled all of the proven and
effective policies put in place under the last administration.
That includes well-known policies like the Remain in Mexico and
the Asylum Cooperative Agreements with the Northern Triangle.
But it also includes more than two dozen lesser-known but
effective policies, such as a third country transit asylum bar,
a humanitarian asylum review process, a prompt asylum claim
review, a regulation to end fake families and the cruel
recycling of migrant children, having Border Patrol Agents
conduct credible fear screenings, internal relocation guidance,
expedited removal, ending Nation-wide catch-and-release, maxing
out ICE detention capacity and exceeding annual deportation
targets. The list goes on. Every one of those have been torn
down.
By comparison, this administration has embraced ineffective
and unlawful policies that have made American communities
dangerous and have enriched the Mexican cartels. These policies
include a Nation-wide catch-and-release scheme that
incentivizes millions and millions of other illegal aliens to
enter illegally, a 100-day deportation freeze for all illegal
aliens, including criminals, releasing illegal aliens on an
honor system to self-report to ICE field offices, exempting 99
percent of the illegal aliens from deportation, the lowest
level of ICE detention capacity, the lowest deportations in
modern history, terminating Remain in Mexico and fully
exempting children from Title 42. This is dangerous and this is
an inhumane approach that need not occur. The laws did not
change between administrations, just the decision by this one
not to follow the laws.
For the reasons cited here and others I'm happy to discuss,
it is my professional opinion that this administration is
derelict in its duty to faithfully execute the laws as written
and protect American communities.
Thank you, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Wolf follows:]
Prepared Statement of Chad Wolf
June 14, 2023
Chairman Green and Representative Thompson: Thank you for the
opportunity to testify before the House Homeland Security Committee.
By any objective measure or metric, the United States is facing the
worst humanitarian and national security crisis along our Southern
Border in our Nation's history.
As someone who understands the difficulty and complexity of running
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), I do not state this lightly.
It is clear to me and millions of Americans that the Biden
administration has failed in its Constitutional duty to ``take Care
that the [immigration and border security] Laws be faithfully
executed.''\1\ This is a dereliction of duty.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ U.S. CONST. ART. II,  3 (cleaned up).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
I have reached this inescapable conclusion after having had the
distinct privilege of serving at DHS at its inception under President
George W. Bush and throughout President Trump's administration,
including the last 14 months as Acting Secretary of Homeland Security.
For the last 27 months since I left office, I have closely followed the
national security and humanitarian crisis unfolding along the Southern
Border and have been publicly critical of the Biden administration's
policies and operations. That criticism is not expressed because we are
from different political parties but rather, it comes from my own
experience as Acting Secretary and the apparent and deliberate
destruction of what was, very recently, the most effective border
security in recent memory.
One of my philosophies as Acting Secretary was based on one simple
axiom: if you do not have borders, you do not have a country.
Sovereignty does not exist if you are not sovereign over your own
borders--territorial, maritime, or aerial.
To that end, today's border security system is unrecognizable from
the America First border security policies of the Trump administration
or even the border security apparatus in place during the
administrations of Presidents Clinton, Bush, and Obama. In all candor,
the Biden administration is the first administration of either
political party to actively take steps to diminish the security along
our Southern Border.
In contrast, under President Trump's leadership, a talented group
of professionals and I helped implement a body of policies that
established the most secure Southern Border in my lifetime. In addition
to building the most advanced border wall system, we put in place
across-the-board policies that deterred illegal immigration, disrupted
the Mexican cartels, disincentivized the flow of deadly fentanyl, and
enforced the laws enacted by Congress.
In fact, when confronted with caravans of illegal aliens surging to
the Southern Border in 2018-2019, we were honest with the American
people that it was a crisis. So, we went straight to work to restore
order and maintain America's sovereignty.
The Trump administration utilized previously untapped legal
authority found in section 235(b)(2)(C) of the Immigration and
Nationality Act (INA) to put in place the highly successful Remain in
Mexico policy, or Migrant Protection Protocols;\2\ President Trump also
struck historic Asylum Cooperative Agreements with the Northern
Triangle countries to redirect illegal aliens to seek asylum closer to
their home country under the authority provided by section 208(a)(2)(A)
of the INA.\3\ The Trump administration also issued a third-country
transit regulation under section 208(b)(2)(C) of the INA to thwart
asylum forum shopping, bolstered internal relocation guidance for
adjudicators,\4\ streamlined asylum cases at the border to speed up
deportations of those found ineligible, and restored the definition of
refugee \5\ to Congress's intent of requiring persecution by a
Government actor on one or more of the protected grounds. No
Presidential administration can do more under existing law--and none
should do any less.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ 8 U.S.C. 1225(b)(2)(C).
\3\ 8 U.S.C. 1158(a)(2)(A).
\4\ See 8 C.F.R. 208.13(b)(3).
\5\ 8 U.S.C. 1101(a)(42).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These policies were necessary because economic migrants and human
traffickers were exploiting the loopholes in our laws by making
fraudulent asylum claims to block their quick deportation under
expedited removal.\6\ Only between 10-15 percent of illegal aliens
apprehended at the Southern Border who claim asylum actually qualify
for this humanitarian relief.\7\ The rest, to put it mildly, are trying
to game the system. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA),
they need to--but they cannot--satisfy the appropriately rigorous
``well-founded fear of persecution'' standard in order to obtain
humanitarian relief.\8\ Such artful circumvention of the law is the
same as breaking the law. Every President has a bona fide duty to stop
the lawbreakers. Anything short is a contravention of the laws Congress
has gone to all the trouble of enacting--repeatedly.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\6\ 8 U.S.C. 1225(b)(1)(A)(i).
\7\ See DEPART OF JUSTICE, EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW,
Asylum Decision and Filing Rates in Cases Originating with a Credible
Fear Claim, available at https://www.justice.gov/eoir/page/file/
1062976/download.
\8\ 8 U.S.C. 1101(A)(42).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The Trump administration utilized the fullest extent of its legal
authority to combat this asylum fraud by making aliens wait in Mexico
or detaining them in the United States, the only two options
permissible under section 235 of the INA and, importantly, quickly
returning them when an immigration judge denies their claim. We never
forgot the violence that illegal immigration cruelly inflicts on
defenseless women and children, who are raped, trafficked, and scarred
for life by the lawbreakers.
The evidence speaks for itself. During the Trump administration:
fraudulent asylum claims declined, those who qualified got humanitarian
relief faster, lives were saved as migrants stopped taking the
dangerous journey north when they realized they would not be allowed
into American communities.
In stark contrast, today we see a border in chaos and crisis
because the Biden administration ideologically and arbitrarily
dismantled ALL of these successful policies on Day One and sidelined
career Border Patrol experts who continued to warn that a historic
surge of illegal aliens would overwhelm the border in the absence of
any deterrent policies. Political correctness and rank ideology
supplanted common sense and the clear command of our immigration laws.
And even as the warnings of career Border Patrol experts came to
pass, the Biden administration sat idly by and did little to curtail
this crisis. The result is that since President Biden was sworn into
office, nearly 5.5 million illegal aliens--and counting--have
unlawfully come into our country plus at least another 1.5 million
``gotaways'' who completely bypassed the Border Patrol and made it into
American communities.\9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\9\ See https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/southwest-land-border-
encounters.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To be clear--the laws didn't change between administrations, just
the refusal of the current one to follow their legal obligations.
Instead, they embraced destructive and unlawful policies that have made
American communities less safe and enriched the Mexican cartels to new
heights because open borders is a lucrative business.
But the abuse of the law doesn't end there. Here are some
additional, non-exhaustive examples:

Nationwide Catch-and-Release.--The Biden administration
intentionally decided to ignore its legal mandate to detain
illegal aliens or make them wait in Mexico throughout their
immigration court proceedings. Instead, this administration re-
implemented the dangerous catch-and-release policies ended by
President Trump and instead began mass releasing illegal aliens
into American communities.
Federal District Court Judge Wetherell struck down this practice,
writing ``The Court finds in favor of Florida because, as
detailed below, the evidence establishes that [the Biden
administration] have effectively turned the Southwest Border
into a meaningless line in the sand and little more than a
speed bump for aliens flooding into the country by prioritizing
`alternatives to detention' over actual detention and by
releasing more than a million aliens into the country--on
`parole' or pursuant to the exercise of `prosecutorial
discretion' under a wholly inapplicable statute--without even
initiating removal proceedings.''\10\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ State of Florida v. U.S., Case No. 3:21-cv-1066-TKW-ZCB (N.D.
Fl. Mar. 8, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Issuing Notices to Report (NTRs).--Unable to process the
volume of illegal aliens out of DHS custody fast enough under
catch-and-release, DHS early on under the Biden administration
resorted to issuing Notices to Report--essentially an honor-
system document that asks illegal aliens to self-report to a
local Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) office when
they reach their destination.
Unsurprisingly, few reported and now these illegal aliens lack
immigration court dates because they were not issued a Notice
to Appear (NTA), the formal charging document. This means that
removal proceedings will not even begin until ICE encounters
them in the future, further prolonging the amount of time these
illegal aliens remain in the United States. This process was
discontinued for some time but as the administration scrambled
to deal with the expiration of Title 42, they attempted to
resume NTRs.
Again, the court blocked the implementation of this policy, holding
that it ``appears that DHS is preparing to flout the Court's
order,'' noting that this policy ``sounds virtually identical''
to the catch-and-release policy he blocked in March 2023. The
judge further explained, ``In both instances, aliens are being
released into the country on an expedited basis without being
placed in removal proceedings and with little to no vetting and
no monitoring.''\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\11\ State of Florida v. Mayorkas, Case No. 3:23-cv9962-TKW-ZCB
(N.D. Fla. May 11, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Canceling Notices to Appear (NTAs).--For those illegal
aliens who received NTAs, their court dates are multiple years
down the road because the volume of illegal aliens the Biden
administration allowed into the United States has overwhelmed
the immigration courts. Instead of ending catch-and-release and
reinstating deterrence policies, the Biden administration
unilaterally canceled thousands of NTAs which removes them from
the immigration court backlog. These illegal aliens still lack
a lawful right to be in the United States and this unlawful
action by the Biden administration makes their future
deportation nearly impossible.
As a broader point, such travesty of the Rule of Law dishonors not
only our Nation and our law-abiding citizens--it also makes
light of the sacrifices borne by countless lawful immigrants
who patiently stood in line to come to this country the legal
way. This administration's message could not be more
unambiguous--those who waited their turn, filled out
applications, and paid fees for visas were foolish for obeying
our immigration laws. The Biden administration tells lawful
immigrants that the enormous sacrifices they and their families
made in coming to America by following the law count for
nothing. When the current administration arbitrarily excuses
the contravention of our laws by some, it is diminishing and
demeaning to us all.

Nullifying Interior Enforcement.--On Day 1, the Biden
administration issued a 100-Day deportation freeze for all
illegal aliens, including those with criminal convictions.
Federal District Judge Drew Tipton enjoined this non-
enforcement policy on the grounds that it was ``arbitrary and
capricious'' and that the policy ``fails to provide any
concrete, reasonable justification for a 100-day pause on
deportations.''\12\ DHS has since issued ``enforcement''
priorities that exempt 99 percent of illegal aliens from the
threat of deportation. The Biden administration has sidelined
ICE agents and effectively accomplished the goals of the
extremist ``Defund ICE'' movement.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ Texas v. United States, Civil Action No.: 6-21-cv-00003 (S.D.
Tex. Feb. 24, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

De Facto Amnesty.--President Biden campaigned on granting
amnesty to all illegal aliens--a policy that even the previous
Congress rejected. But the President was undeterred. Ignoring
the Constitution's grant of the legislative power to the
Congress (and not to the President), he decided to achieve in
practice what Congress did not permit him to achieve in
principle. As a result, the DHS Secretary implemented a de
facto amnesty when he declared that being here unlawfully is
not grounds for removal. The obvious remedy corresponding to a
violation of the law was arbitrarily taken off the table.
This edict directly and incontestably contradicts the law and mocks
our Nation's time-honored immigration court system. In keeping
with that policy choice, the current administration's claims of
prioritizing limiting resources are disingenuous, perhaps
flatly risible. After all, there are over 1 million aliens with
final orders of removal who are still in the United States;
yet, the Biden administration has removed the lowest levels of
illegal aliens, including criminal aliens, in modern
history.\13\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\13\ See U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ICE Annual
Report Fiscal Year 2022, fig. 20 (Dec. 30, 2022), available at https://
www.ice.gov/doclib/eoy/iceAnnualReportFY2022.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Giving USCIS Asylum Officers Jurisdiction over Border Asylum
Claims.--Through an unlawful regulation, the Biden
administration has given U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services asylum officers the ability to decide the asylum
claims of illegal aliens apprehended at the border. Congress
created DHS through the Homeland Security Act of 2002, with
much--but not all--immigration jurisdiction that was held by
the former Immigration and Naturalization Service within the
Department of Justice transferred to DHS.\14\ By this
authorizing statute, only immigration judges have the legal
authority to hear asylum claims of aliens in removal
proceedings as this authority was not delegated to DHS.\15\ It
is apparent that the Biden administration made this unlawful
move under the belief that USCIS employees will be more like to
grant relief. DHS data shows that USCIS asylum officers are
granting asylum at nearly twice the historical rate of
immigration judges.\16\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. 107-296 (Nov. 25,
2002).
\15\ Id.; see also Arthur, Andrew & Law, Robert, Public Comment Re:
Procedures for Credible Fear Screening and Consideration of Asylum,
Withholding of Removal, and CAT Protections by Asylum Officers (Oct.
18, 2021), available at https://cis.org/sites/default/files/2021-10/
JNPRM_Asylum_Procedures_FINAL_submitted_10-18-2021.pdf.
\16\ See Department of Homeland Security, Asylum Processing Rule
Cohort Reports, available at https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-
statistics/special-reports/asylum-processing-rule-report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Categorical Parole.--Perhaps the most egregious example of
violating the law is the DHS Secretary's unlawful use of the
parole authority. Section 212(d)(5) of the INA could not be
clearer that the right to grant this kind of parole comes from
a remarkably narrow sliver of statutory authority, only
allowable on a case-by-case basis for: (1) urgent humanitarian
reasons or (2) significant public benefit.\17\ DHS has ignored
the statutory requirements and turned this limited authority
into an override of the legal immigration system.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\17\ 8 U.S.C. 1182(d)(5).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
You know the law is not in your favor when you suddenly discover a
slender reed in some old statutory provision that, only when it
is totally divorced from context, gives you the slightest hope.
That's why, as the Supreme Court reminded us less than a year
ago in West Virginia v. EPA, when the Executive branch ``claims
to discover in a long-extant statute an unheralded power
representing a transformative expansion in its regulatory
authority,'' that's usually a sign of desperation because the
President and/or the agency know in their heart of hearts that
they do not have the statutory authority they are claiming.\18\
Everyone else knows it as well. As if that Supreme Court
prescription wasn't enough, the Court in West Virginia also
said that when the Executive suddenly ``locate[s] [its]
newfound power in the vague language of an ancillary provision
of the [law],'' its claimed authority is on conspicuously
shaky, and presumptively unsound, ground.\19\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2610 (2022) (cleaned up and alterations
made).
\19\ Id. (cleaned up and alterations made).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
So too here. The mass parole system devised by the Biden
administration turns our immigration law framework on its head.
After all, statutes have to be interpreted, to the extent
possible, as a harmonious whole, so why would Congress have
enacted the rest of the INA if Presidents, operating
whimsically, could circumvent it by issuing paroles ad nauseam?
This question, like all such questions, answers itself.
Just think: The parole program for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans,
and Venezuelans allows up to 360,000 illegal aliens per year to
fly into American communities and the separate unlawful program
using the CBP One app near the Southern Border are not new,
safe, lawful pathways but a diversion of illegal aliens from
between ports of entry to the ports of entry. It is clear that
these illegal categorical parole programs are designed to hide
the optics of the border crisis from the American people.
What is more, this administration's abuse of the parole authority
isn't limited to the border. After the Biden administration's
disastrous withdrawal from Kabul DHS unlawfully paroled into
the United States nearly 100,000 unvetted Afghans, most of whom
were military-aged males.
You needn't take my word for it. Even the Inspectors General of
both DHS and the Department of Defense have issued scathing
reports on the national security vulnerabilities the homeland
has been exposed to because of this reckless, senseless,
dangerous, and of course unlawful decision.\20\ There are a
number of instances where these Afghan parolees have committed
heinous crimes, include rape.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\20\ See, e.g., U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE INSPECTOR GENERAL,
Evaluation of the Screening of Displaced Persons from Afghanistan,
Report. No. DODIG-2022-065 (Feb. 15, 2022), available at https://
media.defense.gov/2022/Feb/17/2002940841/-1/-1/1/DODIG-222-065.PDF.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
By embarking on this nullification of immigration law by Executive
fiat, the Biden administration is allowing into the U.S.
millions of illegal aliens who do not qualify for a visa and
thus creating a subclass of aliens who have no avenue for a
legal immigration status and are in perpetual uncertainty and
agony. That is not American leadership or humanity at its
finest. Instead, this is just cynical, crass treatment by the
current cadre of Executive branch leadership and is the direct
result of the Biden administration's circumventing our border
security and immigration laws.
In conclusion, I would suggest that one of the most important
duties as the DHS Secretary is to be transparent and honest with the
American people about security issues affecting the homeland. It is
very clear to me that the current administration is lying to the
American people about the severity of the problem, while at the same
time absurdly attempting to lay blame on the Trump administration, on
Congress, or some other entity for their failed strategy.
Here is the reality:

The border is not secure, it is in fact open to illegal
aliens by the hundreds of thousands.

A historic number of illegal aliens--nearly 5.5 million--
have been apprehended at the Southern Border during the Biden
administration with approximately 3 million allowed into
American communities--a population larger than every major U.S.
city except for New York City and Los Angeles.

Another 1.5 million observed ``gotaways'' who bypassed
Border Patrol and pose severe national security and public
safety threats.

More than 200 known or suspected terrorists apprehended at
the Southern Border compared to just 11 during the Trump
administration--and these are just the ones caught because they
didn't realize we had them in the FBI database.

The border is effectively controlled by Mexican cartels--who
crave the predictability of these policies for their business
model.

More migrants have died during their journey than ever
before.

More Border Patrol agents have been assaulted by so-called
asylum seekers than ever before.

The Biden administration has lost contact with more than
85,000 children after releasing them to sponsors, according to
The New York Times.\21\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Dreier, Hannah, Alone and Exploited, Migrant Children Work
Brutal Jobs Across the U.S., NEW YORK TIMES (Feb. 25, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Biden administration is aware of tens of thousands of
children being subjected to abusive work conditions, according
to The New York Times.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\22\ Dreier, Hannah, As Migrant Children Were Put to Work, U.S.
Ignored Warnings, NEW YORK TIMES (Apr. 17, 2023).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

And there is no operational control over large portions of
the border. This is not just my assessment, but that of
outgoing Border Patrol Chief Ruiz and other career U.S. Customs
and Border Protection officials when questioned by Congress or
in litigation challenging Biden administration policies.
These are the results of a process the Biden administration calls
``safe, orderly, and humane.'' But to whom exactly? Not to the migrants
dying along the journey; not to the migrants abused, extorted, or worse
by the Mexican cartels; not to American communities that have been
overrun by this influx of illegal aliens and lethal fentanyl; and not
to Border Patrol officers who have been assaulted and have pleaded with
political leadership to solve this crisis.
Instead, the process that has been created over the last 2 years
can be more accurately described as dangerous, corrupt, and inhumane.
After 9/11, DHS was created to secure the homeland and protect our
Nation's citizens. I was there to help get DHS up and running. Yet the
actions of the Biden administration have done the opposite of adhering
to the DHS mission by eroding our institutions and diminishing the Rule
of Law. This is a crisis by design.
Finally, a singular quote from Supreme Court Justice Louis
Brandeis' from almost a century ago still rings true today:

``Decency, security and liberty alike demand that government officials
shall be subjected to the same rules of conduct that are commands to
the citizen. In a government of laws, existence of the government will
be imperil[]ed if it fails to observe the law scrupulously. Our
Government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher. For good or for ill,
it teaches the whole people by its example . . . If the Government
becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every man
to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy.''\23\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\23\ 277 U.S. 438, 485 (dissenting opinion) (emphases added).

Unfortunately, this is a message lost on the Biden administration.
Anarchy, I regret to say, is what we see today with the strategic
refusal to implement our border security laws. Unless we course-correct
immediately, our Rule of Law is in somber danger of being lost forever
into the oblivion of history. That is a message worth remembering, and
re-committing ourselves to, if we are to remain a Nation of laws. Or
even a Nation at all.
For the reasons cited here and for others I am happy to discuss, it
is my professional opinion that the Biden administration has been
derelict in its duty to faithfully execute the law, as written, and to
protect American communities.
Thank you and I look forward to answering your questions.

Chairman Green. I now recognize Mr. Edlow for 5 minutes to
summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF JOSEPH B. EDLOW, MANAGING MEMBER, THE EDLOW GROUP,
FORMER ACTING DIRECTOR FOR U.S. CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION
SERVICES

Mr. Edlow. Thank you, Chairman Green, Ranking Member
Thompson, and distinguished Members of this committee. I
appreciate the opportunity to present testimony today regarding
the continuing threats to the integrity of our immigration
system caused by the Secretary of the Department of Homeland
Security's willful disregard of our country's immigration laws.
The Biden administration, through the Secretary, has seen
fit to ignore the law, instead favoring poorly-conceived and
poorly-executed policy decisions. Actions through Executive
Orders, Departmental memos, and rules lay waste to the INA and
Congressional intent, it has eroded our immigration system and
propelled the crisis to current levels.
As the Chairman said, Section 102 of the INA charges the
Secretary of Homeland Security with administration and
enforcement of the Act, and further vests in the Secretary the
power and duty to control and guard the boundaries and borders
of the United States against the illegal entry of aliens. The
massive number of encounters recorded by CBP and the small
number of alien removals by ICE, however, suggest that this
Secretary has failed to faithfully execute the laws entrusted
to him.
Since Day 1 of the administration, the Department has taken
aggressive action to undermine immigration enforcement. Nowhere
is that clearer than Secretary Mayorkas' September 30, 2021
memorandum outlining the appropriate instances in which DHS was
authorized to take action against aliens, either unlawfully
present or lawfully present, but removable. Specifically,
Secretary Mayorkas outlined three main buckets for removal,
threats to national security, threats to public safety, and
threats to border security. While in theory this would seem to
encompass many aliens, in reality the numerous carve-outs,
loose definitions, and required factors for consideration made
it nearly impossible for ICE to move forward with most
enforcement actions. These poorly-defined categories gave even
some of the most serious of criminal aliens a free pass in the
interest of equity. Let me be clear, there is a time and a
place for prosecutorial discretion, which has been recognized
by the Supreme Court. However, memos targeted at whole groups
and not on a case-by-case basis do not comply with contours of
such discretion. Categorical prosecutorial discretion is not
discretion at all. It is instead an effort to undermine the
enforcement mechanisms clearly found in the law. The
Department's failure to enforce the full INA in the name of
prioritization and discretion is a dereliction of duty.
The rampant parole abuse that we now witness is exactly why
Congress saw fit to change the law in 1996. Replacing emergent
reasons or for reasons deemed strictly in the public interest,
with on a case-by-case basis for humanitarian reasons or
significant public benefit, Congress signaled its intention to
clamp down on the process. It specifically wanted to guard
against ad hoc programs meant to supplement existing
immigration programs. Regardless of the plain language as it
currently stands, parole has become a favorite tool of the
administration. While first used as an alternative to
detention, parole programs have subsequently played a large
role in artificially decreasing border numbers. The expanded
categorical parole programs for nationals of Venezuela, Cuba,
Nicaragua, and Haiti are wholly unlawful. While certainly the
previous administration utilized programs, the number of
parolees were a small fraction compared to what we have seen on
a monthly basis over the past 2\1/2\ years.
I would be remiss if I did not mention the Department's
regulatory agenda, which seeks to upend the credible fear
process in the name of orderly processing, starting with the
presumption that every economic migrant is entitled to
protection. In 2022, DHS issued an interim final rule on
credible fear screening. Under the new process, a positive
credible fear determination by an asylum officer will lead to a
non-adversarial asylum interview before another DHS asylum
officer. This impermissibly changes the process and undermines
Congressional action by shifting adjudication authority from
DOJ to DHS. Even more concerning, written summary of the
original credible fear interview now doubles as an alien's
asylum application, rendering moot the requirement that an
alien file one at all. This shifts the burden to present and
prepare a meritorious claim for protection. While this does not
ensure an asylum grant, it certainly provides a path for fraud
and renders certain anti asylum fraud measures moot.
A second final rule issued last month appears to be tough
on illegal border crossers, making them ineligible for asylum.
However, the number of exceptions and the easily rebuttable
presumptions belie its stated purpose. This rule will have the
opposite effect, as it will ultimately incentivize aliens to
make the dangerous trek northward with families in tow.
Mr. Chairman, we would not be sitting here today if the
Secretary and the Department simply enforced the law as
written. Instead, the Department has, in an effort to remove
barriers and to create a subjectively orderly system, conflated
law and policy and ensured that when the two were in conflict,
that policy won the day. A return to the rule of law is the
only cure at this point and is incumbent upon Congress to use
its oversight and lawmaking authority to repair the damage done
by the Department.
Thank you and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Edlow follows:]
Prepared Statement of Joseph B. Edlow
June 14, 2023
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of this committee, thank you for the opportunity to present testimony
regarding the on-going crisis threatening the integrity of our
immigration system.
As this committee investigates the actions and inaction of the
Department of Homeland Security, the conclusion that the administration
and Department have failed to comply with the law, as written, and
often times acted in contravention of the law, is inevitable. This
administration has seen fit to ignore the law, instead favoring poorly-
conceived and even more so poorly-executed policy decisions. The
actions through Executive Orders, Departmental memos, and rules
seemingly upend the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) and
Congressional intent. These decisions, implemented at each immigration
agency, have eroded this country's immigration system and have
propelled the crisis to its current levels.
The sharp rise in unlawful entries and attempted entries along the
Southwest Border provides a critical litmus test of the crisis' scope
but is an outgrowth of administration and Departmental actions. The
focus on the overwhelming numbers does not, in and of itself, provide
insight into the reasons for the crisis. Additionally, media often
focuses on the border to the detriment of the other actions and
inaction by Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS). Regardless of the
specifics, it is plainly obvious that since President Biden was
inaugurated in January 2021, this country has witnessed an
unprecedented border crisis.
executive order and memos
Beginning on Day 1 of the Biden administration, the Department of
Homeland Security's (DHS) Acting Secretary, David Pekoske, halted all
deportations for 100 days.\1\ This was predicated on interim
enforcement priorities that the Department wanted ICE to implement. In
its view, the only way to sufficiently update priorities was to reset
the entire system by halting all enforcement actions. This was followed
up by ICE Acting Director Tae Johnson's memo of February 18, 2021. This
memo was the first step to implement the priorities and included
reporting requirements for enforcement actions and the need to justify
any action to superiors through a pre-approval process.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Memo. from David Pekoske, Review of and Interim Revision to
Civil Immigration Enforcement and Removal Policies and Priorities (Jan.
20, 2021), available at: https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/21_0120_enforcement-memo_signed.pdf.
\2\ Memo. from Tae D. Johnson, Interim Guidance: Civil Immigration
Enforcement and Removal Priorities (Feb. 18, 2021), available at:
https://www.ice.gov/doclib/news/releases/2021/021821_civil-immigration-
enforcement_interim-guidance.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
At the White House, on February 2, 2021, President Biden issued his
``Executive Order on Restoring Faith in Our Legal Immigration Systems
and Strengthening Integration and Inclusion Efforts for New
Americans.''\3\ The order required DHS, in conjunction with the
Department of Justice and the Department of State to ``identify
barriers that impede access to immigration benefits and fair, efficient
adjudications of these benefits and make recommendations on how to
remove these barriers.''\4\ This was followed with an Executive Order
that, among other things, created the battle cry of the
administration--removing barriers to immigration.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Exec. Order No. 14012, 86 Fed. Reg. 8277 (Feb. 5, 2021).
\4\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
To that end, on September 30, 2021, Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas
issued a memorandum entitled ``Guidelines for the Enforcement of Civil
Immigration Law'' which outlined the appropriate instances in which DHS
was authorized to take action against aliens either unlawfully present
or lawfully present but removable.\5\ \6\ Specifically, Secretary
Mayorkas outlined three main buckets for removal--(1) threats to
national security; (2) threats to public safety; (3) threats to border
security. While, in theory, this would seem to encompass many aliens
who should properly be targeted for enforcement actions by ICE, in
reality, the numerous carve-outs, loose definitions, and required
factors for consideration make it nearly impossible to move forward
with most enforcement actions. These poorly defined categories could be
seen to give even the most serious of criminal aliens a free pass in
the interest of equity and ``justice.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\5\ Memo. From Alejandro N. Mayorkas, Guidelines for the
Enforcement of Civil Immigration Law (Sept. 30, 2021), available at:
https://www.ice.gov/doclib/news/guidelines-civilimmigrationlaw.pdf.
\6\ On June 10, 2022, the U.S. District Court for the Southern
District of Texas vacated this memorandum.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
On April 3, 2022, ICE's Principal Legal Advisor, Kerry Doyle,
issued a memo on prosecutorial discretion, aligning ICE action in
immigration court with the Mayorkas Memo.\7\ The April Memo provided
that ICE attorneys were to exercise prosecutorial discretion in cases
that were not deemed priority cases. This could include dismissal as
well as administrative closure (pausing the case indefinitely).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\7\ Memo. from Kerry E. Doyle, Guidance to OPLA Attorneys Regarding
the Enforcement of Civil Immigration Laws and the Exercise of
Prosecutorial Discretion (Apr. 3, 2022), available at: https://
www.ice.gov/doclib/about/offices/opla/OPLA-immigration-
enforcement_guidance-Apr- 2022.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
These memos all seek to redefine immigration enforcement by
creating fictional priorities with no basis in law. Neither the INA's
section on inadmissibility nor its section on removability suggest a
prioritization of grounds for enforcement. Instead, it enumerates a
list of grounds of inadmissibility and removability that the Department
of Homeland Security is required to enforce. Its failure to do so in
the name of prosecutorial discretion is a dereliction of duty and
cannot be permitted to continue.
Prosecutorial discretion is a critical tool for any police or
prosecuting agency, when used correctly. The Supreme Court has even
upheld such measures. Writing for the Court, Justice Scalia found that
a `` . . . well-established tradition of police discretion has long
coexisted with apparently mandatory arrest statutes.''\8\ In
interpreting ``seemingly mandatory legislative commands,'' the Court
found that the there exists a ``deep-rooted nature of law enforcement
discretion . . . ''\9\ However, that discretion is not absolute and
cannot replace whole statutory text. Prosecutorial discretion should be
viewed in the context of a case-by-case analysis in an individual
matter. The use of prosecutorial discretion to exempt an entire class
of individuals from law enforcement action, as is suggested in these
memos, is not discretion at all.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\8\ Town of Castle Rock v. Gonzales, 545 U.S. 748, 760 (2005).
\9\ Id. at 761 (citing Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S. 41 (1999)).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The results of these memos speak for themselves. In fiscal year
2022, ICE recorded a little more than 72,000 alien removals from the
United States.\10\ While that may appear to be large number, the
Executive Office for Immigration Review (the immigration courts)
reports that in just the first quarter of 2023, immigration judges have
ordered almost 47,000 people removed and have affirmed credible or
reasonable fear denials in more than 4,000 matters.\11\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\10\ U.S. Immig. and Customs Enforcement, ICE releases fiscal year
2022 annual report (Dec. 30, 2022), available at: https://www.ice.gov/
news/releases/ice-releases-fy-2022-annual-report.
\11\ Exec. Off. For Immig. Review, Fiscal year 2023 First Quarter
Decision Outcomes (Jan. 16, 2023), available at: https://
www.justice.gov/eoir/page/file/1105111/download.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
During the period that these memos were in effect, and beyond, the
number of encounters along the Southwest Border steadily climbed. In
fiscal year 2022, U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) recorded a
staggering and unprecedent 2,378,944 encounters.\12\ Thus far in fiscal
year 2023, CBP has already recorded 1,431964 encounters as of the end
of April.\13\ These are just the known and reported numbers and do not
account for the thousands of ``gotaways'' who were able to elude Border
Patrol agents.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\12\ U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Southwest Land Border
Encounters (May 17, 2023), available at: https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/
stats/southwest-land-border-encounters.
\13\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The numbers simply do not add up and even with the bulk of the
Mayorkas and Doyle memos not in effect, the result is still lopsided
enforcement compared to the record number of aliens entering.
the regulations
Under the guise of removing barriers, the Department, along with
the Department of Justice, engaged in several rulemakings purportedly
aimed at creating efficiency and expediency at the border.
Under section 235(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act
(INA),\14\ aliens apprehended by CBP entering illegally along the
border or without proper documents at the ports of entry are subject to
``expedited removal'', meaning that they can be quickly removed without
receiving removal orders from an immigration judge (IJ).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\14\ Section 235(b)(1) of the INA, available at: https://
uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title8-
section1225&num=0&edition=prelim.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
If an arriving alien claims to fear harm or asks for asylum,
however, CBP must hand the alien over to an asylum officer (AO) in U.S.
Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) for a ``credible fear''
interview.\15\ Credible fear is a screening process to assess whether
the alien may have an asylum claim, and thus proving credible fear is
easier than establishing eligibility for asylum.\16\ If an AO finds
that the alien does not have credible fear (makes a ``negative credible
fear determination''), the alien can ask for a review of that decision
by an IJ.\17\ If the IJ upholds the negative credible fear
determination, the alien is to be removed immediately.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\15\ Section 235(b)(1)(A)(ii) of the INA, available at: https://
uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title8-
section1225&num=0&edition=prelim.
\16\ See section 235(b)(1)(B)(v) of the INA (defining ``Credible
fear of persecution''), available at: https://uscode.house.gov/
view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title8-section1225&num=0&-
edition=prelim.
\17\ Section 235(b)(1)(B)(iii)(III) of the INA, available at:
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title8-
section1225&num=0&edition=prelim.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
When an AO or IJ makes a ``positive credible fear determination'',
on the other hand, the alien is placed into removal proceedings to
apply for asylum before an IJ.\18\ Most aliens who have claimed a fear
of return in the past received a positive credible fear assessment (83
percent between fiscal year 2008 and fiscal year 2019),\19\ but less
than 17 percent of those who received a positive credible fear
assessment were ultimately granted asylum.\20\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\18\ Section 235(b)(1)(B)(ii) of the INA, available at: https://
uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title8-
section1225&num=0&edition=prelim.
\19\ Credible Fear and Asylum Process: Fiscal Year (FY) 2008-fiscal
year 2019, U.S. Dep't of Justice, Executive Office for Immigration
Review (generated Oct. 23, 2019), available at: https://
www.justice.gov/eoir/file/1216991/download.
\20\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In 2022, DHS issued an interim final rule entitled ``Procedures for
Credible Fear Screening and Consideration of Asylum, Withholding of
Removal, and CAT Protection Claims by Asylum Officers.''\21\ Under the
new process, a positive credible fear determination by a DHS asylum
officer will lead to a non-adversarial asylum interview before another
DHS asylum officer. Asylum officers who find an alien eligible for a
form of protection lesser than full-fledged asylum, such as statutory
withholding of removal \22\ or protection under the Convention Against
Torture,\23\ must still refer the matter to a DOJ immigration judge who
may consider the entire case. That is hardly streamlining the process.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\21\ Procedures for Credible Fear Screening and Consideration of
Asylum, Withholding of Removal, and CAT Protection Claims by Asylum
Officers, 87 Fed. Reg. 18078 (Interim Final Rule Mar. 29, 2022) (to be
codified at 8 C.F.R. parts 208, 212, 235, 1003, 1208, 1235, and 1240).
\22\ Statutory withholding of removal specifies that an alien may
not be removed ``to a country if the Attorney General decides that the
alien's life or freedom would be threatened in that country because of
the alien's race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular
social, or political opinion.'' 8 U.S.C. 1231(b)(3)(A).
\23\ Following the United States ratifying its signing of the
Convention Against Torture in 1994, Congress implemented CAT
protections in Section 2242 of the Foreign Affairs Reform and
Restructuring Act of 1998 aimed at not effecting the removal of a
person who would be subjected to torture upon such removal. See Foreign
Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (FARRA), Pub. L. 105-277,
Div. G, Tit. XII, chap. 3, subchap. B, section 2242(a) (1998).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Even more concerning was that the written summary of the original
credible fear interview doubles as an alien's asylum application,
rendering the requirement that an alien file an asylum application
moot. This shifts the burden to present and prepare a meritorious claim
for protection. Aliens may rely on first-made claims of their story,
changing or including relevant details in advance of the asylum
interview or court proceeding, but without having to affirmatively file
an application. While this, in and of itself, does not ensure an asylum
grant, it certainly provides a path for fraud. It also renders a key
anti-asylum fraud measure moot.
In addition to the practical problems associated with this rule, it
impermissibly shifts authorities from the Department of Justice to the
Department of Homeland Security. As Congress was creating the new DHS,
it specifically determined which functions would be enumerated.\24\
Regarding asylum officers, or USCIS in general, Congress specified
which immigration functions would be transferred to the new created
department.\25\ Section 451 of the HSA established the Bureau of
Citizenship and Immigration Services and provided its function as
transferred from the DOJ.\26\ By including a catch-all provision for
any functions that may have been missed in the paragraphs 1 through 4,
it is apparent that the intent was to ensure that whatever adjudicative
functions were being performed by INS prior to the transfer, would be
continued by USCIS subsequent to it. Nothing in the provision suggests
that any further functions be transferred.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\24\ Homeland Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296, 116 Stat.
2135 (2002).
\25\ Id.
\26\ Id. at  451(b), 116 Stat. 2135, 2196 (2002). (``(b) Transfer
of Functions from the Commissioner.--In accordance with title XV
(relating to transition provisions), there are transferred from the
Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization Services the following
functions and all personnel, infrastructure, and funding provided to
the Commissioner in support of such functions immediately before the
effective date specified in section 455:
(1) Adjudications of immigrant visa petitions.
(2) Adjudications of naturalization petitions.
(3) Adjudications of asylum and refugee applications.
(4) Adjudications performed at service centers.
(5) All other adjudications performed by the Immigration and
Naturalization Service immediately before the effective date specified
in section 455.'')
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
As additional evidence that EOIR functions were not transferred,
the HSA affirmatively established EOIR within DOJ. This section,
ultimately codified in INA, states:

``(1) In general.--The Attorney General shall have such authorities and
functions under this Act and all other laws relating to the immigration
and naturalization of aliens as were exercised by the Executive Office
for Immigration Review, on the day before the effective date of the
Immigration Reform, Accountability and Security Enhancement Act of
2002.''\27\ \28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\27\ 8 U.S.C. 1103(g).
\28\ The Immigration Reform, Accountability, and Security
Enhancement Act of 2002 (S. 2444; 107th Cong.) was introduced in May
2002 but was never passed. This language was retained for the Homeland
Security Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-296,  1102, 116 Stat. 2135,
2273-2274 (2002).

This provision makes clear that the Attorney General retained the
functions of EOIR to include the authority to order deportation from
the United States. Nowhere in the HSA nor in the INA is there any
reference to USCIS, exercising authority to order removal. As the
former INS did not exercise such authority, and no such functions were
specifically transferred to USCIS, the statute is not ambiguous or
silent on the matter. Congressional intent is clear that such quasi-
judicial functions would remain with EOIR where such functions have
been exercised exclusively since 1983.
Accordingly, DHS, through USCIS, now taking on additional
authorities aimed at processing in aliens faster and getting them full-
fledged asylum interview, in a non-adversarial manner, without the
benefit of immigration court or ICE trial attorney's input. This is
rulemaking run amok as it is contrary to statute, contrary to long-
existing policy, and directly encroaches on the Department of Justice.
Relevant to the border, a notice of proposed rulemaking was
published on February 23, 2023.\29\ Starting with the name,
``Circumvention of Lawful Pathways,'' the proposed role is an
ineffective measure and empty gesture. Despite its perceived
enforcement provisions, this rule, if implemented, would allow most
aliens to arrive at or between ports of entry, make fraudulent claims
of fear to enter the United States or continue to utilize unlawful mass
parole programs to accomplish the same. As the Biden administration
continues to steadfastly grip to its Executive Order on removing
barriers to immigration,\30\ this rule, finalized on May 16, 2023 will
do exactly that.\31\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\29\ Circumvention of Lawful Pathways, 88 Fed. Reg. 11704 (proposed
Feb. 23, 2023) (to be codified at 8 C.F.R. parts 208 and 1208).
\30\ Restoring Faith in Our Legal Immigration Systems and
Strengthening Integration and Inclusion Efforts for New Americans, 86
Fed. Reg. 2877 (Feb. 5, 2021).
\31\ Circumvention of Lawful Pathways, 88 Fed. Reg. 31314 (Final on
May 16, 2023) (to be codified at 8 C.F.R. parts 208 and 1208).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The rule may be framed as an enforcement tool to limit the number
of aliens who will ultimately be able to receive asylum, however we are
hard-pressed to find any examples of classes of aliens who will
actually be kept out of the process under this rule.
The crux of the rule is the concept that a presumption of asylum
ineligibility exists for any alien entering the United States who does
not meet certain criteria. Specifically, the proposed rule requires
that to be eligible for asylum one of three criteria must be met: (1)
The alien must have appropriate documentation; (2) must present at a
port of entry with a prescheduled appointment through the CBP One App;
or (3) must have sought protection in a third country and received a
final determination. The last criteria is akin to the Third Country
Transit Rule, which likewise largely prohibited asylum eligibility for
a non-contiguous alien who did not apply for protection in a country
where such processes are available.\32\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\32\ Circumvention of Lawful Pathways, 88 Fed. Reg. 11704, 11750-
11752 (proposed Feb. 23, 2023) (to be codified at 8 C.F.R. parts 208
and 1208).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
The similarities to the previous rule end there, however. While
this appears to be a strong measure to control migration along the
Southern Border, it becomes apparent that the exceptions swallow the
rule. We are left with the question of to whom this rule will actually
apply once implemented. Of the three criteria, the one that we presume
will most often be utilized is the prescheduled appointments. It is not
likely that many aliens will suddenly obtain legitimate documentation
and, if they were able to do so, they likely would not be applying for
asylum but would be entering on a type of visa. This is an important
distinction because credible fear procedures would not apply to an
admitted alien (i.e. one that actually has a valid authorization). The
third criterion may be used more often than the first but it is unclear
to the extent that an alien would avail themselves of protection in
Mexico and other nations in Central and South America. Whether they are
being smuggled to the United States or make the journey on their own,
the lack of resources and familiarity with the law will also make this
criterion rarely met.
The rule is clearly encouraging aliens to use the second criterion.
A prescheduled appointment through the CBP One App is the most
available option for aliens with access to smart phones or other
technology allowing them to contact the system. However, even this
criterion is waived if the alien can demonstrate that ``it was not
possible to access or use the . . . system due to language barrier,
illiteracy, significant technical failure, or other on-going and
serious obstacle.''\33\ In essence, everything must align perfectly for
this criterion to be the basis for the presumption of ineligibility.
Relying on technology is itself a risky proposition as factors such as
bugs within the app or lack of available cellular service or a reliable
internet connection could all hamper an alien's ability to successfully
schedule an appointment. Additionally, while we do not have statistics
on literacy rates of migrants, it would be fairly common to find
migrants without a strong grasp of the English language. If language
and literacy are included as prerequisites, this will likely include a
far larger population of migrants who would overcome the rule's
presumption. Last, the catch-all of ``other or on-going and serious
obstacle'' is left undefined in the regulatory text. As asylum officers
and immigration judges will be trained on identification of the
presumption, leaving a catch-all which will seemingly be within the
discretion of the adjudicator will allow virtually any reason to pass
muster. This will result in the presumption being raised against hardly
any alien crossing into the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\33\ Circumvention of Lawful Pathways, 88 Fed. Reg. 11704, 11750
(proposed Feb. 23, 2023) (to be codified at 8 C.F.R. parts 208 and
1208).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
For those few aliens against whom the presumption will be raised,
the rule has fashioned it as a rebuttable presumption. Again, the
exceptions and now the rebuttals swallow the rule itself. An alien may
rebut the presumption when proving that the alien has a medical
emergency, ``faces an imminent and extreme threat to life or safety,''
or meets the statutory definition of trafficking victims.\34\ Of the
three, the most concerning is the threat to life or safety. It is well-
established that the trek to the United States is dangerous with more
migrants killed or kidnapped each year. The dangers of the journey are
further exacerbated with the influence of cartels and other criminal
organizations that view smuggling migrants as a for-profit business
without regard to their safety. From fiscal year 2017 through fiscal
year 2021, CBP has reported over 1,700 migrant deaths.\35\ Fiscal year
2021 had the most in a single year with 568 deaths.\36\ Additionally,
in that same time period, Border Patrol rescued over 8,400
individuals.\37\ Fiscal year 2021 again saw the most rescues in a
single year with 3,423.\38\ These numbers only represent the deaths and
emergencies reported by CBP, not other Federal, State, and local
agencies and it is unknown how many bodies have never been discovered.
The journey to the Southern Border of the United States is inherently a
journey where an alien will face extreme threats to life and safety
from beginning to end. To add this as an exception is to exempt the
entire population of migrants that have traveled with the assistance of
smugglers and other criminal enterprises.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\34\ Id.
\35\ U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Border Rescues and
Mortality Data (Feb. 6, 2023), https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/
border-rescues-and-mortality-data.
\36\ Id.
\37\ Id.
\38\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the rule claims to disincentivize illegal border crossers,
the Department's provisions have instead created additional incentives
to make the perilous journey either as unaccompanied children or with
children in tow. In addition to the fact that the NPRM does not apply
to unaccompanied children, the Department of Justice rule requires
granting asylum despite ineligibility in an effort to preserve family
unity. In a relevant portion, the Department of Justice's regulation
states that ``[w]here a principal asylum applicant is eligible for
withholding . . . and would be granted asylum but for the presumption .
. . and where an accompanying spouse or child . . . does not
independently qualify for asylum or other protections . . . the
presumption shall be deemed rebutted.''\39\ Caselaw has long held that
grantees of withholding of removal cannot receive derivative benefits
for their spouses and children.\40\ This provision seeks to sidestep
that issue by granting full asylum status to the principal and family
even if the principal alien cannot otherwise rebut the presumption.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\39\ Circumvention of Lawful Pathways, 88 Fed. Reg. 11704, 11752
(proposed Feb. 23, 2023) (to be codified at 8 C.F.R. parts 208 and
1208).
\40\ Matter of A-K-, 24 I. & N. Dec. 275 (BIA 2007).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
parole abuse
While the Department claims that a lack of available pathways has
made the aforementioned rules necessary, that lack has not stopped the
Department from abusing its parole authority. For a section of law
meant to be used sparingly and in exceptional circumstances, the
Department has relied heavily on its parole powers to permit aliens to
enter the counter en masse, many without a notice to appear before an
immigration judge. Section 212(d)(5) of the INA authorizes parole of
aliens ``into the United States temporarily under such conditions as he
may prescribe only on a case-by-case basis for urgent humanitarian
reasons or significant public benefit . . . ''\41\ Additionally, the
legislative history of parole authority, cited by the former INS in its
initial regulation, makes clear that the intent was to exercise the
authority in a narrow and restrictive manner. The original rule stated:
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\41\ 8 U.S.C.  1182(d)(5).

``The drafters of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 gave as
examples situations where parole was warranted in cases involving the
need for immediate medical attention, witnesses, and aliens being
brought into the United States for prosecution. H. Rep. No. 1365, 82d
Cong., 2d Sess. at 52 (1952). In 1965, a Congressional committee stated
that the parole provisions `were designated to authorize the Attorney
General to act on an emergent, individual, and isolated situation, such
as the case of an alien who requires immediate medical attention, and
not for the immigration of classes or groups outside the limit of the
law.' 5 Rep. No. 748, 98th Cong., 1st Sess. at 17 (1965).\42\''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\42\ Detention and Parole of Inadmissible Aliens; Interim Rule with
Requests for Comments, 47 Fed. Reg. 30044 (Jul. 9, 1982) (codified in 8
C.F.R. parts 212 and 235) (emphasis added).

Regardless of the plain language of the statute and the legislative
history, parole has become a favorite tool of the Biden administration.
While first used as an alternative to detention, parole programs have
subsequently played a large role in artificially decreasing numbers
along the border.
When reviewing the Border Patrol monthly disposition and transfer
statistics, it becomes apparent that parole was the path of choice to
quickly process and move aliens northward. Border Patrol monthly
disposition and transfer statistics for fiscal years 2022 and 2023
demonstrate just how commonplace parole has become. While Border Patrol
suggestions that the ``processing disposition decision related to each
apprehension is made on a case-by-case basis . . . ''\43\ the raw
numbers belie that disclaimer. In fiscal year 2022, parole numbers
steadily rose to culminate in over 95,000 paroles granted in September
2022.\44\ That trend has continued in this fiscal year as Border Patrol
recorded over 130,000 paroles in December 2022.\45\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\43\ Customs and Border Protection, Custody and Transfer Statistics
Fiscal Year 2023 (May 19, 2023), available at: https://www.cbp.gov/
newsroom/stats/custody-and-transfer-statistics.
\44\ Customs and Border Protection, Custody and Transfer Statistics
Fiscal Year 2022 (Nov. 14, 2022), available at: https://www.cbp.gov/
newsroom/stats/custody-and-transfer-statistics-fy22.
\45\ Customs and Border Protection, Custody and Transfer Statistics
Fiscal Year 2023 (May 19, 2023), available at: https://www.cbp.gov/
newsroom/stats/custody-and-transfer-statistics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Moreso than individual aliens, the Department has gone farther
astray as it has implemented parole programs, contrary to law, for
nationals of certain countries. Beginning in October 2022, the
Department announced that it was utilizing new pathways to ``create a
more orderly and safe process for people fleeing the humanitarian and
economic crisis in Venezuela.''\46\ This was augmented in January 2023,
when the Department announced expanded parole programs for nationals of
Nicaragua, Cuba, and Haiti.\47\ The program permits nationals of those
countries, and their immediate relatives, to seek parole when sponsored
by someone with lawful status in the United States. It is worth noting
that the sponsor need not be a relative of the beneficiary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\46\ Dep't of Homeland Sec., DHS Announces New Migration
Enforcement Process for Venezuelans (Oct. 12, 2022), available at:
https://www.dhs.gov/news/2022/10/12/dhs-announces-new-migration-
enforcement-process-venezuelans.
\47\ Dep't of Homeland Sec., DHS Continues to Prepare for End of
Title 42; Announces New Border Enforcement Measures and Additional Safe
and Orderly Processes (Jan. 5, 2023), available at: https://
www.dhs.gov/news/2023/01/05/dhs-continues-prepare-end-title-42-
announces-new-border-enforcement-measures-and.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
While the previous administration did end parole programs, such as
the Central American Minors (``CAM'') program, it is undeniable that
some parole programs continued to exist and operate. These programs
were far more limited in scope. The Filipino World War II Veterans
Parole Program, the Haitian Family Reunification Parole Program, and
the Cuban Family Reunification Parole Program only account for a
fraction of the number of paroles granted by the Biden administration
in just a single month. Additionally, the Cuban Family Reunification
Parole Program stems from the Cuba Accords, something that cannot be
said about the other countries currently enjoying broad parole.
The result of these parole programs was a drop in border numbers
and a marked decrease in parole utilized by Border Patrol. This is all
smoke and mirrors however as it is supplanting one form of illegal
entry for another. This is not to suggest that parole is akin to an
illegal entry but a recognition that parole usage in this fashion, is
unlawful.
the legal immigration backlog
This committee is well aware of the vast number of pending matters
presently before USCIS. As of December 31, 2022, USCIS reported a
pending caseload of 8,841,152 matters. While the agency claims to want
to reduce this number, actions speak louder than words. It was recently
reported that USCIS adjudicators were being shifted from their assigned
work in order to support operations along the Southwest Border.
While the extent of this shift is still relatively unknown, it is
clear that any shift will have significant consequences for the
adjudication of affirmative asylum cases as well as applications and
petitions for immigration benefits. It is also important to remember
that the latter group pays the fees that keep USCIS operational.
Essentially, USCIS is taking resources away from the adjudications that
fund the agency and thereby applicants for benefits are primarily
funding, not their own adjudications, but the adjudication of credible
fear matters along the border.
conclusion
The Department of Homeland Security has taken many measures in the
past 2\1/2\ years aimed at addressing the border crisis however it
appears that no one thought to simply enforce the law as written. In an
effort to remove barriers and to create a subjectively orderly system,
the Department has conflated law and policy and ensured that when the
two were in conflict, that policy won the day. The memos that undermine
grounds of inadmissibility and removability, the rules that undermine
Congressional action and established authorities, and the parole
programs that are simply incongruous with the law paint a clear
picture. The Department has, through its own actions, created the worst
border crisis in American history. A return to the rule of law is long
overdue and it is incumbent upon Congress to demand that corrective
action be immediately taken.

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Edlow.
I now recognize Mr. Scott for 5 minutes to summarize his
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF RODNEY S. SCOTT, SENIOR DISTINGUISHED FELLOW FOR
BORDER SECURITY, TEXAS PUBLIC POLICY FOUNDATION, FORMER CHIEF
OF U.S. BORDER PATROL

Mr. Scott. Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, Members
of the committee, thank you for letting me testify here today.
The career professionals at DHS, and specifically Customs
and Border Protection and U.S. Border Patrol, deserve our
praise and admiration. I am confident that they are doing
everything they can every day to protect this country, despite
this administration's efforts to undermine their efforts.
The chaos at our Southwest Border and the consequences are
a result of actions taken by the Biden administration. The
perspectives that I provide are grounded in my professional
experience, including my time as chief in the Biden
administration.
Decades of bipartisan border security improvements were
erased on January 2021, when the Biden administration announced
actions that were heard around the world as the U.S. borders
are now open. As predicted, the most secure border the United
States had ever enjoyed disintegrated into chaos. The Biden
administration's claims that they inherited a border in
shambles, that surges in illegal immigration like this are
normal, or that allowing more illegal aliens to go through a
port of entry is solving the problem are not accurate. The
crisis at our border is still raging. Don't get lulled into
believing that 3,500 arrests a day should be cheered just
because it is lower than the 11,000 a day we saw a few weeks
ago. The Border Patrol remains overwhelmed, the cartels
continue to control who and what is entering the United States,
migrants are still being exploited, and children are still
being trafficked.
CBP has recorded over 6 million encounters and over 1.4
million known gotaways--that's under the Biden administration.
But numbers fail to convey the severity of the national
security consequences. Some consequences are easier to measure
than others before a bomb goes off. The 1.4 million known
gotaways are a measurable consequence of agents being
overwhelmed. But consider that hundreds of miles of border lack
any persistent surveillance. When construction of the border
wall system was terminated, the associated technology was also
terminated. Every minute that agents are not patrolling the
U.S. border increases the probability of more unknown gotaways.
Most illicit narcotics, including the fentanyl that is
readily available in your home town, originated outside of the
United States. Every agent and officer taken away from
inspection and patrol duties decreases our Nation's ability to
interdict these poisons before they can hurt your family, your
friends, and your neighbors.
Leaving hundreds of miles of border unmanned and
unpatrolled is like leaving the doors of your home open when
you go on vacation. You can replace things that get stolen, but
the real threat is the unknown person hiding in your home when
you return. Verifying any unknown person's identity or their
story requires a face-to-face conversation. How many human
trafficking incidents went undetected because our law
enforcement personnel today are being instructed to process
aliens like a fast-food drive through? How do we quantify the
intelligence collection opportunities that were lost?
Additionally, when CBP officers are redirected to conduct
immigration processing, legal trade and travel suffers. This
further disrupts our supply chain, increases the cost of
imported goods, and more.
As chief of the United States Border Patrol, my staff and I
engaged and advised the Biden transition teams well before
inauguration. The administration's laser focus on expediting,
processing, and increasing opportunities for migrants to enter
the United States never wavered. Advice from career
professionals was ignored, policies were implemented that
resulted in thousands of aliens being released into the United
States. Illegal immigration intensified, overwhelmed Border
Patrol, and effectively transferred control of our Southwest
Border directly to the Mexican drug cartels. This is a national
security threat. Cartels use illegal aliens to overwhelm law
enforcement, creating controllable gaps in border security.
These gaps are exploited to smuggle anything they want into the
United States. To think that terrorist networks and hostile
nations are not exploiting this vulnerability is naive.
I'm not here testifying about policy differences. Policy is
how you carry out your duties under the law. The Secretary of
Homeland Security has a legal duty to prevent the illegal entry
of aliens and to secure our border. Even if success is
unattainable, he still needs to try. Instead, Secretary
Mayorkas has chosen to expend Department resources to provide
care for aliens that enter the United States illegally.
As detailed in my written testimony, I believe the
Secretary is derelict in his duties to secure the border. I
also believe that the Secretary has likely violated the
Empowerment Control Act. Secretary Mayorkas is great at
invoking understandable compassion for the plight of the
migrants, and I too acknowledge our humanitarian
responsibilities. But as Secretary of the United States
Department of Homeland Security and the overseer of billions of
tax dollars that are appropriated to protect America, if you
look at that, this administration is clearly not doing their
job.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Scott follows:]
Prepared Statement of Rodney S. Scott
June 14, 2023
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, Members of the committee,
good morning and thank you for inviting me to testify before you.
I am appearing before you to ensure that you and the American
people have an opportunity to understand that the chaos at our
Southwest Border, and the subsequent national security vulnerabilities
and consequences are a direct result of informed and intentional
decisions made by the Biden administration. The chaos at our borders is
not a reflection on the dedicated career Government personnel. The
career professionals that make up DHS, and specifically U.S. Customs
and Border Protection (CBP), including the U.S. Border Patrol (USBP),
deserve our praise and admiration. I am confident that they do
everything they can each and every day to secure our borders and
protect America even as this administration undermines their efforts.
The information and professional assessments that I provide are
grounded in nearly three decades of experience as a career Border
Patrol agent and my first-hand experience working in the Biden
administration, as chief of the U.S. Border Patrol, until I retired in
August 2021. For much of my career I was honored to participate in the
transition from an uncontrolled chaotic Southwest Border to a border
that was increasingly secure. Unfortunately, that progress was reversed
by the Biden administration. The informed and intentional decisions
made by the Biden administration directly resulted in the predicted
disintegration of border security into the chaos that now threatens to
be a new normal.
The current administration, supported by a lot of media, is
misleading America by asserting that they inherited a border in
shambles, surges in immigration like we are experiencing are normal and
that they are solving the border ``challenge'' by allowing aliens,
without any legal immigration documents, to enter the United States
through official Ports of Entry. The aliens are allowed to schedule an
appointment via the CBP One app, assert a fear claim, and then get
released with Notice to Appear in immigration court in a few years. Or
they can apply for a program that relies on an expanded use of parole
authority to get into the country without immigration documents. This
parole program is arguably illegal, because in part, the process lacks
the individual case by case determination as required by law.
Let me be clear, the crisis at our border is still raging and poses
both immediate and strategic national security threats to America.
Despite the current administration's claims, just because U.S. Border
Patrol encountered 11,000 illegal aliens on a single day with Title 42
in place does not mean that arresting 3,500 illegal aliens a day under
Title 8 is a good day. First, 3,500 arrests each day continues to
overwhelm USBP capabilities and empowers the cartels to control who and
what enters the United States. For context, from fiscal years 2015
through 2020, USBP averaged approximately 1,250 arrests each day.
Fiscal year 2015 and fiscal year 2017 averaged below 1,000 arrests each
day. Over the course of those years, USBP was improving situational
awareness and improving interdiction effectiveness. This progress ended
and chaos ensured with the signing of several Executive Orders and
public announcements on, and following January 20, 2021. The message
that was heard around the world was that the U.S. borders are open and
even those without legal immigration documents will be allowed to enter
the United States. As you know, this resulted in over 6 million
encounters \1\ and over 1.4 million known got-a-ways.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ Nationwide Encounters/U.S. Customs and Border Protection
(cbp.gov).
\2\ Public statements by USBP Chief Raul Ortiz.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Second, these numbers and comparisons alone still fail to
adequately demonstrate the severity of the border crisis or the daily
consequences of mass migration. Simple encounter and arrest numbers
fail to portray how much time it takes to arrest, search, transport,
and then process each individual. These numbers also fail to show the
thousands of hours that agents spend transporting sick and injured
aliens to local hospitals and then providing 24/7 security monitoring
until the alien is released.
Third, these numbers fail to adequately portray the loss in
situational awareness as agents are not patrolling the border while
they routinely detain and then transport large groups of illegal aliens
out of remote areas, often three aliens at a time depending on the
terrain and the vehicle capacity. Nor do they account for the number of
agents required to monitor and provide care during administrative
processing. Further, these numbers do not address the loss in agent
effectiveness that occurred when the border wall system, to include the
surveillance technology package, was terminated leaving hundreds of
miles of border without persistent surveillance capability and sporadic
gaps in border barrier. These numbers also fail to show how many human
trafficking incidents went undetected or measure the loss of
intelligence because agents and officers do not have time to conduct
thorough interviews.
Fourth, these numbers do not address how many people got into the
United States undetected or the volume of narcotics that was
successfully smuggled to your city. If you are unaware, the gotaways
reported by USBP are only the known gotaways. They were detected but
there were no agents left to interdict them. An illegal entry unseen is
an illegal entry uncounted!
Additionally, these numbers also fail to acknowledge the impacts
associated with the increased volume of undocumented migrants being
funneled into our ports of entry. By redirecting CBP Officers to
conduct civil immigration processing the wait times for legal trade and
travel are increased. This further disrupts our supply chains and
increases the cost of imported goods. Even more importantly, it also
reduces the time officers have to conduct thorough inspections and
interviews to identify potential threats. I would like to remind
everyone that this is their real job. Nineteen terrorists carried out
the 9/11 attacks because the 20th terrorist was denied entry into the
United States by an alert officer that had time to conduct an effective
inspection interview.
I would also like to remind everyone that the majority of fentanyl
and other illicit narcotics, readily available in every State across
our Nation, originated outside the United States. Every agent and
officer taken away from inspection and patrol duties decreases our
ability to interdict these poisons before they can make it to your
families, friends, or neighbors.
I started my testimony with a strong assertion that I believe the
chaos at our Southwest Border and the national security vulnerabilities
and consequences are a direct result of informed and intentional
decisions made by the Biden administration. I do not make this
assertion lightly. As chief of the U.S. Border Patrol, my staff and I
engaged directly with the transition teams prior to the inauguration,
as well as President Biden's appointed personnel following the
inauguration.
In two very brief direct engagements with Secretary Mayorkas, he
acknowledged that the significant numbers of illegal entries were
overwhelming Border Patrol capabilities and was not sustainable. He
also acknowledged his prior experience in DHS and that he understood
there must be consequences for illegal entry to stem the flow. The
first engagement was a senior DHS leadership call with the Secretary
and the second engagement was at a meeting with border Sheriffs in El
Paso, TX. Unfortunately, I quickly learned that the Secretary's words
and action were routinely very different. Routine conversations, formal
and informal operational guidance, combine with the public actions and
statements of Secretary Mayorkas and other Biden administration
officials, quickly resulted in the conclusion that the administration
had no intention of securing the border in any meaningful way despite
the legal requirements to do so.
Biden administration personnel made it very clear in every
engagement that their focus was on expediting immigration processing to
increase throughput and open new opportunities for migrants to enter
the United States. This was very consistent with the statements made
during the Presidential campaign. My personal interactions also made it
clear that many of the political appointees did not believe that
millions of unknown, unvetted foreigners illegally entering the United
States were a problem. The only issue that the Biden administration
appointees wanted to discuss was how to avoid the optics of large
numbers of aliens, especially unaccompanied alien children, being
detained in Government facilities.
Nonpartisan career Government personnel, to include myself, advised
the Biden administration repeatedly that the removal of consequences
for illegally entering the United States, reimplementing catch-and-
release, and very publicly terminating the construction on the border
wall system would undoubtedly result in an influx of illegal aliens
that would overwhelm U.S. capabilities and empower the cartels. The
Biden administration refused to acknowledge the national security
threats that increase proportionately with any increase in illegal
immigration and/or the fraud in our asylum processes. Despite being
briefed and provided written warnings, the Biden administration refused
to acknowledge that mass illegal immigration transfers control of the
U.S. border directly to the cartels.
From Day 1, political leadership in the Biden administration
ignored career professionals and increasingly made policy decisions
that resulted in thousands of aliens being released into the United
States. As predicted, the volume of illegal immigration rapidly
increased, overwhelmed Border Patrol and effectively transferred
control of our Southwest Border to the Mexican drug cartels.
I watched the border security gains that were made over three
decades vanish and the safety of border communities spiral backwards.
Policy makers must understand that this is not simply an immigration
issue. This is a national security threat. Cartels use illegal aliens
to overwhelm law enforcement creating controllable gaps in border
security. These gaps are exploited to smuggle anything they want into
the Uited States. To think that well-resourced terrorist networks and
hostile nations are not exploiting this vulnerability is naive.
Prioritizing immigration processing over enforcement also means
that deployed agents are spread so thin that they often lack the
capability to make an interdiction, even after an illegal entry is
detected. This does not include the unknown gotaways along the hundreds
of miles of border that lack persistent surveillance and go unpatrolled
for days and even weeks. In my professional assessment, as a direct
result of decisions and actions taken by the Biden administration and
specifically Secretary Mayorkas, U.S. Border Patrol has lost the
ability to know who and what is entering our homeland.
Border security is national security. My first-hand experiences
taught me that border security and immigration policy are two
distinctly different, yet interrelated issues. Border security is
simply knowing and controlling who and what enters our homeland.
Immigration and customs laws and policies are irrelevant if you cannot
control the initial entry.
I realize that some people see the border security and immigration
enforcement decisions of this administration, and specifically
Secretary Mayorkas, as simple policy differences. I do not agree with
that opinion. Policy is how you carry out your duties and
responsibilities under the law. Our Government officials should not be
allowed to use policy differences as an excuse to ignore the law. By
law, the Secretary of Homeland Security is required to take action to
prevent the entry of illegal aliens and to secure the border. I argue
that even if unattainable the law requires the Secretary to at least
try to meet these objectives.
I believe that Secretary Mayorkas and subordinate political
appointees have taken actions and made public statements clearly
demonstrating that the Secretary has made informed decisions to ignore
legal responsibilities. Instead, he has chosen to dedicate the
resources of the Department to provide care, feeding, and even
facilitating the movement of aliens that entered the United States
illegally. I would argue that once again his actions do not match his
words and go against his own enforcement prioritization guidance issued
on September 30, 2021. This guidance states that Department resources
should be focused on the most significant national security and public
threats. Despite issuing that guidance, he has chosen to expend a
significant portion of the resources and capabilities of the Department
to process civil immigration cases at the expense of addressing
significant national security and public safety threats at the border.
I have heard many people of both parties rightly argue that we have
never had enough resources to detain and prosecute everyone that enters
the United States illegally, and that this is why we must leverage
prosecutorial discretion. While on the surface this statement is true,
it is also misleading, as it leaves out some very important facts.
Prior to Secretary Mayorkas taking the helm at DHS, prosecutorial
discretion was heavily complimented by deterrence strategies and
effective polices that decreased the total number of illegal entries.
As illegal entries decreased the percentage of law violators that could
be detained and prosecuted increased, this acted as a further
deterrent. These cascading effects resulted in improved border security
year over year until January 20, 2021.
I believe the intent of the law is clear even in areas where the
means and methods are not clearly defined. My personal observations and
experience have led me to believe that Secretary Mayorkas has
intentionally ignored legal responsibilities and empowered his
subordinates to do the same. Specific areas of concern are outlined
below.
Secretary Mayorkas has ignored his duty to prevent aliens from
illegally entering the United States as required by law.

``8 USC 1103 (a)(5) Secretary of Homeland Security . . . He shall have
the power and duty to control and guard the boundaries and borders of
the United States against the illegal entry of aliens and shall, in his
discretion, appoint for that purpose such number of employees of the
Service as to him shall appear necessary and proper.''

Secretary Mayorkas has ignored his duty and failed to take any
meaningful action toward establishing operational control of the U.S.
borders as required by law.

``The Secure Fence Act of 2006 states in part that:
`` . . . the Secretary of Homeland Security shall take all actions the
Secretary determines necessary and appropriate to achieve and maintain
operational control over the entire international land and maritime
borders of the United States . . . ''

Biden administration personnel demonstrated contempt for the
Impoundment Control Act of 1974 and openly discussed methods to ignore
the Appropriations Acts that authorized and funded border wall
construction. They prevented any meaningful construction, while
creating the appearance that work was being done to avoid an
Impoundment Act violation.
The Presidential Proclamation \3\ that paused border wall
construction was issued on January 20, 2021. The Proclamation included
a required review of each project and that a submission of a plan
within 60 days. It also included the following statement,
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ Proclamation on the Termination of Emergency With Respect to
the Southern Border of the United States and Redirection of Funds
Diverted To Border Wall Construction/The White House.

``while providing for the expenditure of any funds that the Congress
expressly appropriated for wall construction, consistent with their
appropriated purpose. The plan shall be developed within 60 days from
the date of this proclamation. After the plan is developed, the
Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Homeland Security shall take
all appropriate steps to resume, modify, or terminate projects and to
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
otherwise implement the plan.''

Based on statements made during the 2020 Presidential campaign, I
had anticipated this type of guidance and directed my staff to create a
database with details of every wall project. The database would
include, but not be limited to, the origination of the specific
operational requirement, funding source, construction status, and any
foreseeable questions that the new incoming administration may ask.
That database was completed well before the Presidential Proclamation
was issued. This information was presented and made available to
Secretary Mayorkas and several Biden administration personnel on
multiple occasions. Yet, to my knowledge, no meaningful construction of
Congressionally-appropriated wall projects has been resumed.
While the statements of Secretary Mayorkas and subordinate
political appointees usually include at least one small fact to evoke
understandable compassion for the plight of migrants, I have yet to
hear a single statement or see any action toward protecting Americans
or securing our borders. I acknowledge and champion our responsibility
as humans to help others, but Secretary Mayorkas oversees the United
States Department of Homeland Security, with significant capabilities
and billions of tax dollars in appropriated funds, that are supposed to
be used to protect Americans, and America. This administration is
clearly not doing that.
I look forward to answering your questions.
Honor First!

Chairman Green. Thank you, Mr. Scott.
I now recognize Ms. Acer for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statement.

STATEMENT OF ELEANOR ACER, DIRECTOR, REFUGEE PROTECTION, HUMAN
RIGHTS FIRST

Ms. Acer. Thank you.
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson and distinguished
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to
testify before you today.
Over the last few years, Human Rights First has documented
the horrific harms inflicted on people due to the Remain in
Mexico and Title 42 policies. I personally witnessed the first
days of the implementation of Remain in Mexico from Tijuana
under the Trump administration and the final days of the Title
42 policy from Matamoros and Reynosa last month. My testimony
focuses on a few key areas.
First, our laws and treaties rightly allow people seeking
protection from persecution to seek asylum, and asylum is both
morally just and politically popular. Second, not only did
Trump administration policies like Remain in Mexico and Title
42 evade and violate refugee law, but they spurred chaos and
inflicted massive human suffering. Third, the Biden
administration should swiftly end its asylum ban, which
endangers the lives of refugees and is inconsistent with the
law, as were the Trump administration's bans on asylum. Fourth,
as Human Rights First's experts on extremism and antisemitism
have detailed, rhetoric painting migrants and asylum seekers as
threats or invaders fuels white supremacist conspiracy theories
and violence. It must be countered. Finally, Congress and the
Biden administration should work together to implement
effective strategies and provide the necessary resources to
address challenges at the border and properly staff safe,
effective, fair, asylum adjudications.
The crisis we're facing is a humanitarian one, and it's
global. In my written testimony, I outlined the ways in which
human rights situations have deteriorated in countries in the
Americas, including Cuba, Guatemala, Haiti, Nicaragua, and
Venezuela, pushing people to flee in search of protection,
safety, and stability. The reality is that the vast majority of
the world's refugees are hosted by other countries, and here in
the Americas, other countries are hosting refugees as well. Six
million of the 7 million Venezuelans who have fled are hosted
in countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. The United
States is more than capable of humanely receiving and fairly
processing the claims of people seeking refuge here.
Under the Trump administration, Human Rights First tracked
1,544 reports of kidnappings, murder, torture, rape, and other
violent attacks against people returned to Mexico under MPP.
During the Court-ordered reimplementation of MPP in 2022,
asylum seekers continued to be targeted. MPP hearings remained
a due process farce. Many asylum seekers were abducted while
traveling through border regions to attend hearings or directly
outside U.S. ports of entry before or after their hearings. MPP
also wasted Government resources. DHS's analysis concluded it
diverted resources from other migration priorities. In June
2020, the Supreme Court confirmed the DHS Secretary had
authority to end the policy.
Asylum seekers and migrants returned to Mexico under Title
42 similarly suffered kidnappings, rapes, and other attacks.
The Trump administration returned well-known political
activists from Nicaragua directly back to their country of
persecution. Human Rights First has tracked over 13,480 reports
of kidnappings, torture, and other attacks against asylum
seekers and migrants during the Biden administration. Moreover,
far from being an effective border management tool, the policy
actually spurred increased crossings between ports of entry,
inflated border apprehension statistics, and exacerbated cartel
violence. Ending Title 42 does not mean that the U.S. border is
open. It means U.S. immigration and refugee law can no longer
be evaded by specious invocation of public health authority.
The Biden administration has taken important steps toward
expanding refugee resettlement from the Americas and some
regular pathways to the United States through parole. As
outlined in my testimony, the Department of Homeland Security
has authority, legal authority, to parole individuals into the
country, and legal authority to release people from detention.
The use of these legal authorities do not mean the border is
open.
In conclusion, the Biden administration and Congress should
work together to uphold refugee law at U.S. borders. Maximizing
asylum at ports of entry after years of blockage is essential
to end the counterproductive consequences of term policies that
restricted and blocked access to asylum at ports of entry and
pushed populations to cross between. We should enhance support
for refugee hosting capacities in other countries, support for
strong asylum systems and reception capacities ramp up, speed
up, and strengthen regional resettlement, improve parole and
other safe migration policies, implement humanitarian rather
than punitive approaches to refugee protection, and take other
steps that I've outlined in detail in my testimony.
We also need to press the Biden administration to end its
asylum ban and to stop subjecting asylum seekers to fast track
processing in CBP custody, as the Trump administration did.
Thank you so much.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Acer follows:]
Prepared Statement of Eleanor Acer
June 14, 2023
Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson, and distinguished Members
of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you
today. My name is Eleanor Acer, and I serve as Human Rights First's
senior director for refugee protection. I have over 25 years of
experience monitoring and advocating for adherence to human rights and
refugee law under both Democratic and Republican administrations. Human
Rights First is an independent, non-profit organization that, for more
than 4 decades, has pressed the United States to take a lead role in
promoting, defending, and upholding human rights. It has partnered with
human rights defenders in Cuba, El Salvador, Hong Kong, Russia, Saudi
Arabia, Ukraine, and elsewhere around the world and, here at home, with
attorneys, veterans, and many others.
Working with volunteer lawyers at many of the Nation's leading law
firms, we have provided pro bono legal representation to refugees
seeking asylum, helping thousands to receive protection in this
country. These have included pro-democracy advocates and victims of
religious persecution from China, journalists forced to flee Guatemala,
Ethiopia, Honduras, Iran, and Nigeria, LGBTQ+ people seeking protection
from persecution, victims of political repression from Venezuela,
Syria, Egypt, and Nicaragua, and Indigenous and other families targeted
due to their opposition to brutal armed groups with transnational reach
in Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala.
Over the last few years, our human rights researchers have traveled
repeatedly to Mexican border cities to speak with people seeking asylum
who have been turned away or left stranded in danger by the Remain in
Mexico and Title 42 policies, and we have tracked horrific accounts of
human suffering inflicted by these policies. I personally witnessed the
first days of implementation of the Remain in Mexico policy from
Tijuana under the Trump administration, and the final days of the Title
42 policy from Matamoros and Reynosa last month. My testimony will
focus on a few key areas:

First, our laws and treaties rightly allow people fleeing
persecution to seek asylum--and this right to seek asylum is
both morally just and politically popular.

Second, not only did failed Trump administration policies
like Remain in Mexico and Title 42 evade and violate refugee
law, but they spurred chaos and inflicted massive human
suffering.

Third, the Biden administration should swiftly end its ban
on asylum, which endangers the lives of refugees seeking asylum
and is inconsistent with the law.

Fourth, orchestrated rhetoric painting migrants and asylum
seekers as threats or ``invaders'' fuels white supremist
conspiracy theories and violence targeting Black, Brown,
immigrant, Jewish, and other people. Lawmakers must refuse to
provide a platform for this rhetoric and must swiftly call out
racist fearmongering and counter disinformation with reliable
and accurate data.

Finally, Congress and the Biden administration should work
together to implement and support effective strategies
including strengthened regional refugee resettlement and
parole; provide the necessary resources to address adjudication
and processing challenges; and properly staff safe, effective,
and fair asylum adjudications. Parole and release from
detention are legally authorized and mass detention would
neither be humane nor fiscally responsible.
i. upholding asylum is morally right and politically popular across
party lines
The right to seek asylum is a fundamental human right enshrined in
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. In the wake of World War II,
the United States helped lead efforts to draft the Refugee Convention,
which along with its Protocol, prohibits the return of people to
persecution. United States law specifically provides for people in
search of refuge to seek asylum at ports of entry and after entering
the United States.
The majority of American voters, across party lines, believe that
the United States should provide asylum to people fleeing persecution
or violence in their home countries.\1\ Many Americans are the
children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren of people who fled
political, religious, and other persecution. Moreover, lawmakers of
both parties also believe the right to asylum should be protected.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\1\ In a November 2022 poll conducted by the U.S. Immigration
Policy Center, 87 percent of Democrats, 74 percent of Independents and
57 percent Republicans expressed support for asylum. Another May 2022
poll found that a majority of voters across the political spectrum
supported asylum and wanted the Biden administration to end the Title
42 policy. Voters ``by a margin of 58 percent to 32 percent [said] that
they would prefer a candidate who favors allowing people to legally
request asylum at the Southern Border over a candidate who opposes
doing so.''
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Proponents of unjust anti-asylum policies often refuse to
acknowledge the factors pushing people to leave their countries in
search of refuge, or the fact that the vast majority of the world's
refugees are hosted by countries other than the United States. In
reality, the human rights situations in many countries in the Americas
have deteriorated in recent years, pushing people to flee in search of
protection, safety, and stability. For example:

In Cuba, where freedom of expression, association, and other
basic human rights are sharply restricted, repression has
increased over the last few years, as security forces responded
violently with an extended wave of brutal repression to the
country's historic protests against economic difficulties and
lack of fundamental freedoms.

In Haiti, violence and political instability escalated after
the 2021 assassination of the president, and in late 2022 the
U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights, U.N. High Commissioner
for Refugees, and the U.N. Humanitarian Coordinator for Haiti
all warned that people should not be returned to the country
due to the dire and dangerous conditions there.

In Nicaragua, political persecution continued to escalate
against civil society, journalists, activists, church leaders,
nuns, and ordinary people--who live in fear and cannot safely
engage in public assembly or religious worship--and further
intensified during the year with a crackdown against civil
society in connection with November 2022 elections. In January
2023 guidance, the U.N. Refugee Agency (UNHCR) stated this
crackdown ``may be characterized as a massive violation of
human rights.''

In Venezuela, the human rights situation has grown
significantly worse in recent years due to harsh crackdowns on
political opposition, the ruling party's reliance on widely
condemned elections to control all branches of the government,
horrific use of torture, and a severe humanitarian crisis.

Human rights violations have continued or escalated in other
countries as well, including in Guatemala where the rule of law
has deteriorated, concerns of authoritarianism are rising, and
persecution has escalated against journalists, Indigenous and
human rights activists, and judicial officials combating
impunity for human rights violations, as well as in Honduras,
El Salvador, and other countries, as Human Rights Watch
documented in its recent annual report.
The reality is that many people fleeing these and other places have
fled to other countries in the Americas. In fact, of the 7.1 million
people who have fled Venezuela in search of safety and stability, about
6 million are hosted in Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and other countries in
Latin America and the Caribbean. Costa Rica is hosting about 200,000 or
more Nicaraguans, and experienced a five-fold increase in total asylum
claims in the first 6 months of 2022, as compared to the year before.
Mexico hosts about 500,000 refugees and asylum seekers, though many
face grave threats to their safety there.
The United States is more than capable of humanely receiving and
fairly processing the asylum claims of the portion of people seeking
refuge here from repression, violence, and persecution.
ii. failed trump administration policies inflicted chaos and human
rights abuses
The Title 42 and Remain in Mexico policies were failed policies
implemented by the Trump administration that violated and evaded
immigration law, inflicted disorder and dysfunction at the border, and
led to massive human rights abuses. These dysfunctional policies also
spurred repeat entries, led to family separations, pushed people
seeking asylum to cross outside ports of entry, and inflated border
statistics.
A. Remain in Mexico or ``Migrant Protection Protocols'' (MPP)
The Remain in Mexico policy--often referred to as ``MPP''--was a
blatant evasion of U.S. refugee law and asylum processes. Initiated by
the Trump administration through a flimsy 4-page memorandum, the policy
turned away people seeking asylum and other migrants awaiting
immigration court hearings to ``wait'' in danger, in Mexico, for their
U.S. hearings. The Remain in Mexico policy--and others like it that
force asylum seekers to wait outside the United States for their cases
to be heard--simply cannot be implemented lawfully, safely, fairly, or
humanely.
Human Rights First tracked at least 1,544 publicly-reported cases
of kidnappings, murder, torture, rape and other violent attacks against
people returned to Mexico under MPP during the Trump administration.
For example, after the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) returned
them to Nuevo Laredo under MPP, a Guatemalan family with 2 young
children, 5 Cuban asylum seekers, and 4 Venezuelan women and a girl
were among those kidnapped and held captive in multiple separate
incidents. Others were subjected to horrific sexual violence, including
a 9-year-old disabled girl and her mother, who were kidnapped near the
Tijuana port of entry and repeatedly raped. Another asylum seeker was
kidnapped and raped in front of her 3-year-old son after DHS sent them
to Matamoros. In yet another case, DHS forced a Nicaraguan mother and
her 9-month-old baby to wait in Mexico under MPP; they were kidnapped
by cartels, who punched the mother in the neck and forced her to call
family members and beg for ransom money. A 7-year-old Honduran girl and
her mother were abducted after DHS returned them to Nuevo Laredo under
MPP. She told her mother ``Mommy, I don't want to die'' after
overhearing the kidnappers threatening to murder other migrants.
During the court-ordered reimplementation of MPP in 2022 (due to
litigation brought against the Biden administration by Trump-aligned
State attorneys general attempting to force the continuation of MPP),
asylum seekers continued to report horrific kidnappings, rapes, and
other violent attacks after DHS returned them to Mexico (under what was
known as MPP 2.0). As Human Rights First detailed in a September 2022
report, these included: a Nicaraguan woman kidnapped and sexually
assaulted; a Venezuelan asylum seeker beaten and shot at; a teenage
girl sexually assaulted; and two Nicaraguans kidnapped by a cartel and
forced to watch as cartel members put a gun in another man's mouth and
threatened to kill him.
MPP hearings also remained a due process farce under MPP 2.0. Only
5 percent of the people returned to Mexico under MPP 2.0 managed to
find attorneys to represent them. Just to attend their U.S. immigration
court appointments, asylum seekers were forced to risk kidnapping and
violence. Many were abducted while traveling through border regions to
attend hearings or directly outside U.S. ports of entry before or after
hearings. Cartels extorted returned asylum seekers based on the date of
their next MPP hearing, effectively imposing a tax on the time the U.S.
Government forced them to wait in Mexico under the policy. For asylum
seekers subjected to this process, the dangers, impediments to legal
counsel, and abhorrent conditions forced many to give up on their
requests for U.S. asylum protection.
MPP also wasted Government resources. DHS's own analysis concluded
that the personnel required for MPP diverted resources from other
immigration priorities. DHS Secretary Mayorkas concluded that ``there
are inherent problems with the program that no amount of resources can
sufficiently fix, and that other problems ``cannot be addressed without
detracting from key administration priorities and more enduring
solutions.'' In June 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court confirmed that the
DHS Secretary had the authority to end the policy.
B. Title 42
Beginning in March 2020, the Trump administration exploited Title
42, a public health authority, to block and expel people at the U.S.
Southwest Border without due process, adherence to refugee law and
treaties, or immigration law consequences. Federal courts have vacated
and enjoined the Title 42 policy, including in a November 2022 D.C.
district court ruling that vacated the policy for violating U.S. law. A
March 2022 ruling by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit
prohibited DHS from using Title 42 to return asylum-seeking families
``to places where they will be persecuted or tortured.''
Asylum seekers and migrants returned to Mexico under Title 42
endured kidnappings, rape, and other attacks. Under the Trump
administration, these included a pregnant Honduran asylum seeker who
had been repeatedly raped in Mexico and was expelled under Title 42
while experiencing contractions, a Guatemalan asylum seeker, who had
been kidnapped for a month in Mexico and was beaten by a U.S. Customs
and Border Protection (CBP) agent with a baton while being expelled to
Nogales, Mexico, and a Honduran woman who was turned away from a
shelter in Reynosa, Mexico, along with her 3-year-old toddler and 5-
day-old baby after being expelled. The Trump administration also used
Title 42 to deny Nicaraguan political activists opposed to President
Daniel Ortega the ability to seek asylum and instead expelled them
directly back to Nicaragua, as the Washington Post reported.
Human Rights First has tracked over 13,480 kidnappings, torture,
and other attacks against asylum seekers and migrants impacted by the
Title 42 policy during the first 2 years of President Biden's
administration. These included: a 34-year-old Haitian asylum seeker,
Jocelyn Anselme, who was murdered in Tijuana in May 2022 while blocked
from seeking asylum under Title 42; a Nicaraguan woman kidnapped with
her 4-year-old child and raped, who remained stranded in danger in
Mexico; a lesbian asylum seeker from El Salvador raped after being
expelled to Mexico under Title 42; a 13-year-old girl who was nearly
abducted at gunpoint in Juarez after her family fled political
persecution in Venezuela but was expelled under Title 42; and a
transgender Honduran asylum seeker who was kidnapped and raped after
DHS repeatedly expelled her to Mexico.
In a December 2022 report, Human Rights First found that the court-
forced continuation of the Title 42 policy (pursuant to a lawsuit
brought by Trump-aligned attorneys general) and the Biden
administration's October 2022 expansion of the Title 42 policy to expel
Venezuelans: inflicted terrible human rights abuses, including for
Black, Brown, Indigenous, and LGBTQ+ persons, women, and children;
subjected asylum seekers to refoulement to persecution and torture in
the countries they fled; endangered faith-based, humanitarian, and
legal aid workers assisting asylum seekers impacted by the policy; and
pushed asylum seekers to attempt dangerous crossings to reach safety.
Proponents of the forced continuation of the Title 42 ``public
health'' policy inaccurately and absurdly painted it as a tool needed
for ``controlling'' migration at the Southwest Border. Far from being
an effective border management tool, the Title 42 policy was a failed
attempt at a border policy. The policy actually prevented U.S. agencies
from enforcing immigration law, spurred increased crossings between
ports of entry, inflated border apprehension statistics, exacerbated
cartel violence and insecurity at the border, facilitated
discriminatory asylum policies that target Black, Brown, and Indigenous
asylum seekers, and subverted both U.S. and international law.
In a June 2021 report, the Government Accountability Office (GAO),
for example, confirmed that Title 42 expulsions led to ``some
individuals trying to cross the border multiple times per day'' and
that the repeat crossing rate rose to 34 percent during the first
quarter of fiscal year 2021, meaning that 1 in 3 people encountered at
the border at that time had been previously expelled or deported. With
respect to people seeking refugee protection, Title 42 and similar
policies pushed asylum seekers--including Cubans, Haitians, and
Venezuelans--who previously mostly approached official border posts to
seek asylum, to instead attempt to cross into the United States between
ports of entry.\2\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\2\ For instance, as Human Rights First explained in a June 2022
report, Government data confirms that in fiscal year 2017, 99 percent
of Cubans and Haitians encountered at the Southern Border had arrived
through a port of entry. But after years of ``metering'' restrictions
and Title 42 expulsions, in fiscal year 2022 through May 2022, just 0.2
percent of Cubans and 14 percent of Haitians arriving at the Southern
Border were able to present themselves at a port of entry. The
percentage of Haitians arriving through ports of entry rose in April
and May 2022, as some ports of entry processed limited numbers of
Haitian asylum seekers through Title 42 exceptions. More limited data
also shows that the percentage of Venezuelan asylum seekers presenting
themselves at ports of entry followed a similar trend, plummeting from
56 percent in fiscal year 2020 to just 0.2 percent in fiscal year 2022
through May 2022.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Counterproductive policies such as Title 42 and Remain in Mexico
have also benefited the criminal cartels that control extensive
territories. As Human Right First detailed in a February 2022 report,
cartels have adapted to turnback policies by targeting the very asylum
seekers turned away by CBP--kidnapping them, purporting to charge them
for the right to remain in Mexico, torturing them and demanding ransom
payments from their U.S. family members. Some of these organizations
have worked to actively prevent asylum seekers from approaching ports
of entry, as the restoration of port of entry processing for asylum
seekers threatens the cartels' control and extortion efforts.
Ending Title 42 does not mean that the U.S. border is ``open.'' It
means that U.S. immigration and refugee law can no longer be evaded by
the specious invocation of ``public health'' authority.
The last thing that Congress or the Biden administration should do
is to attempt to force, prolong, codify, or resurrect policies that
violate U.S. law and obligations under international refugee law and
inflict disorder, family separation and massive human rights abuses on
people seeking refuge. Such policies are not actual ``solutions,'' but
tools to deny access to this country to Black, Brown, Indigenous,
LGBTQ+, and other people seeking asylum from persecution.
iii. inhumane, counterproductive asylum policies remain in place under
the biden administration
Two-and-a-half years since President Biden took office, his
administration has taken some important initial steps toward ending
Trump administration policies that created chaos, subvert refugee law,
and endanger the lives of people seeking asylum. These steps include
President Biden's February 2021 Executive Order directing review of
Trump administration policies, the Secretary of Homeland Security's
termination and re-termination of the notorious Remain in Mexico (RMX)
policy, and the termination of the Title 42 policy in May 2023. The
Biden administration has also taken steps to expand refugee
resettlement from the Americas and provide some regular pathways to the
United States through parole.
The Biden administration wielded the Title 42 policy for over 2
years--in part due to lawsuits filed by State politicians aligned with
the prior administration--and expanded it multiple times to expel
additional nationalities to danger. Despite finally ending this
inhumane and dysfunctional policy, the Biden administration has
recently taken steps backward, implementing other Trump-era policies in
the face of border arrivals and orchestrated, politically-driven anti-
immigrant rhetoric. Other inhumane Trump administration policies remain
on the books due to the slow pace of agency regulatory action.
In May 2023, the Biden administration DHS and DOJ issued a
regulation promulgating an asylum ban--an approach repeatedly initiated
by the Trump administration and repeatedly found unlawful by the
courts.

During the period that the Trump administration's transit
ban was in effect, asylum seekers who were denied protection
and ordered deported due to the ban included a Venezuelan
opposition journalist and her 1-year-old child; a Cuban asylum
seeker who was beaten and subjected to forced labor due to his
political activity; a gay Honduran asylum seeker who was
threatened and assaulted for his sexual orientation; and a
Congolese woman who had been beaten by police in her country
when she sought information about her husband who had been
jailed and tortured due to his political activity.

Asylum seekers who underwent credible fear interviews in CBP
custody under the Trump administration--many of whom were also
subjected to the asylum transit ban--were denied a meaningful
opportunity to present their asylum claim and many were ordered
deported, including a 16-year-old girl who fled trafficking and
sexual exploitation, an Indigenous Guatemalan woman who was
sexually assaulted because of her ethnicity, and a Central
American woman fleeing domestic violence by an abuser who
killed one of her children.
The Biden administration's asylum ban unlawfully makes refugees
ineligible for asylum based on how they enter the United States and
whether they applied for protection in a country they traveled through
on their way to seek safety. It will return refugees to persecution,
torture, and death in their home countries and other countries where
their lives are at risk and leave other refugees in limbo in the United
States without permanent status or a pathway to citizenship. During the
year that the Trump administration's similar transit ban was in effect,
it resulted in the denial of asylum to refugees with well-founded fears
of persecution and deprivation of a path to citizenship for refugees
left only with withholding of removal due to the transit ban. The Biden
administration's misguided approach breaches President Biden's campaign
promise to end restrictions on asylum seekers traveling through other
countries and endangers many Black, Brown, Indigenous, LGBTQ+, and
other asylum seekers. It also advances the agenda of anti-immigrant
groups, including the Federation for American Immigration Reform, which
was designated a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center and
praised the Biden administration's plans to impose an asylum ban as a
``good first step.''
In January 2023, Human Rights First joined a diverse \3\ coalition
of nearly 300 organizations in a letter to the Biden administration,
urging it to abandon its plan to issue the asylum ban. Nearly 80
Members of Congress echoed that call, in a bicameral letter to
President Biden. Faith-based organizations also called on the Biden
administration to uphold asylum and abandon plans to propose an asylum
ban. Nonetheless, in February 2023 the Biden administration published
its proposed asylum ban, which met wide-spread opposition. Of the
51,000 comments received in response to the proposed rule after a mere
30-day comment period, the vast majority of comments opposed the ban,
including comments from UNHCR, the union representing asylum officers
who would be forced to implement the illegal ban, former immigration
judges, 82 Members of Congress from the President's own party, Black-
led, civil rights, and LGBTQ+ organizations, Catholic Bishops, rabbis,
and Holocaust survivors and their family members. Despite the wide-
spread opposition, the administration finalized the illegal ban in May
2023 and began wielding it against asylum seekers.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
\3\ The diverse coalition of prominent labor, LGBTQ, faith, and
civil rights signatories include: ACLU, Amnesty International, CHIRLA,
Community Change Action, FIRM Action, HIAS, Haitian Bridge Alliance,
Immigration Equality, Immigration Hub, Indivisible, International Mayan
League, MoveOn, IRAP, IRC, NILC, National Immigrant Justice Center,
PFLAG National, Refugee Council USA, The Leadership Conference on Civil
and Human Rights, UndocuBlack Network, UnidosUS, and the Welcome with
Dignity campaign.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
In addition, the Biden administration has been conducting fast-
track asylum screenings through expedited removal in CBP custody at the
border, undercutting any meaningful opportunity for an asylum seeker to
explain their case, and applying the asylum ban in these screenings to
rapidly deport asylum seekers without a hearing regardless of their
risk of persecution. On June 5, 2023, 112 organizations wrote to the
Biden administration warning that this practice has already produced
systemic due process barriers, effectively denies asylum seekers any
meaningful chance to consult with counsel, and rushes them through a
sham process to quickly deport them. The National Immigrant Justice
Center also issued a report finding that the Government is actively
obstructing access to counsel and that the program ``appears designed
to rush people through to deportation without legal advice or
representation.'' The conduct of credible fear interviews in CBP
custody is similar to a Trump-era policy known as the ``Prompt Asylum
Case Review'' program and ``Humanitarian Asylum Review Program,'' or
PACR/HARP.
PACR/HARP was also a due process, humanitarian, and refugee
protection fiasco. Notably, President Biden directed DHS to terminate
PACR/HARP in his February 2021 Executive Order. Asylum seekers detained
in CBP custody have frequently reported being provided insufficient or
inedible food and water; lack of access to showers and other basic
hygiene; and inability to sleep because of lack of adequate bedding and
cold conditions. Conducting credible fear interviews in CBP custody
drastically exacerbates the deficiencies of the expedited removal
process, which continues to result in the deportation of refugees to
persecution and torture.
Over the last month or so, Human Rights First and other researchers
have spoken with hundreds of asylum seekers stranded in the highly
dangerous Mexican border cities of Matamoros, Reynosa, Nogales, and--
this week--Ciudad Juarez. Findings include:

The Biden administration's new asylum ban is stranding many
people seeking asylum to wait in places where they are targets
of brutal violence and kidnappings and left in horrendous
conditions without access to basic services. Haitian and other
Black people seeking asylum are targets of anti-Black
discrimination and violence;

Human Rights First has spoken to hundreds of people waiting
in Mexico, and they overwhelmingly had no knowledge of the
Biden administration's asylum ban;

People seeking asylum continue to struggle to secure one of
the limited CBP One appointments while they wait in danger--
including an LGBTQI+ asylum seeker who was nearly kidnapped in
Sonora, and two Haitian couples and a baby who escaped a
potential kidnapping near the Nogales port of entry in late
May;

People seeking asylum who do not have appointments have been
turned away from ports of entry by CBP officers and/or by
Mexican authorities, and in other cases left to ``wait'' in a
line that barely budges--some left waiting in their country of
feared persecution.
Human Rights First issued reports in recent weeks in collaboration
with some of the other organizations that are monitoring the
implementation of the Biden administration's asylum ban including the
Haitian Bridge Alliance and organizations participating in a delegation
the Haitian Bridge Alliance led, the Florence Immigrant & Refugee
Rights Project and the Kino Border Initiative.
There is a more humane, effective, and legal way forward, as Human
Rights First has explained in its most recent set of recommendations,
which are outlined below.
iv. anti-immigrant narratives endanger communities and drive harmful
policies
Anti-immigrant fear-mongering that paints migrants and people
seeking asylum as threats and ``invaders'' fuels white supremist
conspiracy theories and violence targeting Black, Brown, immigrant,
Jewish, and other people, as Human Rights First's experts on extremism
and antisemitism have detailed in a recent fact sheet. By portraying
immigrants as an existential threat to native-born Americans, this type
of rhetoric makes violence more likely, as we have seen in recent
years. Eleven people in Pittsburgh and 23 people in El Paso were
murdered by white supremacists animated by fears of supposed immigrant
``invaders.'' As these horrifying attacks demonstrate, we cannot
divorce this ``invasion'' rhetoric from its violent and racist origins.
These narratives often rely on a vitriolic combination of
disinformation and bigoted stereotypes. For example, immigrants are
often portrayed as criminal or violent, even when extensive research
shows native-born Americans are much more likely to commit crimes than
are immigrants. In recent years, immigrants have been increasingly
blamed for the devastating growth of fentanyl usage across the country,
despite the reality that fentanyl is most likely to enter the United
States through legal points of entry by U.S. citizens.
In recent months, some Members of Congress have continued to
promote this harmful rhetoric, including in advance of the lifting of
Title 42. To prevent Congressional hearings from serving as vehicles to
further popularize extremist rhetoric, lawmakers must effectively
challenge the disinformation, bigoted stereotypes, and conspiracy
theories on which these narratives rely. For example, 115 Members of
Congress co-sponsored H. Res. 413, which condemns the white supremacist
``great replacement'' conspiracy theory and the terrorist attack
targeting the Black community it inspired in Buffalo, New York.
Representative Raskin, Ranking Member of the Committee on Oversight and
Accountability, publicly called on his fellow committee Members to
denounce white supremacism. Lawmakers, especially those in positions of
leadership, can and must proactively and repeatedly counter such
statements on the public record, ensure the voices of targeted
communities have representation, and support efforts to protect the
rights of migrants and asylum seekers.
v. the use of parole and release from detention are authorized by law
DHS has the legal authority to parole people into the country ``on
a case-by-case basis for urgent humanitarian reasons or significant
public benefit.'' The parole authority is spelled out in 8 U.S.C.
1182(d)(5)(A) of U.S. law. The use of parole for eligible people does
not mean that the U.S. border is ``open.'' U.S. immigration authorities
have used parole authority for decades to parole people into the United
States--including people from the Soviet Union and Vietnam (1988),
Cubans through the Cuban Family Reunification Parole Program (CFRP)
(2007), and Ukrainians through Uniting for Ukraine (2022).
The Biden administration has also created programs to allow certain
individuals from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela to apply for
parole if they meet requirements including having a sponsor in the
United States. The existence of regular pathways can enable some people
to travel safely and without resorting to irregular travel. The Biden
administration should strengthen its use of parole including to improve
access to it for highly vulnerable persons who are not eligible under
current initiatives.
The use of parole however is not, and is no substitute for, asylum
or refugee resettlement. People facing grave threats cannot wait to
apply for parole, and many cannot afford or are not eligible to apply
for these parole initiatives due to their requirements. Parole
authority or other regular pathways to the United States should never
be used as an attempt to justify the denial of access to asylum.
Moreover, it is not illegal to release people from immigration
detention. U.S. law provides for ways to release people from
immigration detention and custody. For instance, CBP has the discretion
to put people it encounters into removal proceedings, with or without
sending them to detention, or to use expedited removal. People seeking
asylum who are initially referred into expedited removal can for
instance be released from immigration detention on parole under U.S.
law--as both Democratic and Republican administrations have repeatedly
confirmed through their actions and official guidance.
Human rights reports have documented the abuses suffered by people
held in immigration detention, as well as the waste of Government
resources inherent in the massive use of immigration detention.
Detention costs on average $144.42 per bed, per day. Studies have
repeatedly confirmed that asylum seekers and migrants overwhelmingly
appear for hearings after release from DHS custody, rendering the use
of costly and harmful immigration detention unnecessary to ensure
future appearance. It is both fiscally irresponsible and incredibly
inhumane to endeavor to send all people awaiting asylum or other
immigration court adjudications to detention centers. Detained asylum
seekers and migrants are also cutoff from legal representation; only
37.6 percent of detained individuals with pending cases have been able
to secure legal representation while 63.8 percent of all people
released from detention who have pending cases are represented,
according to data analyzed by Syracuse University's Transactional
Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC). Legal representation is critical
to ensuring that individuals understand our byzantine immigration laws
and court proceedings (described by one immigration judge as ``death
penalty cases heard in traffic court settings''), and thus demonstrate
they meet the criteria to receive asylum or other relief that they are
eligible for under U.S. law.
vi. recommendations for upholding refugee law
Instead of seeking to prolong, use, or resurrect inhumane and
counterproductive policies that were part of the Trump administration's
agenda, the Biden administration and Congress should work together to:

Uphold refugee law at U.S. borders without discrimination,
including to maximize (rather than restrict or ``meter'')
asylum at ports of entry, and ensure people seeking asylum have
prompt access to ports of entry--not limited to CBP One, but
also assured to people approaching ports of entry to seek
asylum. Maximizing asylum at ports of entry after years of
blockage is essential not only to uphold refugee law, but also
to end the counterproductive consequences of Trump policies
that, by restricting and blocking access to asylum at ports of
entry, have long pushed populations that previously sought
asylum at ports of entry to instead attempt to cross the
border.

Immediately rescind the Biden administration's asylum ban,
which punishes refugees and bars them from asylum, stop
subjecting asylum seekers to expedited removal including
through dangerously fast-tracked screenings in CBP custody
where asylum seekers do not have meaningful access to counsel,
and rescind remaining fatally-flawed policies of the Trump
administration that ban refugees from asylum.

Enhance support for human rights and refugee hosting
capacity in other countries in the Americas, including through
efforts to support development of strong asylum systems,
reception capacities, access to employment, and protection of
rights and safety of refugees and migrants in Mexico and other
countries in the Americas.

Ramp up, speed up, support, and strengthen regional refugee
resettlement, improve parole and other safe migration pathways
in the Americas, but never use the existence of such pathways
to deny access to asylum.

Implement a humanitarian, rather than a punitive and
attempted deterrence-based, approach to refugee protection
through effective, sustainable, humane refugee reception
structures, coordination, funding mechanisms, and case support
to address the lack of dedicated humanitarian and refugee
protection structures that has long hampered the U.S. response
to people seeking refuge at its own borders.

Upgrade asylum adjudication processes so they are accurate,
fair, properly staffed, and prompt, including: improve the new
asylum rule process so it leads to efficiency rather than
rushed and counterproductive inaccurate adjudications, fund
sufficient asylum adjudication capacities to address asylum
backlogs and ensure timely adjudication of new cases, and
support and champion funding for legal representation.

Stand firm against anti-immigrant rhetoric and efforts, and
unequivocally reject attempts to exploit Congressional hearings
as opportunities to platform dangerous anti-immigrant
conspiracy theories. Reject and oppose anti-asylum
Congressional proposals, including efforts to force
continuation or enactment into law of the Trump
administration's cruel, racist, and counterproductive policies.
Draconian policies will not appease perpetrators of xenophobic,
racist rhetoric, but will inflict massive human suffering,
create more dysfunction, and subvert refugee law globally.
Human Rights First has detailed these steps in its comprehensive
recommendations paper issued in January 2023. These strategies lay out
a more humane and effective approach.
Let's be clear: we are not, by any stretch of the imagination, an
``open borders'' Nation. Any such assertion is patently false. For
example, CBP conducts security checks of people seeking entry at ports
of entry or otherwise encountered, and puts people into removal
proceedings, expedited removal, and/or refers them to ICE for check-
ins. Too often they send people seeking refugee protection to
immigration jails. Human Rights First has issued countless reports
documenting past and present asylum bans and the horrifying impact of
Title 42. Unfortunately, our Government has repeatedly focused on
harsh, rights-violating policies that attempt to deter and punish
people seeking to migrate or request asylum at the border, only
exacerbating bottlenecks and dangerous conditions along the Southwest
Border and in detention.
Instead of prolonging, codifying, using, or resurrecting unjust,
inhumane, and dysfunctional policies aimed at decimating asylum that
were initiated under the Trump administration, the Biden
administration, and Members of Congress should uphold U.S. refugee law,
the human right to seek asylum, and U.S. commitments under
international refugee law. This includes abandoning efforts to ban or
deny asylum to refugees who are otherwise eligible for asylum under
U.S. law.
The crisis we are facing is a global humanitarian crisis; people
are fleeing their home countries due to a rise in political
instability, authoritarianism, human rights abuses, climate change, and
more. The United States is not meeting the moment, nor is it leading by
example; other nations, including those with far less capacity than
ours, are welcoming and hosting the overwhelming majority of the
world's refugees. We can and must do better to uphold refugee law at
home.

Chairman Green. Thank you for your testimony.
I now recognize myself for questions.
I want to talk about this claim that there has been a 70
percent decrease since Title 42 went away. It looks like they
are counting the encounters at 3,500 compared to the peak of
11,000, the actual record number, which happened right before
that. But what they are not counting--it is very interesting--
confirm--I don't know any of the witnesses that can confirm
this, but we are not counting the CBP One app appointments, as
I understand it. Is that correct?
Mr. Wolf. That is correct. So the numbers that are being
cited by the Department are Border Patrol numbers. Those are
encounters between ports of entry. So they talk about, I
believe, a 70 percent decrease. What they're not telling you,
they're actually capturing the number, but they're not
including it in their press release, is the number from of,
which is the Office of Field Operations, they're at a port of
entry are the number of inadmissibles that are showing up at
ports of entry. What's happening is they're being shifted
between the ports of entry to the ports of entry.
Chairman Green. It is a shell game. Basically, we are
taking the numbers out of these and we are not reporting them
over here, and we are allowing for appointments to be made
through CBP One app and then saying that that is a lawful
mechanism of entry.
Mr. Edlow, is that in congruence with the law? Is that a
lawful entry just because you fill out an app on-line?
Mr. Edlow. No. No, it's not.
Chairman Green. So it is a violation of the law?
Mr. Edlow. It's a violation. Frankly, if somebody comes to
the port of entry, has no documentation to get in, there is a
lawful mechanism for them to claim credible fear and to move
through that process. But to just allow them to come in to
parole them, not on a case-by-case basis, I might add, but as a
group, is not within the confines of the law.
Chairman Green. Yes, it is against the laws passed by the
U.S. Congress. OK.
So again, kind-of digging into this a little further. This
group of--and I think the amount of the appointments are about
1,500 or so a day, add that to the 3,500, add that to the
number that don't schedule an appointment, and come through
that--we don't know that number because they are not reporting
that number. Has there really been an appreciable decrease in
your opinions since Title 42 went away?
Mr. Scott. I do not believe that there has been a decrease
in the numbers. It is a shell game.
The other thing I want to point out, too, is it's very
selective about what day they choose to compare the numbers to.
You need to look at a little broader amount of time. The border
for my entire career was systematically getting more and more
controlled, and we are actually driving those numbers down. You
have to look at it longer, not just 1 day in time.
Chairman Green. Mr. Wolf, on May 10, reporter and
immigration analyst Todd Bensman reported ahead of the
expiration of Title 42 that Mexican immigration officials were
informing him that they were coordinating with DHS personnel on
the other side of the border to move illegal aliens from the
Mexico side of the Rio Grande to the American side. In other
words, they were helping aliens illegally cross into the United
States. This would violate, as I understand it, Section 274 of
the INA, which prohibits aiding and abetting illegal
immigration or helping someone enter the country. In your
opinion, would such an intentional coordination on a high-
profile stage have been conducted without the approval or
foreknowledge of the Secretary of Homeland Security?
Mr. Wolf. No, you would need to have approval up and down
the chain of command.
Chairman Green. So basically, again, violating the laws of
the United States. You would think that authority--I mean, the
Border Patrol guys would never do that without the authority of
the Secretary. Is that what you are saying?
Mr. Wolf. It's hard for me to say whether the Chief of the
Border Patrol was aware or whether that made it all the way to
the Secretary or not. I'm not there, so I can't testify to
that.
Chairman Green. OK. I can't imagine they would willfully
break the law without the Secretary giving them approval. But
we will dig further into that later.
The interim final rule that came out, Mr. Edlow, can you
discuss a little bit about how this basically upends the entire
intent of the laws of Congress from the INA?
Mr. Edlow. Certainly, Mr. Chairman.
When the Homeland Security Act was signed and enacted in
2002, 2003, most powers that had been exercised by the former
INS were moved over to the new DHS, specifically with asylum to
USCIS, where asylum officers were conducting interviews.
However, after a credible fear interview, the way it always had
worked was that the alien would then go before the immigration
judge. That powers were never transferred as part of the
Homeland Security Act. This rule does transfer, does shift that
authority from DOJ to DHS, having a second bite at the apple
to----
Chairman Green. Speed people into the country, basically
not have to go through the immigration judge process.
Mr. Edlow. Correct. But not only that, sir, but the fact
that they do not require a new asylum application really does
limit the ability for anyone to assess whether there's a valid
claim or not.
Chairman Green. My time has expired.
I yield to the Ranking Member.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Acer, Republicans have constantly falsely accused
Secretary Mayorkas of being derelict in his duty to secure the
border, even though as I said in my opening statement, border
encounters have dropped sharply since the Biden administration
terminated Title 42 last month. Republicans don't like the
Biden administration is returning to a more orderly, humane
border and immigration policy after the cruelty and dysfunction
of the Trump administration. They can't stand that these
policies have been effective. So we are seeing this political
theater play out with the Republican leadership trying
desperately to appease its Members.
My Republican colleagues seem to be particularly upset
about the Biden administration allowing people to present
themselves at port of entry to seek asylum as provided under
the law, just as every other administration had prior to this
one. Actually, there seems to be some revisionist history going
on because even President Trump's Secretary of Homeland
Security, Kirstjen Nielsen, Mr. Wolf's former boss,
acknowledged, in fact, encouraged migrants to come to ports of
entry for processing, saying, and I quote, ``So if a migrant
comes to a port of entry, they haven't broken any laws''. This
is exactly why we tried encourage the migrants to go to a port
of entry.
The Biden administration is being sued to force it to do
more to restore access to asylum after the last administrations
effectively cut it off.
Now, Ms. Acer, since you are an immigration attorney with
vast experience and expertise in this field, I want to talk
with you you and set the record straight. Claiming asylum at a
port of entry is lawful, correct?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely.
Mr. Thompson. Claiming asylum after being encountered by
Border Patrol is lawful too, correct?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely, yes.
Mr. Thompson. Paroling migrants, is lawful and within the
authority of the Secretary of Homeland Security, correct?
Ms. Acer. Yes, sir.
Mr. Thompson. No administration has ever detained everyone
encountered at the border, isn't that right?
Ms. Acer. That is right.
Mr. Thompson. That includes the Trump administration,
correct?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely.
Mr. Thompson. So Title 42 caused terrible harm to asylum
seekers, which you saw first-hand on your visits to the border.
Title 42 was also detrimental to border security. Isn't that
right?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely.
Mr. Thompson. Please explain that to the committee.
Ms. Acer. As I mentioned in my testimony, Title 42
encouraged repeat entries. It did not have immigration
consequences. It also pushed populations that used to go and
seek asylum at ports of entry to end up having to cross between
ports of entry, because not just for weeks, but for months and
months and years and years, there was no way to actually cross
the border.
The change in numbers we've seen, I believe, is a
confirmation of what an absolute disaster Title 42 was from so
many ways. Asylum seekers that we met at the border were trying
to use the CBP One app. How that works, for those of you who
haven't seen it, is people provide information that the
Government receives and actually reviews in advance. One of our
concerns about the CBP One app is that it could be used to
actually meter and limit the number of asylum seekers allowed
to legally seek asylum.
In addition, I would say that we're also concerned about
asylum seekers who are trying to approach ports of entry, who
are not being allowed to do so now, either because of CBP or
Mexican government authorities not letting them do so.
Mr. Thompson. Thank you.
Mr. Chair, I would like to include in the record a GAO
decision that Mr. Wolf indeed served in that capacity of
Secretary illegally. I would like to also include a review
requested by the Department and affirmed by GAO again, that Mr.
Wolf served in that capacity illegally. I would also like to
submit for the record a fellow judge in Maryland also ruled
that Mr. Wolf was serving illegally in that position.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.
Mr. Higgins. Mr. Chairman, I object.
Chairman Green. We have an objection.
Mr. Higgins. I object. I don't believe the Ranking Member
is capable of presenting to this committee justification for
claiming that Secretary Wolf served illegally. This is not a
Court of Law, it is a committee in Congress. I object to the
inclusion in the historical record.
Chairman Green. OK. I think we misunderstood the
gentleman's motion. It was not objection to the insertion of
the material into the record, it was, I think, just a statement
of opinion about.
And so, so ordered. The GAO reports are entered into the
record.
[The information follows:]
[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

------

Article Submitted For the Record by Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
judge rules chad wolf likely unlawfully serving as homeland security
secretary and temporarily blocks some asylum restrictions
By Laura Ly and Paul LeBlanc, CNN
Updated 10:59 AM EDT, Tue September 15, 2020
CNN--A Federal judge in Maryland has ruled that Chad Wolf is likely
unlawfully serving as acting secretary of the Department of Homeland
Security and temporarily barred the Trump administration from enforcing
new asylum restrictions on members of two immigration advocacy groups.
Judge Paula Xinis, in a 69-page ruling issued Friday, wrote that
the two groups are ``likely to demonstrate (former acting Homeland
Security Secretary Kevin) McAleenan's appointment was invalid under the
agency's applicable order of succession, and so he lacked the authority
to amend the order of succession to ensure Wolf's installation as
Acting Secretary.''
Subsequently, Wolf didn't have the authority to impose the asylum
rules that are being challenged, Xinis ruled. The new requirements,
which court documents say took effect in late August, concern
employment, and the case is ongoing.
Xinis' ruling does not mean Wolf is leaving his position. The
appointments of Wolf and his No. 2, Ken Cuccinelli, to the top
leadership roles in the Department of Homeland Security have
increasingly come under scrutiny, though both continue to serve in
their posts. The Trump administration appealed a Federal judge's ruling
earlier this year that it was unlawful to appoint Cuccinelli to lead
the agency responsible for processing US immigration requests, and he
remains in that post more than 6 months later. The case before Xinis is
ongoing.
CNN has reached out to the department for comment.
Last month, a coalition of 20 State attorneys general and 10 cities
and counties challenged rules imposed by the Trump administration that
they argued limited access to employment authorization for asylum
seekers, New York Attorney General Letitia James' office said Monday.
``The first rule would require asylum seekers to wait a year before
applying for employment authorization, and bar many from obtaining
authorization at all. The second rule would eliminate the longstanding
requirement that employment authorization applications be processed
within 30 days, thus allowing such applications to sit untouched
indefinitely,'' James' office said.
Xinis found that DHS ``completely sidestepped this critical impact
of the new rules'' and ``never wrestled with the fundamental
implications of deferring or denying advance work authorization.''
``Substantially limiting approval of work authorization for bona
fide asylees will inevitably affect their ability to afford the costs
of seeking asylum, including hiring legal counsel,'' Xinis wrote.
Xinis' order granted injunctive relief to only members of Casa de
Maryland, Inc. and Asylum Seeker Advocacy Project, two of the lawsuit's
plaintiffs that the judge found to have ``demonstrated associational
standing at this stage,'' finding the relief ``both proper and
necessary to avoid irreparable harm.''
The organizations have approximately 100,000 and 4,000 members
each, according to the judge's order.
James welcomed the ruling, calling Wolf a man with ``no authority
and no business sitting in the chair of the acting secretary of
Homeland Security.''
``Not only is this decision welcome news for asylum seekers who
were unfairly targeted by the Trump Administration, but the courts have
now found that Chad Wolf has no authority at the Department of Homeland
Security,'' she said.
CNN has previously reported that the Government Accountability
Office found that Wolf and Cuccinelli, the senior official performing
the duties of deputy secretary, were appointed as part of an invalid
order of succession.
``We vehemently disagree with what the GAO has put out,'' Wolf told
CNN's Jake Tapper at the time.
Wolf has been at the forefront of a host of issues like
immigration, civil unrest and the coronavirus pandemic response, and as
a result, has come under criticism for his actions. During Wolf's
tenure, the department has been marked by a focus on the border wall, a
fight with New York over Global Entry and more recently, a deployment
of Federal officers to Portland, Oregon, in opposition to local
officials.
Wolf has been the acting secretary since November 2019. The
department has not had a confirmed secretary since April 2019 when
former Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen was forced to resign.
President Donald Trump last month announced that he would
officially appoint Wolf to take over the role on a permanent basis, and
his nomination was formally sent to the Senate last week.
This story has been updated with additional developments.

Chairman Green. I now recognize Mr. McCaul from Texas,
Chairman McCaul from Texas, for his 5 minutes of questioning.
Mr. McCaul. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I served as Chairman of this committee for three terms, now
the Foreign Affairs Committee. Mr. Edlow, good to see you. We
worked together on these issues. Secretary Wolf, Mr. Scott,
great State of Texas, and I was a Federal prosecutor charged
with prosecutions at the border.
Political asylum is always the magnet, and it has been
abused by the cartels for many years. Eighty-five percent of
these claims are not legit, only 15 percent are. It is very
simple, when they are allowed to enter the United States,
because we don't have detention space, they are released into
our society. They are given a notice to appear, and they
disappear. I have seen this for 20 years in Congress. In fact,
my first bill was the End Catch and Release and here we are
today with the same program.
The Trump administration, through Secretary Wolf, Mr.
Edlow, implemented what I thought was a very effective plan
called the Migrant Protection Protocols, Remain in Mexico,
because they had to remain in Mexico pending their
adjudication. If it was legitimate, they were allowed in, if
not, they were not allowed into the country. It brought the
numbers down dramatically. So what happened when the Biden
administration gets into power, nearly on Day 1 Secretary
Mayorkas rescinds the order, rescinds Migrant Protection
Protocols, Remain in Mexico. What has happened since then?
Nearly 100,000 young people died in this country due to
fentanyl. Enough has been seized to kill billions of people, 5
million encounters, nearly 100 on the terror watch list, which
used to frighten me as Chairman of this committee when I would
hear of anybody on the terrorist watch list getting into the
United States of America. There was a court order to force the
administration to reimplement MPP. That court order, in my
view, has not been fully complied with by this administration.
To make things worse, they took the vetting process away
from sponsors of these aliens. What has that turned into?
Children going to houses, 20-30 of them under one sponsor, not
vetted, turns into a human trafficking enterprise, a criminal
enterprise. Young girls being sex trafficked and young men
going to MS-13 as they try to pay back the cartels. Cartels now
are in operational control. When I was down at the border after
the rescission of MPP, I asked the chief of Border Patrol, Mr.
Ortiz, is there a direct cause and effect between the
rescission of this program and what we are seeing at the
border, totally out of chaos? He told me the answer was yes.
Every Border Patrol officer will tell you that because they
live it. My State, Mr. Scott, as you know, has spent $4.5
billion just this session to deal with this problem, a Federal
responsibility.
So my question is, do you believe, Mr. Wolf, Mr. Scott, Mr.
Edlow, that Secretary Mayorkas is responsible for the
consequences that followed of the rescission of MPP, and do you
believe he is complicit with the consequences of what has
happened to this country?
Mr. Wolf. So the answer to that is a resounding yes.
Obviously, the Secretary ended MPP, Migrant Protection
Protocols, so he's responsible for the actions that follow
that.
I would just say, look, at the end of the day, it's OK to
claim asylum. What's not OK is to simply be released into the
country. Or it's not OK to say that there's an immense amount
of fraud in the asylum system. DHS knows that, they have the
numbers, we all use the numbers that come from DHS, but they
simply put blinders on and say, we're OK with that amount of
fraud. It's OK for the American people. That's why we
implemented MPP and we did a number of other things. They're
not doing any of that now. So all the folks that are claiming
asylum at ports of entry, again, are being released into
American communities. That's not OK.
Mr. McCaul. I agree.
Mr. Scott. Mr. Edlow.
Mr. Scott. I agree fully. I want to point out, MPP made
sure people got due process, but they did not get what they
want. Most of these people, from my experience, don't really
care about asylum, they don't really care about the legal
documentation or process. They want to be released into the
United States. Once that was taken away, the flow immediately
decreased because they couldn't commit fraud. Everybody knew
that this administration got rid of that program intentionally.
They're responsible for the results.
Mr. McCaul. Mr. Edlow.
Mr. Edlow. I also agree. There's plenty I could say about
MPP in terms of where it comes from, in terms of the INA. But I
will just say this, when the court initially told the Secretary
to reinstitute MPP, there was an attempt to do that, a half-
hearted attempt to do that. But in the press release that did
that, it also made it clear that the Secretary had every
intention to fight that decision from the court and to take
measures to end MPP in other ways. So it was really never an
actual attempt to reinstate it.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I recognize Mr. Correa of California.
Mr. Correa. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
What I would like to do is start out by submitting for the
record, without objection, the press release mentioned by
Chairman Green, if I may, where it says that there were 10,070
non-citizens processed on an average per day via the CBP One
app. I would like to submit this for record, sir?
Chairman Green. Without objection.
[The information follows:]

Press Release Submitted by Honorable J. Luis Correa
U.S. Department of Homeland Security
border encounters remain low as biden-harris administration's
comprehensive plan to manage the border after title 42 in effect
Release Date: June 6, 2023
Since the CDC's Title 42 public health order lifted and the Biden-
Harris Administration's comprehensive plan to manage the border went
into full effect on May 12, DHS has continued to experience a
significant reduction in encounters at the Southwest Border.
As a result of planning and execution--which combined stiffer
consequences for unlawful entry with a historic expansion of lawful
pathways and processes--unlawful entries between ports of entry along
the Southwest Border have decreased by more than 70 percent since May
11. DHS has overseen significant expansions in lawful pathways even as
we have repatriated a significant number of migrants.
From May 12 to June 2, 2023, DHS repatriated over 38,400
noncitizens under Title 8 authorities, including single adults and
families, to more than 80 countries. This includes over 1,400
noncitizens from Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua, and Venezuela who were
returned to Mexico under Title 8 authorities--the first time in our
bilateral history that the Government of Mexico has allowed the
repatriation of non-Mexican nationals at the border under Title 8
authorities.
Thousands more are being detained by CBP and ICE and processed by
USCIS to assess their asylum claims under the new Circumvention of
Lawful Pathways regulation. Those found not to have a credible fear
have been and will continue to be expeditiously removed.
Since May 12:

CBP has averaged 3,400 U.S. Border Patrol (USBP) encounters
in between ports of entry per day and fewer than 300 non-CBP
One Office of Field Operations (OFO) encounters at ports of
entry per day, for a total of approximately 3,700 unscheduled
encounters per day.

The top 3 nationalities encountered during this most recent
period, which accounted for nearly 70 percent of encounters,
were:

Mexico 1,200 encounters/day

Honduras 520 encounters/day

Guatemala 360 encounters/day

Nearly 14,000 credible fear referrals were received by USCIS
and over 11,500 credible fear interviews were completed. USCIS
has already conducted a record number of interviews over the
past 3 weeks, and these numbers will continue to increase as
our processes further scale.

Through CBP One, an average of 1,070 noncitizens presented
in a safe and orderly manner at a port of entry each day to be
processed during their scheduled appointment time. CBP has, as
of June 1, expanded the number of appointments available to
1,250 each day.

The top 3 nationalities with CBP One appointments were:
Haiti, Mexico, and Venezuela.

An additional 23,000 vetted and sponsored Cuban, Haitian,
Nicaraguan, and Venezuelan nationals arrived in the United
States through the parole processes we announced in January
2023.
The Administration's plan is working as intended. We are cognizant,
however, that the conditions in the hemisphere that are driving
unprecedented movements of people are still present and that the
cartels and coyotes will continue to spread disinformation about any
potential changes to policies at the border in order to put migrants'
lives at risk for profit. We will remain vigilant and continue to
execute our plan, making adjustments where needed.
Surges in migration have been a regular occurrence for more than a
decade under Republican and Democratic Administrations. Presidents of
both parties have attempted to use their executive authorities to
address these challenges--as we have. This, in turn, has invited
litigation from both sides of the political spectrum and has resulted
in courts across the country dictating border and immigration policy in
ways that are contradictory and detrimental to our ability to manage
the border.
It is abundantly clear that executive action cannot solve the
entrenched challenge of migration in our region, and that neither party
can address its impact on our border by itself. Until and unless
Congress comes together in a bipartisan way to address our broken
immigration and asylum system, we will continue to see surges in
migration at our border.

Mr. Correa. Ms. Acer, does that sound like hiding the data?
Ms. Acer. No, it's not hiding the data.
Mr. Correa. I want to show you a quote by Secretary
Nielsen, if I may. So we prefer Mr. Wolf, we prefer people
showing up at ports of entry as opposed to between ports of
entry? Yes, no?
Mr. Wolf. Absolutely. I would say----
Mr. Correa. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. That that is accurate. What I would
say is that the migrants are not breaking the law.
Mr. Correa. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Mr. Wolf. DHS is breaking the law with the parole----
Mr. Correa. You have got other people you can address here,
but I just have 3 minutes left.
Ms. Acer, is it legal to come to ports of entry?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely.
Mr. Correa. I want to show you a couple of pictures here of
the refugee challenge we have in the Western Hemisphere. Tell
you the United States is not No. 1. You have got other
countries that are having it even worse than we do right now
trying to address this human challenge the world is facing. I
am going to show you also a picture of the Darien Gap and a
young girl who separated from her mother. She is not coming to
Disneyland. She is trying to survive.
Ms. Acer, let me ask you, did Secretary Mayorkas create the
COVID-19 Pandemic?
Ms. Acer. No, sir.
Mr. Correa. Is he responsible for the unprecedented
violence, gang violence, extortions, assaults in Central
America?
Ms. Acer. No, sir.
Mr. Correa. How about for the on-going crisis in Haiti?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. The economic instability in Venezuela?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. Human rights violations in Cuba?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely not.
Mr. Correa. Responsible for repression, poverty in
Nicaragua?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. Instability in Peru?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. Central American economic crisis?
Ms. Acer. No, sir.
Mr. Correa. China's economic challenges?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely not.
Mr. Correa. Russian Ukrainian war and the ensuing refugees
from Ukraine and Russia?
Ms. Acer. No, sir.
Mr. Correa. African economic instability and food
shortages?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. America's stunning economic growth, strongest
in the world?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. Probably not. America's low unemployment rate?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. America's insatiable demand for workers with or
without documents?
Ms. Acer. No.
Mr. Correa. Responsible for the private-sector farmers,
ranchers, hiring of undocumented workers?
Ms. Acer. No, sir.
Mr. Correa. Let's just clarify, Ms. Acer, is asylum legal?
Ms. Acer. Yes.
Mr. Correa. Is approaching our ports of entry and asking
for asylum, is that legal?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely.
Mr. Correa. Is that legal under international law?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely.
Mr. Correa. Thank you very much.
I just want to add the majority party here voted to end the
COVID-19 health care emergency. In doing so, you voted to lift
Title 42. What was left? Secretary Mayorkas has managed, he
enlisted the help of our neighbors. No other time in the
history of the United States and Mexico have we had such a
great working relationship with Mexico and the others through
Central and South America on the issue of the refugee crisis.
So to say that Secretary Mayorkas has been derelict of his duty
is misleading the American people and presenting misleading
facts.
Ms. Acer, is Mr. Mayorkas lying to the American people?
Ms. Acer. No, sir, I don't believe to my knowledge. Though
I do disagree with him on his asylum ban. I think he is
absolutely wrong on that.
Mr. Correa. I would probably disagree with him on that as
well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and I----
Mr. Goldman. Will the gentleman yield? Mr. Correa.
Mr. Correa. I yield, of course.
Mr. Goldman. A few seconds.
I just want to point out, Mr. Wolf and all of our witnesses
here, you may have a difference of opinion as to how the United
States should process our asylum applicants, but the notion
that that difference of a policy opinion would be the basis for
``case closed'' that Secretary Mayorkas violating his duty is
preposterous and it is not any basis for impeachment.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Higgins from Louisiana for his 5
minutes questions.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Americans watching this or listening to the commentary you
would have to be living under a rock in America to not
recognize the disintegration of our sovereignty at the Southern
Border over the last 2 years. You got 6 million illegals
processed in some manner into our country, 1\1/2\ million known
criminal runner gotaways. The border law enforcement is so
overwhelmed estimates easily state that that number is doubled
of unknown and uncounted criminal runner gotaways. All told,
you are talking about 9 million people rolling into our country
since President Biden was inaugurated.
Secretary Mayorkas' failure is difficult to calculate the
impact upon our country, our entire country, generational
trauma the man has brought upon our country. My colleagues
across the aisle have a this is your Baghdad Bob moment when
you witness clearly what the truth is, what everyone across the
country recognizes as the disintegration of our Southern Border
and horrific impact upon our country, and yet you drone on and
on about how great things are, blame everything on Trump, good
lord for years. Yes, a Ranking Member has a right to introduce
a Government study into the record. But the insinuation was
that former Secretary Wolf served illegally.
So I am going to give you an opportunity to respond to
that, Mr. Wolf. I know you very well. Did you serve honorably
and legally as Secretary of Department of Homeland Security,
sir?
Mr. Wolf. I believe I did. I was asked to serve as that
Acting Secretary by the President. I took my oath seriously.
I'm very proud of the way that I led the Department. Lawyers
can argue over the order of succession about the Acting
Secretary before me, but I think what's clear is simply being
confirmed doesn't make you capable of doing the job.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you for your response, sir, and I
apologize on behalf of the committee for that insinuation. I
think it was ugly, it was tainted by agenda. Over the course of
the next several months perhaps they can develop a new script
than just attacking the Trump administration, because we are
going to expose what has happened to our country over the last
2 years.
Mr. Scott, would you explain to the committee in America
how Secretary Mayorkas has intentionally shifted migrant
numbers through the CBP One app to promote the appearance of
decreasing illegal crossings?
Mr. Scott. Yes, as we discussed earlier, the numbers that
are being reported publicly focus--they're selective. They've
been focusing on the Southwest Border only and we need to focus
on total encounters or what OFO calls as inadmissibles. If you
go onto CBP.gov, their website, it's a nightmare, but you can
slowly sort some of this stuff out, which is not open----
Mr. Higgins. Yes, sir. So to focus on a CBP One app, is it
true that there is virtually no parameters disqualifying an
applicant from applying for parole through the CBP One app?
Mr. Scott. That is my understanding.
Mr. Higgins. That is my understanding as well.
Mr. Wolf, in your opinion, sir, is an increased use of the
CBP One app for parole application consistent with the app's
original purpose?
Mr. Wolf. No, not the original purpose.
Mr. Higgins. Would you clarify that for America, please?
Mr. Wolf. Again, it was for foreigners. It was for industry
on how to facilitate that trade across the border. It was for
boating licensing----
Mr. Higgins. It was for legal commerce.
Mr. Wolf. Right.
Mr. Higgins. To speed legal commerce through ports of
entry.
Mr. Wolf. Correct.
Mr. Higgins. Yet now it is being used for undocumented,
legally identified as inadmissible, illegal migrants coming
through our ports of entry using the CBP One app, and they are
granted parole.
Is that your understanding?
Mr. Wolf. That's my understanding of how it's currently
being utilized.
Mr. Higgins. Would you clarify how that is in violation of
the law?
Mr. Wolf. Well, again, that's not how the CBP One app was
originally. Again, it's not how you allow individuals to come
in, paroling them in. There's so many different exemptions of
using that CBP One app. If you can't access it, they allow you
into the country. So it's another smoke and mirrors of how to
bring in individuals, again, that have no legal right to be
into the country. Whether you parole them in or put them into
the asylum system, the end result is all the same. So we can
talk about the different ways, the end result is that they are
released into American communities, and that is what's fueling
this crisis.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Wolf.
Mr. Chairman, my time has expired. I yield.
Chairman Green. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize Mr. Magaziner for his 5 minutes
questioning. From Rhode Island, by the way.
Mr. Magaziner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I have to say, I am getting sick and tired of House
Republicans politicizing the Department of Homeland Security.
There are common-sense, bipartisan actions that this committee
could be taking up to improve security along the Southern
Border. But instead of advancing smart policies to keep
Americans safe, the Republicans have resorted to the type of
political theater and Biden-bashing that the American people
are sick of. We know there are challenges at the border because
poverty and political instability are causing millions of
people to flee their home countries. But the notion that
President Biden or Secretary Mayaorkas are guilty of
``dereliction of duty'' are absurd. President Biden and
Secretary Mayorkas have been proactive in taking steps to
protect our homeland.
Here are the facts. April 27, 2021, just 2 months after
taking office, Secretary Mayorkas launched Operation Sentinel
to combat criminal organizations smuggling migrants across the
border. June 7, 2021, Secretary Mayorkas launched Joint Task
Force Alpha to crack down on trafficking groups in Mexico and
the Northern Triangle countries of Guatemala, El Salvador, and
Honduras. November 2021, President Biden's infrastructure bill
delivered $430,000,000 to Customs and Border Protection above
previously-budgeted levels for enhanced security at points of
entry. Nearly every House Republican voted no. December 15,
2021, President Biden signed Executive Order 14060,
establishing the U.S. Council on Transnational Organized Crime
with a focus on enhancing operational and intelligence
capabilities to disrupt transnational crime organizations. In
2022, the Biden administration and Congressional Democrats
passed a Homeland Security funding measure that added 300
Border Patrol agents and 125 CBP officers. Every House
Republican voted no because it had Joe Biden's name on it. In
2023, Secretary Mayorkas launched Operation Blue Lotus and
Operation Four Horsemen to disrupt narcotics trafficking at and
between points of entry. April 2023, the Biden Justice
Department unsealed charges against 28 leaders of the Sinaloa
cartel engaged in drug trafficking and other crimes.
The list goes on and on. This is just a sample of the
actions that the administration has taken to improve security
on the border. But, of course, you do not hear House
Republicans talking about any of this because it doesn't fit
their narrative. The only dereliction of duty here is House
Republicans wasting time on political games instead of focusing
on the real problems that we need to tackle to protect the
homeland.
Let's look again at the record. House Republicans
introduced a measure to impeach Secretary Mayorkas 2 years ago
when he had only been in office for 6 months. Politics. A
leader of this committee, in a closed door fundraiser months
ago, announced that Republicans were going to impeach the
Secretary and said, ``Get the popcorn. It's going to be fun.''
Chairman Green. Will the gentleman yield? That is not what
I said. I want to correct the record. I never used the word
impeachment, and I am tired of this continual narrative falsely
quoting me. I won't allow it, Mr. Magaziner.
Mr. Magaziner. Listen.
Chairman Green. Continue your testimony.
Mr. Magaziner. I will continue.
Listen, another Member of this committee, Ms. Greene, just
a few days ago, told the press that she voted on the debt
ceiling bill only in exchange for ``beautiful dessert,'' which
is impeachment. So this has always been about politics and
political games. The most important fact is this, since the
expiration of President Trump's Title 42 policy, illegal border
crossings are down 70 percent. Even when you include CBP One
app appointments, which are legal, they are still down more
than 60 percent since the expiration of Title 42. So there are
a lot of things that we could be doing. Instead, we are wasting
our time on theater.
Now, Mr. Wolf, during your time running the Department of
Homeland Security, were you ever impeached?
Mr. Wolf. No.
Mr. Magaziner. No. During your time working at DHS in the
Trump administration, did you prevent all unlawful entries into
the United States?
Mr. Wolf. We worked every day to do that.
Mr. Magaziner. But did you prevent all unlawful entries,
yes or no?
Mr. Wolf. No.
Mr. Magaziner. OK, well, I am confused, because I read Mr.
Higgins articles of impeachment that he filed a few days ago.
In short, they say that Secretary Mayorkas should be impeached
because he failed to maintain operational control at the border
defined as the prevention of all illegal entries into the
United States. So I don't understand, why didn't we impeach the
DHS director under the Trump administration or any prior
administration if that is the standard that warrants
impeachment? Political theater, that is why. That is all this
is.
With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I recognize Mr. Bishop from North Carolina.
Mr. Bishop. I thank the Chairman.
I think this is interesting, and it begins to ferret out
what really is the key issue that this Congress needs to focus
on in regards to the matter that is being testified to. I
appreciate the witnesses who are here. You are professional and
dispassionate.
I think almost no one is brazen enough anymore to deny that
there is a border crisis created by the Biden administration,
Secretary Mayorkas. Border Chief Ortiz admitted such on the way
out the door. FEMA announced yesterday the distribution of more
than $290,000,000 in Congressional funding to communities
receiving migrants. You don't deploy FEMA resources when there
isn't a crisis. But the issue here--and I agree it shouldn't be
political theater, it is not about policy differences, can't
be--the issue here is vindicating the rule of law and the
Constitutional role and lawmaking power of Congress. Many claim
the Trump indictment is about the rule of law. The Ranking
Member says appropriately policy differences are of a different
dimension. I agree with that. The appropriate response for
Congress is different in each case.
I don't even think, with all respect to the Chairman, that
our focus can be exactly on dereliction in the full sense
articulated, because dereliction is willful or negligent. What
we need to focus on here is whether this is not a case of
negligence. If it were, the implications would be different,
the remedy would be different. Incompetence in administering a
Federal agency is maladministration, and the recourse falls to
the people alone. But intentional sabotage of the rule of law
is something entirely different. It is an affront to the
separation of powers to the institutional authority of the
Congress under the Constitution and it invites another remedy,
and that is impeachment.
Secretary Wolf, the Ranking Member attacked actions by the
Trump administration. But you point--you know, your statement
really elegant, 10 pages, covers a lot of the ground. I urge
people to look at it carefully. You point out that there--you
were attacked for by the Ranking Member--these were exercises
of authority specifically granted to Congress. Take Migrant
Protection Protocols remain in Mexico. You cite 235B2C of the
INA. In the case of an alien described in subparagraph A, that
somebody who would have right otherwise to asylum, claim of
asylum, who is arriving on land from a foreign territory
contiguous to the United States, the Attorney General may
return that alien to that territory pending a proceeding under
section 1229(a) of this Title. So that is exactly what you did.
Whether somebody said you did it in exact way or if you want to
challenge House, you are exercising an authority.
Same thing with safe Third Country Agreements under section
208(a)2(A). I won't read all that. But here is what you point
out, the violations of law, several of these found by Federal
district judges at this point in time, by the catch-and-
release, ignores the mandate to detain or make them wait--an
asylum applicant wait in Mexico. That has been judged by Judge
Wetherell in Florida to be unlawful.
The use of notices--what are they called, NTRs, Mr. Wolf?
Mr. Wolf. Notices to report.
Mr. Bishop. Notices to report. So you don't even have any
formal commencement of removal proceedings, which a notice to
appear would be setting a date even though you never get to
them. They don't even do it, they just let them go with NTRs.
The exercise of authority to adjudicate asylum by DHS
officials--maybe, Mr. Edlow, you may have pointed this out in
your testimony--instead of in the Department of Justice, where
that power is reserved.
An interior non-enforcement policy. Mr. Wolf, you pointed
out the 100-day deportation freeze. Judge Tipton said that was
illegal. Subsequent enforcement priorities established that
exempt 99 percent from the threat of deportation. Secretary
Mayorkas declaring that illegal presence alone is not grounds
for removal. More than a million in the country subject to
final removal orders, and they said they are not going to
remove them.
So I am just going to leave my last minute to you, Mr.
Wolf. But I see what we are talking about is intentional
sabotage of the rule of law as set by Congress. That is a
different ballgame.
Mr. Wolf. It is different. It's not just about whether or
not aliens, illegal aliens, can claim asylum, as was talked
about here earlier. As you indicated, at least in my written
testimony, there are seven different instances where I believe
the law is not being faithfully executed, to include the
categorical parole, which was the last one there.
Mr. Bishop. I didn't get to that.
Mr. Wolf. Which is at ports of entry, which is at the heart
of all of this. To have asylum, needs to be an urgent
humanitarian benefit or advantageous somehow to the United
States. Simply paroling up to 360,000 individuals, which is
what they are on track to do per year, violates the letter of
the law. It's very clear.
Mr. Bishop. Final point here is that it does fall to
Congress, as well as these judges, fall to Congress through the
impeachment power to decide whether the law has been
intentionally flouted.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Swalwell from California.
Mr. Swalwell. I have heard the phrase rule of law and
accusations that the Biden administration is sabotaging the
rule of law. The title of this hearing is ``Secretary Mayorkas'
Dereliction of Duty on the Border Crisis.'' But I think, in
contrast to that, it is very interesting to me that the chief
witness that the Majority has called here, Mr. Wolf, was found
on November 14, 2020, by a Federal Judge to ``not lawfully be
serving as Acting Secretary.'' Not lawfully serving as Acting
Secretary. So a lot of considerations and concerns from my
colleague across the aisle about the rule of law, but the
witness that they called served unlawfully as the Acting
Secretary of Homeland Security, where an accusation of
dereliction of duty is being made today.
In addition to that, again, it is interesting that this is
the chief witness that they have called today because on
September 17, 2020, the unlawfully-serving Acting Secretary,
Mr. Wolf, failed to honor his Congressional subpoena, didn't
show up, skipped the hearing. So you have someone who is acting
unlawfully and somebody who skips a Congressional subpoena, and
we are going to be lectured by the Majority about a dereliction
of duty of the current lawfully-serving Senate-confirmed
Secretary of Homeland Security. I think that is interesting and
an important perspective that we should have as we consider
what is going on at our Southern Border.
Ms. Acer, I want to speak with you just about what is going
on at the Southern Border. If you were to think about the
migrants who are fleeing the Northern triangle, who leave
everything they know, their family, their livelihood, their
culture, their homes, their community, their churches, and take
the journey to America, do you believe that if we were to find
a way, as a global alliance, public-private partnerships, to
help invest in those countries in their economic security and
their physical security and stand up and support a rule of law
and go after corruption, that that would reduce the number of
people who came to the United States?
Ms. Acer. Absolutely. The reason that people are coming
here to seek protection is because they're not being protected
at home by their countries. There's a lot more that the United
States can do to increase respect for human rights and to
otherwise assist in making sure that conditions allow people
who can stay safely in their home countries to do so.
Mr. Swalwell. I understand the counter to that will be,
well, why would we invest money there if we have needs here?
There is no doubt we have needs here, but if we are going to be
spending the money anyway, either enforcement of the border or
taking care of people who come here, to me it just seems like a
better holistic investment to try and work private-sector,
public-sector, non-profit, NGO's in those countries to stand
up. As I said, economic and physical security.
Also wanted to ask, what effect do you think it has, Ms.
Acer, when my colleagues across the aisle and Republicans say
that we have open borders? In fact, the title of the hearing
today is ``Open Borders, Closed Case.'' Do you think if you are
south of our border and you are looking for somewhere to go to
keep your family safe and to find some livelihood, if you hear
people falsely declaring that the border is open, do you think
that makes you more or less likely to try and go to the United
States because you think the border is open?
Ms. Acer. I don't know how much migrants actually listen to
these hearings, but you're right in that I've heard Mexican
officials say they wished that U.S. politicians would actually
stop saying that the border was open because they thought that
was really sending the wrong message. Sometimes disinformation,
inaccurate information does get into Facebook groups that many
migrants do follow.
Mr. Swalwell. Thank you, Ms. Acer.
I think the lesson here is that this issue is complicated.
It involves human beings who are leaving everything. We have
got our own struggles in the United States and clearly cannot
take on a consistent flow from the Southern Border. But it
needs solutions, not theater. I am afraid that my colleagues
are interested in the crisis, but they are not interested in
the solutions.
I yield back, gentlemen.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Gimenez from Florida for his 5 minutes.
Mr. Gimenez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Ms. Acer, you were quoted in the Baptist News Global
referring to the end of Title 42, and you said that the dangers
facing asylum seekers are more acute than they were years ago
when the Trump administration started these policies and these
policies have contributed to a worsening of the conditions that
face migrants and people seeking asylum. Did you make that
statement?
Ms. Acer. I don't remember my exact words, but I probably
did.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. Thank you.
Mr. Wolf, I believe, like my colleagues, that I don't
believe that Mr. Mayorkas is incompetent. I think that he is
derelict in his duty because I think everything that he has
done is actually done on purpose. Do you share that view?
Mr. Wolf. I do. This is by design.
Mr. Gimenez. Right. So I have been an administrator and
when I have made mistakes and I listen to my folks and say,
hey, why didn't that go the way that I wanted it to, I would
listen and kind-of change things, but Mr. Mayorkas kind-of
doubles down. So when in the first days of the Biden
administration, a bunch of policies that the Trump
administration had put in place in order to secure the border
were overturned, and then things started to go south in a
really big way.
Do you know first-hand, if people in the border--that
Customs and Border Patrol agents actually advised Mr. Mayorkas
that, hey, you need to reverse these policies to stop this
tidal wave that is coming into the United States?
Mr. Wolf. Again, I wasn't there. It's my understanding that
they did. Chief Scott was there in the Border Patrol advising
the Biden administration, so I'm sure he can answer.
Mr. Gimenez. Well, Mr. Scott, can you answer that question?
Mr. Scott. Yes. He was informed verbally, he was informed
in writing. I think it's important for everybody to understand
everything fundamentally changed. When I worked for Secretary
Wolf, we had team meetings, we were asked for our input. We
were told over your career what works and what doesn't work. On
January 20, 2021, that all got shut off. DHS, the Secretary
even went to the step of shutting down the integrated teams of
career professionals that were brought into DHS Ops to provide
guidance. Our input was no longer solicited, and when my team
and I gave it unsolicited, we were basically put in a box. They
did not want to know what we had to say. They made it very
clear, expedite processing and find new ways to let migrants
into the United States and that was the only agenda.
Mr. Gimenez. Exactly. Which is on purpose, really
circumventing U.S. law.
Mr. Scott. One hundred percent on purpose, scripted out.
The Secretary is not incompetent.
Mr. Gimenez. No, I know he is not incompetent. He is
derelict, without a doubt.
Mr. Wolf, back to you. When you had the Remain in Mexico
policy and people were told to remain in Mexico, and then they
had their asylum hearings, what percentage of those that were
seeking asylum were actually granted asylum?
Mr. Wolf. Again, it would have been under that about 10 to
15 percent. The number that grant asylum has been holding for
years now. About 80 percent to 85 percent do not qualify, and
about 10 to 15 percent do qualify. We saw that again under MPP
as well.
Mr. Gimenez. All right, so those are the people that
actually qualify to get into the United States, are granted
parole into the United States, given some kind of legal status
in your site, because they actually have a valid asylum claim.
Now, when you get rid of that and you allow them to come into
the United States and then you don't--well, the law also says
that if you are seeking your asylum, you are supposed to be
detained until your hearing, correct?
Mr. Wolf. Correct.
Mr. Gimenez. That is not happening right now, is it?
Mr. Wolf. It is not.
Mr. Gimenez. OK, so now you have got all the people are
coming into the United States. They are actually being granted
entry into the United States. So you are actually increasing
the number of migrants entering the United States illegally
because they don't really have a valid asylum claim by about 80
percent. Would you agree with that number?
Mr. Wolf. That sounds about right.
Mr. Gimenez. OK. So we don't even know where they are, we
don't know where they're some of them are being tracked, some
of them are not being tracked. We don't know where 85,000
children are at this point. I consider that to be a dereliction
of duty. Children? 85,000? We don't know where they are. Did
that ever happen under the Trump administration?
Mr. Wolf. Eighty-five thousand, no, absolutely not. Again,
you have an unaccompanied alien child crisis at the moment,
380,000. So if you happen to go to the baseball game tonight,
that fills National Stadium almost nine times, that's how many
children that have come across that border that have no parent,
have no guardian, that have been smuggled by these Mexican
cartels at the behest, sometimes of their parents, because they
know that if they get across that border, they will remain here
in the United States. It is a terrible journey. You are
subjecting them to just horrific conditions. It needs to end.
Mr. Gimenez. The Democrats dare to call what happened
during the Trump administration inhumane.
My time is up. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields.
I now recognize Mr. Goldman of New York.
Mr. Goldman. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
Our witnesses were asked whether what Secretary Mayorkas
has done is intentional. Obviously, it is intentional. He is
not doing things unintentionally. He has testified before us
and he has acknowledged repeatedly that we are dealing with a
very difficult situation at the border.
I want to focus on, go back to what my colleague, Mr.
Swalwell, was focusing on, which is my friend, Mr. Bishop's,
quote that there is an intentional sabotage of the rule of law.
Now, we have heard a couple of times today that the GAO and a
Federal Court found that Mr. Wolf was acting unlawfully. To my
understanding, that would be a violation of the rule of law.
But let's focus a little bit on some policies and some
efforts. Mr. Gimenez mentioned that there are children who
cannot be found, which brings up, of course, the Trump
administration family separation policy. Mr. Wolf, when you
were the chief of staff to the Secretary of Homeland Security,
isn't it true that you supported the family separation policy?
Mr. Wolf. I was at the Department from 2017 to the end of
the administration.
Mr. Goldman. Well, did you not, according to an inspector
general's report, urge the counselor to the Attorney General to
implement the family separation policy to increase prosecution
of family unit parents and separate family units?
Mr. Wolf. No, I don't believe--no.
Mr. Goldman. OK. Well, I want to introduce into the record
this inspector general's report on family separation, which
includes an email by you to Jean Hamilton, the counselor to the
Attorney general.*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
* The document has been retained in committee files and is also
available at https://oig.justice.gov/sites/default/files/reports/21-
028_0.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Mr. Wolf. So that email had a number of options----
Mr. Goldman. Hold on, hold on.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. For consideration. There was no
direction, there was no directive.
Mr. Goldman. Right. So you are saying right here, right
now, that you did not support the family separation policy?
Mr. Wolf. That was not your question.
Mr. Goldman. Is that your testimony?
Mr. Wolf. That was not your question.
Mr. Goldman. I am asking it right now, is that your
testimony?
Mr. Wolf. We implemented a number of policies in the
administration. I agreed with President Trump when he ended
zero tolerance in June, I believe, of 2018. Absolutely.
Mr. Goldman. Did you support the family separation policy?
Mr. Wolf. We had no family separation policy at the
Department.
Mr. Goldman. Really? The Department did not----
Mr. Wolf. No. I'm happy to go through this. The Attorney
General announced a zero----
Mr. Goldman. All right, let's talk about this.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Tolerance policy that the
Department----
Mr. Goldman. That the--let's talk about this.
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. Then implemented.
Mr. Goldman. One sec, one sec. Let's talk about this
because the facts are that more than 5,000 children were
forcibly separated from their parents at the border. The reason
is because the Department of Justice for the first time used
Title 8, United States Code, Section 1325, which makes it a
misdemeanor offense to charge anyone crossing without lawful--
without papers, et cetera. That had never been used before.
Because the only point of that is to put parents who are
charged with that in jail where they cannot actually be with
their families.
Now, a Federal Court in 2018 ended the family separation
policy, which this Court determined that there was because the
Government's policy, ``shocks the conscience'' and violates the
Constitutional right to family integrity. There are still
children who were separated at the border from their parents
who have not been found because this zero tolerance policy,
which ultimately ended up separating parents and children, did
not create any mechanism to account for that separation in
order to track the children. Now, that clearly, as a judge said
was a violation of the rule of law. An intentional sabotage of
the rule of law.
Let me go quickly to another one. According to a
whistleblower complaint by the former head of the Department's
intelligence branch, Mr. Wolf ordered him to withhold an
intelligence notification on Russian activities because it
``made the President look bad''. The Office of Inspector
General investigated it and found that the Department did not
adequately follow its internal processes and policy standards
when editing and disseminating an intelligence product
regarding Russian interference with the 2020 Presidential
election. The Acting Secretary, Mr. Wolf, participated in that
review process.
Mr. Chairman, I know my time is up. I would like to
introduce for the record that Inspector General's report which
my staff will give.
I would like to note that before we start attacking this
intentional sabotage of the rule of law, we ought to look in
our own glass house.
I yield.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.**
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
** The document has been retained in committee files and is also
available at https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/2022-
05/OIG-22-41-Apr22-Redacted.pdf.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
Chairman Green. I recognize Mr. Pfluger from Texas for his
5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
How rich was that?
Mr. Wolf, how many apprehensions occurred in the Trump
years combined? I mean, just round numbers.
Mr. Wolf. All 4 years?
Mr. Pfluger. Yes.
Mr. Wolf. I don't have a number for you. The chief may.
Mr. Pfluger. Chief?
Mr. Scott. I don't have that number off the top of my head,
to be honest. But it was less than a million a year and some
years, less than 500,000.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. How many since Biden has taken over?
Mr. Scott. You have to define whether they're arrests or
encounters.
Mr. Pfluger. Apprehensions.
Mr. Scott. The apprehensions would technically include
encounters. There were over 6 million.
OK. Known, gotaways that has been reported?
Mr. Scott. Known gotaways over 1.5 million, plus or minus
that's only the known.
Mr. Pfluger. OK. Known or suspected terrorists?
Mr. Scott. There's been about 200. I think there's 98 this
year.
Mr. Pfluger. OK.
Mr. Scott. Again, those are just the ones that are known.
Mr. Pfluger. Two hundred since January 2021.
Mr. Wolf, you guys reported known or suspected terrorists.
Actually, it took us 6 months to get Mayorkas and the President
to actually report known or suspected terrorists. What is the
combined approximate total in the Trump years of known or
suspected?
Mr. Wolf. I believe it was 11.
Mr. Pfluger. Eleven. How rich is that discussion that we
just heard about looking in a glass house? You know what the
political theater here is? Over 5 million apprehensions at our
Southern Border, over 200 known or suspected terrorists, over a
million and a half known gotaways. I have constituents who are
currently sitting in this committee hearing right now that live
in west Texas and these folks are dealing with the unfunded
mandate that my colleagues on the other side of the aisle are
calling political theater. You are saying that 53 people that
died in a tractor trailer south of San Antonio last summer is
political theater? Give me a break.
This is insane that we continue to look at this
administration anything less than a complete, abysmal failure.
Mr. Wolf, it looks like you might have a reply or something
that was from the previous question.
Mr. Wolf. I would just say the previous question from the
Congressman was probably false on all fronts. I think it's a
naive view of the situation that occurred in 2018. Children are
separated from adults who may or may not be their parents.
Perhaps they're their parents that are abusing them. This
happens every day along the border. You need to visit the
border. You need to talk to Border Patrol to actually
understand the border. This happens every day in the Biden
administration, this happens in the Trump administration,
Obama, and it goes on and on and on. I'm sure the chief can
tell you more about that. But this idea that it only started in
3 weeks in 2018, it's a false narrative.
Mr. Pfluger. Well, isn't it true that the Obama
administration actually started family separation in all
practicality? Mr. Scott, you served for four different
Presidents, both sides of the aisle.
Mr. Scott. Correct. I'm really offended by the--not by you,
but the statement family separation. DHS, United States Border
Patrol, under various different administrations prosecute
people for committing crimes, and we prosecute more people for
committing crimes of the percentage of the total population as
the numbers go down. Over years, we found out consequences slow
down the flow of illegal immigration. A consequence is a
prosecution. That's what we were doing in the field. That
happened way before the Trump administration. Some of you may
be familiar with Operations Streamline. The Border Patrol
reported on it all the time, and that was misdemeanor
prosecution of illegal entry, and it has a direct result in
improved border security. The track record is there, multiple
administrations.
Mr. Pfluger. Mr. Scott, when did you serve the Biden
administration? What months or years?
Mr. Scott. For the Biden administration from the day of
inauguration until August 14, 2021.
Mr. Pfluger. OK, so for approximately 8 months.
Mr. Scott. Plus or minus.
Mr. Pfluger. Was Secretary Mayorkas briefed on policy
failures? Were there recommendations that were made to
Secretary Mayorkas and President Biden from Border Patrol, from
ICE, from Customs, from any of our DHS leaders?
Mr. Scott. I personally participated in numerous conference
calls. The Secretary insulated himself a lot, but he had
representatives on those calls, and occasionally he was in
those calls himself. Yes, it was very clear, but the
administration made it very clear deterrence was no longer our
mission, and we weren't even allowed to talk about it. The
minute you talked about trying to slow down the flow or putting
any kind of a deterrent mechanism in place, we were immediately
stymied.
Mr. Pfluger. So this is a willful and complicit decision to
turn away from the policies from 2017 to 2020 and go a
different direction, which have resulted in the numbers that I
previously said. They have been advised, and there have been
recommendations made by yourself and others that they have
completely ignored?
Mr. Scott. Absolutely. They're just carrying out their game
plan that they said in the campaign.
Mr. Pfluger. This is complete dereliction of duty.
I thank you, gentlemen, for your service to this country.
Mr. Chairman, the dereliction that we see from Secretary
Mayorkas is unprecedented, and it has resulted in so many
assaults, deaths, and drugs and chaos in this country. Thank
you for holding this hearing.
I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields.
I now recognize Mr. Ivey from Maryland.
Mr. Ivey. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that.
I wanted to say that when I arrived on the Hill this
morning, I was surprised to find out that the committee had
issued a report. It is titled ``Causes, Costs, and
Consequences.'' It is titled as Committee on Homeland Security
Majority Report. It is, I don't know, around 55 pages long.
What this document lays out is the Republican views with--I
haven't had a chance to read it yet because I just got it.
Actually it was waiting in my spot here when I sat down to
begin the hearings. That is the first I have saw it and I
didn't have a chance to go through it.
But I want to say a couple of things about it. I look
forward to reading it and having a chance to digest it. I am
deeply disappointed that a Majority Report didn't give the
Minority any opportunity not only to review it, but to respond
to it. I guess this isn't a formal report, but to the extent we
are actually looking to try and do things together, to work
together, to move the committee forward together to address the
issues that are being addressed not only in this hearing, but
in previous hearings, this kind of approach doesn't work. In
fact, it is counterproductive, to say the least. I understand
you guys have a view, and some of the points you have are
different than ours, some of ours are different than yours. But
if we are going to try and address this together, we actually
have to work together, and it has to begin before the hearing
starts.
What was especially disappointing about this one was I had
a conversation with--I won't call a name, but a Member of the
report, the Republican side on the House floor last night with
respect to trying to move legislation in this committee. Part
of it came out of the mark-up that we had a few weeks ago where
there was recognition I thought by both sides that the
Democrats had offered some amendments that might make sense.
For example, with respect to the drones issue, we were told
when we went to visit the border that there was a 17-to-1
deficit. We had offered an amendment to try and increase the
number of drones and funding for it. The Republicans didn't
take any amendments during the mark-up, and that is their
prerogative. But there was a statement made at the time, well,
maybe we can move amendments that you have offered that we find
mutually acceptable that are beneficial. Another one, for
example, was additional funding for Border Patrol agents. There
are some provisions in the bill that passed, but not all that
we talked about to provide additional funding, hire more
agents, retention by paying them more and the like, since we
are losing agents and it is harder to enforce the border with
fewer agents than more agents. So we talked about actual
legislation to try and address the problems that we are talking
about here. I was assured, hey, yes, we can work together on
this stuff. We got an oversight thing we got to do tomorrow,
but we can work together on getting legislation done through
the--I had no idea that the oversight thing--I knew the
witnesses were coming. I mean we got the testimony just barely
48 hours in advance, but at least we did get it in advance. But
this report is a blind-side. Hopefully that is not an
indication of things to come.
But I also did remember at a previous hearing I raised this
issue, the New York Times article that came out April 18. ``Key
Republican Tells Donors He Will Pursue Impeachment of
Mayorkas.'' Now, I don't need to go through it again, we put it
in the record previously. But basically it laid out a plan, a
five-phase plan, quote, unquote, to set up the impeachment of
Mr. Mayorkas. I was told that these were misquotes and the
like. You know, we are really going to try and work together on
this, we are going to file the--blah, blah, blah--in the
hearing. This is on the record. Then I get this.
You know, I understand that that both sides differ. As I
mentioned before, my first job here was 1987 on Capitol Hill
working for Congressman Conyers. I am sorry I missed earlier
parts of the meeting because I had votes in Judiciary. But can
we actually try and address some of these problems by working
together? I know we have got different sides. I understand how
hearings work. You guys get three witnesses, we get one. That
is fine, but let's try and do things that--we can disagree
without being disagreeable and try and move our points forward,
I think. Because this is the Homeland Security Committee, our
goal, I think, for all of us is to try and do what is best to
help the American people. It is harder to do it when we are
working at cross-purposes.
So with that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields back.
The Chair now recognizes the gentleman from New York, Mr.
Garbarino.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Mr. Edlow, what is the legal basis for asylum?
Mr. Edlow. The INA Section 208 sets out exactly what asylum
is.
Mr. Garbarino. Is general economic hardship a legal basis
for asylum?
Mr. Edlow. A legal basis? No, it is not. There are five
recognized grounds of asylum.
Mr. Garbarino. Is general violence or crime alone a legal
basis for asylum?
Mr. Edlow. It is not, Congressman.
Mr. Garbarino. Is political instability alone a legal basis
for asylum?
Mr. Edlow. Not alone, no.
Mr. Garbarino. Does filing an asylum claim after entering
illegally or improperly negate the fact that the individual
entered illegally to begin with?
Mr. Edlow. No, it doesn't. However, when someone comes in
at the port of entry, claims credible fear, has a positive
credible fear determination at that point, they are given the
opportunity to present an asylum claim. Under Section 235 they
are supposed to be detained. As we know, that's not been
happening, but they are able to stay in the country to file
that claim. They do not have legal status in the country, they
are an asylum applicant at that point.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you. Are you aware that the CBP and
Troy Miller, CBP acting commissioner, have recently tweeted
that most of those claiming asylum at the border don't qualify
for asylum as economic migrants?
Mr. Edlow. I'm not aware of the tweet, but I would agree
with it.
Mr. Garbarino. Prior to the Biden administration, how were
the words urgent humanitarian reasons and significant public
benefit in a parole statute interpreted by DHS?
Mr. Edlow. So I don't think there's necessarily been a
change in the actual interpretation of the wording. But where I
think there's a change is the sheer volume of categorical
parole programs that we've seen. I'm not going to sit here and
say there were not some categorical parole programs under the
Trump administration, I, for the most part, would have liked to
have seen them go away. I don't think that they are lawful.
With the exception of maybe the Cuba accords that allowed for
the Cuban family reunification, the remainder of the programs
probably should not have been there. However, we saw maybe 20-,
30,000 people over the course of the 4 years get paroled in
under these types of programs. Whereas now, we're seeing mass
parole where in the months prior to them stopping parole, given
the court decisions and some other things, we saw months where
there was over 100,000 people paroled in that month.
So, the sheer volume of parole numbers is astronomical now.
Plus, they're doing it for specific countries, whole
populations of those countries that they have a sponsor here
that's not case-by-case. If they have humanitarian needs to get
here, they can come through other means. They can come to the
border and ask for credible fear. That's what we expected
before. This is not an appropriate use of the parole
authorities.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. A lot of numbers going
up. You are talking about paroles are going up. You know, we
have seen numbers in migrants found dead on U.S. soil also go
up. Mr. Scott, CBP personnel have reported informally that more
than 1,700 migrants have been found dead on U.S. soil during
this administration's watch, Biden and Mayorkas's watch. More
than 500 were found dead in fiscal year 2021, and reportedly
more than 800 found dead in fiscal year 2022. The 5 years prior
to fiscal year 2021, the number had not exceeded 300 in any
given year. Why is the number of dead migrants found on our
soil increasing so much?
Mr. Scott. Because chaos kills people, and we've created a
chaotic border situation. Additionally, Border Patrol has a
search-and-rescue team that would normally just respond and be
out in remote desert areas looking for people in advance.
They're processing civil immigration cases. So, we're leaving
vast sections of border open, and I would argue those numbers
are probably underreported.
I was down at the border recently talking to some local
sheriffs, and they're telling me that they're finding bodies on
ranches. There are people dead along the border they believe
have just crossed that are not included in CBP's numbers. But
chaos kills people, and that's what we've created on our
border.
Mr. Garbarino. I appreciate that. I have 50 seconds left. I
know people run out of time when they want to answer this
question. So, I want to yield the rest of my time to Mr. Wolf,
if there is anything you want to continue to say about, you
know, this hearing and what you have experienced, I would
appreciate it.
Mr. Wolf. No, again, I think what we did during the Trump
administration is every day we weren't perfect, but every day
we worked to install policies and operations that further
secured that border that actually upheld the rule of law, day
after day after day. Some we got right some we got wrong at the
end of the day. I think if you look at the overall evidence of
the past 27 months, that is not the case. They have
specifically torn down policies and put others in place that
make that border significantly less secure, not only from a
humanitarian perspective, but also from a national security and
a public safety perspective as well.
Mr. Garbarino. Thank you very much. I ran out of time, so I
yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. The Chair recognizes
Mr. Clark. All right, Mr. Garcia. I am sorry.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you
to our witnesses for being here today as well. I want to just a
couple of notes. I think that first, I just want to note that
there has been a lot of attacks, of course, on the Biden
administration on the work that is happening on the border. I
think that obviously as a reminder that Democrats also want a
safe and secure border. That is in the interests of everyone in
our country.
I also want to note that there has been a bemoaning that,
of course, that since the end of Title 42, that the chaos at
the border that oftentimes many in this committee were rooting
for just also did not happen. So, once again, it is very clear
that we are getting another political hearing, another
distraction from the real issues that are in front of our
country.
I also want to note that there has been, once again, a
repeating of things that have been debunked by witnesses, by
experts, repeated over and over in this committee. We have been
ignoring the facts about fentanyl. We want to blame the opioid
epidemic on people that are seeking their legal right to asylum
and not actually on the failures of our treatment system in the
United States. Folks want to feed a narrative that if we just
invade Mexico, things will get better in this country. All
these things, along with false claims that our border is
somehow open. The men and women of Department of DHS and our
partnerships with NGO's and in Mexico are doing their jobs.
Again, the border is not open. We continue to do that work in
this country.
I also want to just remind Members of this committee there
has been a lot of back-and-forth on the issues around family
separation. I want to give Ms. Acer a chance to respond to
this. We have heard a lot about family separation under the
Trump administration and specifically, quite frankly, a
rewriting of what actually happened and of history. Can you
clarify the actual differences between what happened in the
Trump administration to what is happening today?
Ms. Acer. Yes, absolutely. So, the Trump administration
initiated policies that they knew would separate children from
their parents. The decision to start prosecuting families for
initial entries was done with full knowledge of what the impact
would be. I actually met mothers in detention centers who had
been separated from their children, had no idea where they were
or how to find them. It was heartbreaking as a parent.
Mr. Garcia. I want to note that I think that the
differences between what has happened during the Trump
administration and what is happening today, and the point of
actually the whole process is completely different. So, I want
to thank you for that clarification.
One other question. In this committee, we have had Members
of the Majority work to defund programs with NGO's,
particularly around with Catholic Charities, who is trying to
support legal asylum, which is really shameful and really
counterproductive to our work and our humanitarian work along
the border. Can you explain why our partnerships with NGO's
that are providing these services are so important to the work
that DHS does and across the border?
Ms. Acer. Yes, absolutely. Those partnerships are critical
globally around the world as well as here at home. Faith
leaders, faith volunteers, employees of faith organizations,
and other NGO's, you know, are inspiring. You know, those who
are motivated by their religions are trying to welcome the
stranger day in and day out through their work. Refugees around
the world are welcomed by faith-based and other organizations.
That's critical to enable all the other countries to be hosting
refugees. But here at home, we need more support for the
organizations that are working to welcome refugees into our
communities. There's also a disgraceful lack of support for the
organizations in Mexico that are struggling to host refugees
who are now waiting to seek asylum at our ports of entry.
Mr. Garcia. Thank you. Finally, I just want to just note, I
know there has been discussion about the One app application. I
think one of the key reasons that conditions have improved and
really we are focused on legal pathways is because the CBP One
app after we all agree a difficult rollout has actually made
things a lot better. So, I just want to thank everyone that
worked on that, the entire Department, so many groups that have
been involved in the rollout. Now over 1,000 migrants a day are
able to use that app to exercise their legal right to asylum,
which I think is really important. It is a legal right, even
though some in the Majority choose to not see it that way. I
yield back. Thank you.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. The Chair recognizes
Ms. Greene of Georgia.
Ms. Greene. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It is interesting to
me to listen to some Democrats here on the committee trying to
harp on the very idea that Mr. Wolf is somehow illegitimate as
the former Acting Secretary. We Republicans here, we are
committed to searching for answers as to why this
administration continues to inflict catastrophic damage to our
country.
Here, I just want to remind you of a few things that are
very important to understand. Not only is fentanyl poisoning
the No. 1 cause of death of young Americans ages 18 to 49,
nearly 83,000 Americans have died of opioid poisonings since
the year 2022, and they die weekly in my district. Ninety-six
individuals on the terrorist watch list have been apprehended.
Crime has skyrocketed across the country, and we are missing
85,000 children, 85,000 children.
While Democrats across the aisle on this committee want to
talk about families being separated under the Trump
administration, I would like to introduce for the record, Mr.
Chairman, a letter from Customs and Border Protection saying
that the Biden administration is ending DNA testing, familial
DNA testing, as of that was at the end of May, May 31, 2023.
So, when you talk about separating----
Chairman Green. So ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Greene [continuing]. Children, we have the Biden
administration not even testing, testing who these adults and
these children are. I can't comprehend it. Everyone in this
room knows what an Amber Alert is. We all get them on our
phones, right? This is when a child has been kidnapped. We are
so concerned in this country about children who have been
kidnapped that we have something called an Amber Alert
notifying all of us that there is a missing child. Eighty-five
thousand children missing, migrant children missing, in the
United States is the same thing as 85,000 Amber Alerts. It is
unbelievable.
Mr. Wolf, many of the children are brought to United States
by coyotes and human smugglers. In your view, how is Secretary
Mayorkas responsible for exasperating the unaccompanied
children humanitarian crisis?
Mr. Wolf. Well, it's not just one action. It's obviously a
culmination of a variety of different incentives. It's an
incentive structure that has been created over the past 27
months. It allows individuals to come into the country and
remain into the country. When you exempt UACs from Title 42,
that sends a signal to the cartels and to everyone else to
smuggle as many children across that border as humanly
possible. We know they are going to stay in the United States.
So, when you make these categorical pronouncements, the cartels
are watching and they are paying attention.
Just to key off on your last point, not only did DNA
testing going to end, about to end, the vetting of sponsors
also ended at HHS under this administration. No more vetting
detailed, in-depth vetting of sponsors. We also increased
vetting of other household members. We didn't just want to know
who the sponsor was. We wanted to know other household members
and dive into those backgrounds. That was eliminated as well.
Site visits, not every home was visited, but random site visits
to make sure that those children were where they said they
would be, also eliminated under this administration. So, the
idea that somehow they are protecting children because they
needed to facilitate the flow out of HHS facilities quicker and
quicker is a misnomer.
Ms. Greene. Unbelievable. Mr. Scott, it has been reported
that many minors at the Southwest Border are in fact related to
adults with whom they are traveling. In fact, some of them are
even recycled. I can't even comprehend using the term recycled
when it comes to children. These kids are used again by
different cartels and human smugglers to guarantee admission of
family units. In your estimation, has this exploitation of
minors exponentially expanded under the Mayorkas's policies?
Mr. Scott. I believe it has and this is why. Every one of
those child recycling cases, and if you don't understand what
that means, that means a child being teamed up with a fake
family over and over again. So, he has to make that trip over
and over again because that gets them to become a family unit.
They get into that categorical exemption to get released. Every
one of those cases was discovered by an agent interviewing the
child and finding little cracks in the story. That takes time.
The agents don't have that time today. Those conversations are
no longer going on at all. They're being pumped through the
system like fast food commodities.
Worse than that, now the DNA piece of it is being shut down
as well. That was one of the last tools to be able to quickly
be able to prove somebody was not related. That doesn't mean
that there's not some kind of a connection there. But that gave
the agents a tool. Most people broke immediately when they
believed they were going to be subjected to the DNA. You didn't
even have to do it.
This administration knows they're putting children at risk
every day. They're enticing them to come to the country, and it
defies common sense.
Ms. Greene. Thank you. He should be impeached.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields.
Ms. Greene. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The Chair recognizes Ms. Jackson Lee of
Texas.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. Let me
thank the distinguished Ranking Member and Chairman and my
colleagues and Members and the witnesses every time you put
yourself forward. We certainly thank you very much. But this is
a journey that I have taken now for 28 years, maybe a little
shorter. It never fails that whenever Republican administration
is in, my Republican friends are in the Majority, there is an
enormous crisis, and the Executive does nothing. There is no
effort to write legislation. There is no effort to correct what
any one of you are saying. It is with all due respect, and
admiration, and friendship, it is a broken record. It is
literally a broken record.
Before the late John McCain passed, there was a gang of
eight who had an enormous contribution to trying to do an
overhaul over immigration reform. It was the party that is now
in charge of the House that blocked it. I worked with on this
committee a Chairwoman by the name of Candice Miller from
Michigan. We worked on comprehensive immigration reform
measures to address the U.S.-Mexico border, which was blocked
by the Republican leadership at that time.
Do your homework. In years past, we have written
legislation to provide the border personnel every manner of
support we could give them. So, let me be very clear. The
Remain in Mexico program was horrible because I went and
visited the squalor that the people were sitting in. There was
nowhere for them to go. It was misery. Nothing was happening.
The border wall, you can get a nice comment and quote, our men
and women at the border are very nice people. They will give
you quotes. But it is well-known that most of fentanyl comes to
the United States citizens through legal ports of entry. It is
also well-known that even though you will say, well, that is
because we need more border wall, that the border communities
fight you for the border wall, not to have it. Smugglers and
others find other ways.
As relates to the asylum cooperative agreements, we have
agreements now with Venezuela, Haiti, Cuba, and Nicaragua. As
relates to Title 42, the Republicans voted to end the public
health provision that the President ended, and by its very
essence, you ended Title 42. Let me quickly because I will be
going to one witness, because all the other witnesses I know
what you are going to say, but I do appreciate the work that
Ms. Acer is doing. So, please be ready for a question. I am
trying to get through.
I heard the word impeachment. I don't know whether it was
going in direction of my President, the President of the United
States, or whether it was going in terms of Secretary Mayorkas,
an immigrant himself, who pulled himself up by the bootstraps
and has more commitment in his tiny finger than what I would
imagine some who advocate against him. I make that generic. But
Secretary Mayorkas has done nothing contrary to his boss. He is
a member of the Cabinet and his boss wants America to be safe,
the President of the United States. In every aspect of work
that we can do, from the increased resources, from adding to
the additional personnel, to creating pathways for people to
parole in, for creating the app, and the numbers have gone
down. They surge up, they go down. It depends upon movements of
people.
So, you have no more answers than anyone else. Mr. Wolf,
you were in there for a year or 2 years, and I don't see
anything that you did that has brought down anything that we
are talking about. This is not a personal statement because I
want to add and say I appreciate your service to the Nation.
But everybody that is sitting there that is criticizing had
their opportunity.
We have got to come together as a country and stop scaring
our constituents because America is getting more diverse and
they are contributing to the economy and to the culture of this
Nation. The world watches as to whether or not we can make this
experiment work. They are in awe of us. They come because they
are in awe, because they are desperate, because they think this
is the greatest country in the world. It is. Its democracy,
however challenged, is still standing. It bothers me to
masquerade.
I have this question, Mr. Chairman, I ask your indulgence
so she can answer it. I represent Catholic Charities and many
others. I fought to get hostages back from Russia. I have dealt
with the crisis of deportation, families separated. What does
it do to our very dedicated non-profits who are innocent, who
have the responsibility of taking care of people in streets,
people who are separated, children who are separated, people
who are traveling that you would assess them criminally or find
them so that they are so scared that they cannot do the normal,
humane things for individuals who even may be in here on a
legal pathway coming into the United States? Mr. Chairman, I
asked your indulgence for her to be able to ask that question--
answer it.
Chairman Green. Just if you could make your answer short.
Ms. Jackson Lee is already over her time, so I will allow it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. OK, thank you.
Chairman Green. I will allow it.
Ms. Jackson Lee. Thank you.
Chairman Green. Just make your answer as quick as possible.
Ms. Jackson Lee. No basis for the Secretary to be impeached
but go right ahead.
Ms. Acer. It's reprehensible. Not only does it punish
people for acting on their humanitarian values, it also
punishes them for acting on their faith beliefs as well. It's
totally counterproductive. I mean, here in America, we need our
faith-based organizations. We need our communities to step up
and be part of the solution. Many Americans want to do that and
are doing that as we speak. Thank you.
Chairman Green. Thank you. The gentlelady yields. I now
recognize Mr. LaLota----
Ms. Jackson Lee. I yield.
Chairman Green [continuing]. For his 5 minutes.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you, sir, for
your leadership and bringing this committee together in this
hearing and for your efforts to make my constituents' lives
safer for securing the Southwest Border. I appreciate the
witnesses and your expertise being here.
I represent the First Congressional District of New York.
The western edge of my district is about an hour or so east of
New York City. Over the past several weeks, my constituents
have heard how New York City's sanctuary city policies, coupled
of course, with our country's non-secure and wide-open
Southwest Border, have overwhelmed New York City's resources
previously meant for the homeless, for folks suffering from
substance abuse and veterans in need. Given the influx of
migrants who are attracted to New York City because of those
sanctuary city policies, the city can no longer handle the
influx of those migrants. In response, Mayor, New York City
Mayor Adams is now attempting to sending those same migrants
who were attracted by those sanctuary city policies to suburban
counties throughout the State who had expressly rejected those
sanctuary city policies.
Mr. Wolf, that leads me to my first question, sir. Can you
please explain what sort of costs, such as monetary, personnel,
public safety, are imposed on States, cities, and counties in
dealing with the current crisis at the Southwest Border?
Mr. Wolf. Sure, there's a variety of different costs. You
know, all of the children that we've talked about go into
public education systems. English is usually not their first
language. So, that's going to strain public education systems
in every community that they go into. Certainly, the ones that
they go to in a large amount.
Health systems, public safety systems. You now have public
safety officers, law enforcement officers, having to deal with
additional crimes and additional incidents, particularly along
the border, that I've talked to sheriffs that are overwhelmed
because of what's going on.
Then we talk about the money that DHS is sending to NGO's,
right? Billions of dollars, I would say millions of dollars
being sent to NGO's for a crisis that they created, that
they're now using taxpayer dollars to send to try to solve the
crisis. So, there's a lot of different costs, you know, that
American taxpayers bear.
Mr. LaLota. What, if anything, sir, can you say about the
cost on public safety with a whole slew of unvetted young adult
migrants, excuse me, adult migrants that are being shipped to
suburban counties? What can you say as far as what public
safety costs?
Mr. Wolf. I think there's a variety of different, you know,
ways. If you talk to law enforcement officers along the border,
they're dealing with crimes and they're dealing with incidents
that they've never had to deal with before. When you talk of
military-aged males, individuals coming over that are a certain
age that are not being vetted, right? We talk about 1.5 million
gotaways. These are individuals that obviously don't want to
interact with law enforcement officers for a very specific
reason. They're here to do bad things.
Or we talk about 100,000 Afghans that weren't properly
vetted. We've seen and there's been reports of crimes and
incidents that are occurring on that front.
So, I think there's a variety of different things that you
could point to that says if the process was followed correctly
and individuals are vetted as they should be, some of this
should not have occurred.
Mr. LaLota. Four billion, New York City has said that it
will spend $4 billion next year caring for and housing the
illegal alien population that has come to New York City because
of its sanctuary city policies. Eight billion, Texas is on
track to spend more than $8 billion on Operation Lone Star
doing the job that Secretary Mayorkas won't do, securing the
Southwest Border.
Another question for you, Mr. Wolf. How do these massive
expenditures affect the cities and States who are forced to pay
them? Is it fair for New York and Texas law-abiding taxpayers
to have to suffer the burden that the open border and the
sanctuary city policy have created?
Mr. Wolf. No, none of this is fair. None of this should be
occurring. But this is what happens when the Federal Government
refuses to do its job. We've never seen this before. As I
testified, it's in my oral and written, every administration
has progressively tried to make improvements along that border.
I would argue that some administrations did more than others,
but every administration, at least in my lifetime, has done
that. This is the first that has not only taken one or two
steps back, we've probably taken five to 10 steps backward.
So, you're going to--that's got to be picked up by someone.
It's different States along the border, and it's different
municipalities, cities, and officials that have to pick up the
slack. They have to protect their communities.
Mr. LaLota. Thank you. I appreciate you being here today
with your expertise and your experience. Mr. Chairman, I yield
back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Ms. Clarke.
Ms. Clarke. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon,
everyone. I just wanted to correct the record of my colleague,
Mr. LaLota. These immigrants had no choice in where they ended
up in this Nation. They crossed the Southern Border, yes, but
it was Governors of the States of Texas and Florida that put
these individuals on buses directed to New York City.
Mr. LaLota. Not all of them.
Ms. Clarke. So, having said that, we are currently, as my
colleague Rep. Correa demonstrated in this line of questioning,
witnessing an unprecedented human migration movement around the
world of individuals seeking refuge, safety, and economic
opportunity. Individuals are fleeing economic instability,
governmental corruption and persecution, violence. Climate
change has ravaged food and water supplies in their homes of
origin, and this has been evident in many nations within the
Western Hemisphere and especially in the Caribbean, in the
island nation of Haiti, as individuals have been enduring far
more dangerous means and methods to escape and to seek refuge
here in the United States. This is not just a challenge for the
United States, but a global challenge. We must step up to the
plate to do our part.
So, my first question, my only question is to you, Ms.
Acer. Would you agree that there is an unprecedented movement
of vulnerable people in the Americas and world-wide? Can you
speak about how that is affecting our border and how our
Government should work with regional partners to address this
challenge?
Ms. Acer. Yes, absolutely. There's been a significant
increase in people fleeing in search of protection in the
Americas in recent years. There's also been a shift with
increasing numbers fleeing from Nicaragua, Venezuela, and Cuba.
I'm sure some of you know, for example, about the crackdown on
political opposition and faith groups in Nicaragua forcing many
people to flee that country, for example. People who have fled
from Venezuela are facing restrictions in some of the countries
that they have been in, and they are seeking safety and
stability as well.
So, there's been major regional shifts. But there's a lot
that we can be doing and doing more of in the region.
Incredibly important is to continue to support, and support as
best we can the front-line countries that are actually hosting
the vast majority of refugees. I mentioned, for example, that
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are hosting 6 out
of the 7 million Venezuelans who left their country. It's
certainly in the U.S. interest to continue to support those
efforts. Critically important that we now have a commitment to
start long-overdue resettlement from the region, from the
Americas that needs to be absolutely stepped up.
You mentioned the plight of Haitians who are facing such
extreme dangers that the United Nations and the U.N. Refugee
Agency said that it is too dangerous for people to be returned
to Haiti right now. So, parole, for example, has been an
incredible lifeline for some people from Haiti. But the parole
processes are not as accessible as they should be for many
people facing dire risks and the numbers are too small. You
know, there's really no way often for Haitians to actually flee
in search of refuge.
So, thank you so much for everything that some of you have
been doing. I would really encourage bipartisan support, you
know, for the programs that are helping refugees around the
world, for the expansion of refugee resettlement from the
region, and for these very legal parole initiatives.
Ms. Clarke. I would like to thank you for the work that you
are doing. Mr. Chairman, without objection, I would like to
enter this report led by the Haitian Bridge Alliance with input
from Ms. Acer and Human Rights First, which documents their
observations on the Southern Border following the end of Title
42.
Chairman Green. Without objection, so ordered.
[The information follows:]

[GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Ms. Clarke. I would also like to just say that for those
who are Christians in the room, you know, I just find it very,
I guess, disorienting that we see suffering around us as a
Nation, one of the wealthiest in the hemisphere, and that today
we sit here not looking for solutions, but creating problems.
Jesus Christ was a refugee. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields. I now recognize Mr.
D'Esposito of New York for his 5 minutes.
Mr. D'Esposito. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to
our panel. Thank you for those who have served this country and
for all the work that you continue to do. I first want to start
with, I guess, a simple question to each of you and ask who
Secretary Mayorkas was appointed by?
Mr. Wolf. The President.
Mr. D'Esposito. Our current President.
Mr. Wolf. President Biden.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. Mr. Scott.
Mr. Scott. President Biden.
Mr. Edlow. President Biden.
Ms. Acer. President Biden.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. I just wanted to make that
clear. So, I guess my first question is going to be to Mr.
Scott. There was a story that in response to a mounted Border
Patrol agent in Del Rio, Texas, Secretary Mayorkas had stated
about the images that were shared, that they ``those images
painfully conjured up the worst elements of our Nation's on-
going battle against systemic racism.'' Now, I asked that
question because on my multiple visits to the border and
speaking to Customs and Border Patrol agents just recently, I
visited JFK Airport, which is just blocks from my district. I
am a retired NYPD detective. I feel that boots on the ground,
having conversations, speaking cop to cop, you really get an
understanding of how people feel.
So, how do Border Patrol agents who have legitimately made
it their life's work to secure our border feel when their so-
called leader, the Secretary of Homeland Security, rewards
their hard work by slandering them as systemically racist?
Mr. Scott. It's a kick in the gut. I'd like to point out
that that followed the Secretary going on national TV and
declaring that the border was secure. So, his credibility was
already challenged. But that second kick in the gut really
damaged morale beyond anything that could be imagined.
Mr. D'Esposito. Thank you. I think what was important, you
said in your opening statement that this is not about policy,
it is about his legal duty and the fact that he took an oath. I
said when he was here that you take an oath to defend and
protect the Constitution, you protect our Nation's borders.
That is what he should be doing. From the moment he wakes up in
the morning to the moment he closes his eyes in his bed, he
should be working every second to protect this great Nation. I
think it is clear from today's hearing that Secretary Mayorkas
has been derelict in his duties to secure the homeland, but
also derelict in his ability to protect CBP agents and DHS
employees.
Both Border Patrol Chief Raul Ortiz and National Border
Patrol Council Vice President Chris Cabrera recently told
Congress that 17, 1-7, CBP personnel committed suicide in 2022,
the highest total in over a decade. How has Mayorkas's
unprecedented border crisis affected the lives and families of
our Border Patrol agents?
Mr. Scott. I'm hesitant to blame the border crisis on any
specific death or suicide, but I want people to think about
this. Every law enforcement agency out there has to make
decisions. He misses birthdays, he misses soccer games just
because of the schedules they work. There's a lot of family
tension. But historically, that agent, that officer, has been
able to go home and say, I'm protecting America. I'm doing this
so that our kids can have a better life.
This administration makes Border Patrol agents and many CBP
officers feel like smugglers. They no longer have that
intrinsic mission that they can justify to their spouse, to
their kids, of why they miss those important events. I believe
that has cascading effects in many areas and can potentially be
a factor in the suicide.
Mr. D'Esposito. I agree with you. I think that someone who
came from law enforcement, there is nothing more important than
knowing that your leader or so-called leader has your back.
When you go to work every day and realize that the control at
the border is no longer in your control, but now in the control
of cartels, it makes your life more difficult.
Seventeen CBP suicides in 1 year is absolutely intolerable.
Do you believe that Secretary Mayorkas has been derelict in his
handling of the crisis among the Border Patrol agents? I don't
just mean the policies along the border, but the way that he is
treating the men and women who put on that uniform, the men and
women who stand that line, the men and women who want to
protect our points of entry?
Mr. Scott. I believe he's derelict. I'll go back to the
horse patrol incident in Del Rio. You know, everybody focuses
on the first allegation that was proved wrong very, very
quickly. Yet, behind the scenes, Secretary Mayorkas still moved
to take disciplinary action against those agents for doing
nothing but trying to prevent the illegal entry of aliens into
this country right in front of them, which is their job. When
he disciplined those agents, that sent a resounding message
throughout the entire work force that not only did he not have
your back, he was out for you.
Mr. D'Esposito. I agree. Listen, when so-called leaders,
and we have seen it in the State where I am from, when you take
the handcuffs from the police, when you take the handcuffs from
their belt and actually handcuff the police and give criminals
and in this case, cartels more resources, things need to
change. I appreciate your service. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Menendez for his questioning. The gentleman is from New Jersey.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, as I think
others have alluded to, this is a bit of a frustrating day. We
had Secretary Mayorkas here in front of this committee, and I
think there was maybe only a handful of questions asked during
that hearing from colleagues across the side. The opportunity
to really engage with the Secretary that you are now looking to
remove from office. There wasn't a lot of appetite to engage in
that honest conversation.
Then today, we get this report, you know, shortly before
this meeting. It took me no time to go through it because this
is supposed to be an investigation, a report looking into what
is happening at our border. But throughout it, using sources
like Fox News, the Heritage Foundation, the Washington
Examiner, the Center for Immigration Studies, an extreme think
tank, the Daily Signal, all outlets that reaffirm what
Republicans want to make the border seem instead of doing a
real investigation, thoughtful about how we can improve the
situation at the border, which Democrats have engaged in.
When we have talked with Chief Ortiz, he has talked about
how the funding is working, that they have the funding that
they need, but they need to continue to work on recruitment. He
even spoke about how morale is high, which you don't hear from
folks in this room because I feel like there is an attempt to
paint a picture that is politically beneficial for folks, my
colleagues, who I do have immense amount of respect for. But
they have already made the decision about what they wanted this
report to be.
You look at the sources throughout, you look at how
statistics are framed, and it is all done to get to the
destination that they had already decided they wanted to arrive
on. To me, you know, that is extremely problematic, along with
other things throughout this. Again, we only had minutes to
review, and I was just in a T&I Committee on the FAA
reauthorization. But there is a section called Empowering a
Vast NGO Network to Facilitate Illegal Immigration. We are
talking about groups like Catholic Charities. We are not
talking about some sinister operation that the Federal
Government is working with NGO's to move illegal aliens across.
That is not what is happening. We are talking about people who
are trying to help other human beings, organizations like the
Catholic Charities. Here in this report, where we are making it
seem sinister.
Also, just to be clear, this is not just about the border.
There is a section, Rolling Back DACA. People who have lived
here their entire lives. Rolling back DACA is one of the
solutions that we should give consideration to. So, this is not
just about the border. This is about, you know, an extreme
policy toward the border, toward immigration, based on, you
know, non-objective sources that aided this report to move in a
way where it got to the destination I think a lot of people
wanted to get to. That is disappointing. I do think people ask
us and look to us to get to real solutions.
The last thing I will say is I think there has been an
immense amount of talk about 85,000 unaccompanied minors who
are lost. I don't believe any of the witnesses are with HHS or
have worked at HHS, but as I understand it, the situation is
that they place calls to these families, to these sponsors of
these children, and there was 85,000 unanswered calls. I
understand that as a fact, but there is no one here from HHS
that can speak to that. But it is something that I think would
course correct a lot of the conversation that has been had
today. Obviously, if there is any migrant children that are
unaccounted for, that is something we want to work on. That is
absolutely something we would want to work on. But when you
talk about the dereliction of duty, when you talk about all the
things you try to cast upon this administration, upon this
particular Secretary, you are doing so in a dishonest way.
That is just a disappointing thing for me, because I do
have so much respect for our public servants, my colleagues,
the staff of this committee. But this is not the direction we
should be heading. This is not the result. If you want to take
a real look at the border, this is really, to me, just
political messaging now. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Ms.
Lee from Florida.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for having this important
hearing and to our witnesses for being here today. It is
undeniable that we have a national security and a humanitarian
crisis at our Southern Border. Under Secretary Mayorkas's
leadership at the Department of Homeland Security, the number
of illegal border crossings has reached a record high. Many of
these crossings are unaccompanied children. These children are
vulnerable to trafficking, exploitation, and other forms of
abuse. Just last month, we saw a migrant child who arrived in
Safety Harbor near my district without a parent or guardian,
who died in Federal custody.
Tragedies like these are avoidable and preventable. Today
we have heard testimony about decisions that are being made at
the Department of Homeland Security that have facilitated this
crisis. Mr. Wolf, I would like to return specifically to a line
of earlier testimony you were providing about the decisions of
Secretary Mayorkas to suspend certain policies that have had
the net effect of endangering these unaccompanied children who
are coming across our border. Specifically, you touched on a
couple of things that the vetting of sponsors and household
members for these children is not being done appropriately and
that site visits have been eliminated. Would you tell us,
please, a little bit more about those safety protocols and the
significance of them not being done effectively?
Mr. Wolf. Sure. Once children come across that border and
Border Patrol apprehends them, they are quickly transferred
over to HHS facilities where they stay until they're able to
find a sponsor. The sponsor comes, picks them up, and they do
that. What we were finding was that individuals coming to pick
them up, we didn't know who they were, and the background
checks and the type of vetting that was done was not
sufficient. We wanted to make sure that we were protecting
those minors and that they were going into households that they
wouldn't be trafficked, they wouldn't be further trafficked in.
But again, this administration, for a variety of different
reasons, I think we could only guess, decided to reduce the
amount of vetting on those sponsors that come and pick them up.
But it's not only the sponsor it's again, it's the others in
that household. So, it's not enough to do that background check
on one adult, but if there's five other adults in that
household, you want to know who they are as well. Again, they
have reduced those vetting requirements, site visits as well.
My guess, and it's a guess, is because early on in this
administration, the number of children coming across that
border in such astronomically high numbers was backing up HHS
facilities.
Ms. Lee. Is----
Mr. Wolf. There were too many children in there. So, the
quickest way to get children out of those facilities is to
reduce the amount of time they're in the facility, which is to
say, reduce the amount of vetting, because vetting does take
time. We need to make sure that we know who those individuals
are that are picking up these children. But if you reduce that
amount of vetting and you reduce the time, then the children
can go through those facilities quicker and there's not lines
and they're not backing up.
Ms. Lee. Mr. Wolf, is it correct to say that those
protocols, those measures that you used to implement with
checking the people, checking the sponsors, checking the people
who are living in that home, verifying that the sites are safe,
and conducting that on-going monitoring of the sites, was that
an important part of ensuring that we are keeping these
unaccompanied minors safe when they are here in our country?
Mr. Wolf. Well, absolutely. From the HHS perspective, Chief
Scott talked about it earlier, DNA testing is something that
Border Patrol could do. So, we actually tried to find it early
in the system, as early in the system as humanly possible,
which is when they cross that border and they go before that
Border Patrol officer to do that questioning, that line of
questioning. Again, as you reduce that, you're taking more and
more protections away from trying to protect these children and
trying to reduce the amount of trafficking that's going on.
Ms. Lee. Thank you. On that subject, Mr. Scott, would you
please return to the subject of DNA testing and tell us what
role does DNA testing, why is it important in our efforts to
combat human trafficking and the exploitation of children?
Mr. Scott. It's very important for the simple reason you're
trying to identify people and you're trying to make sure
people's stories actually match. I left out of my statement
earlier, in the INA, it mandates that we fingerprint and
photograph anybody over 14 years of age. It's silent below, but
Council has determined that you need reasonable, articulated
facts above and beyond to do the fingerprinting and
photographing of minors. So, most children because, again,
Border Patrol doesn't have time right now to get those facts,
aren't fingerprinted or photographed. So, there's no historic
data to look at to figure out if the child is being recycled or
not. Then on top of that, the massive flow.
So, the DNA testing, the real, actual rapid testing at the
stations, and just the threat of that could take a potential 2-
or 3-hour interview and make it into minutes. Because people
broke left and right that it's not really my kid. Because we
would tell them, you're going to be prosecuted. You can tell me
the truth now.
But now they don't have the ability to do the threat. Then
if someone sticks to their story, they don't have the ability
to actually identify that there is no actual biological
connection between these people. More children will be
trafficked. More children are at risk.
Ms. Lee. Thank you, sir. Mr. Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields. I now recognize Mr.,
well, we have Ms. Titus here. I recognize Ms. Titus from
Nevada.
Ms. Titus. Well, thank you, Mr. Chairman. I apologize for
being late. I was in a mark-up. But it doesn't sound like I
missed much because it is the same old points being hammered
over and over again for political reasons and not trying to
really look for a solution. Also, this committee just continues
to look at this one topic. If you are talking about dereliction
of duty, perhaps we should be looking at some of the other
aspects of homeland security, like cybersecurity. That is such
a major issue. Or real immigration reform, or domestic
terrorism, those are all part of our charge. Not looking at
those, I think, is a dereliction of duty.
In my district, we have a lot of mixed-status families. We
have somebody who is a dreamer, somebody who is TPS, somebody
who is a citizen, somebody who has no papers, and somebody who
doesn't even know what they are. So, that is five problems all
in one. I would like to ask you, Ms. Acer, if you would comment
a little bit about the TPS aspect of that, because it was just
announced that the President was going to extend TPS for El
Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Nepal. Can you talk about
how that helps with humane immigration or accommodation of
people here? We have got 6,000 TPS holders, mostly from El
Salvador in southern Nevada. So, I would just like to hear more
about where that is.
Ms. Acer. Yes, TPS is critical. It is, you know, a life-
saving protection for people from places that, you know, are
too dangerous or for other reasons people cannot be returned
to. So, it's a life-saver. It could be improved, and there
needs to be access for people to eventually, after a certain
number of years, to really be able to stabilize their families,
to be able to bring their kids to safety and, you know,
ultimately to get onto a path to citizenship.
Ms. Titus. Well, I know that the former President ended
TPS, excuse me, for some of these countries. There were some
people who had been here 20 years, had established a family,
had a job, paying taxes, and then suddenly that is yanked away
and they are sent back. So, maybe you could help us with some
ways that we could actually put forward to improve the system,
as you mentioned.
Ms. Acer. I'd be happy to suggest changes, and I think one
of the most important ones is that people can actually get onto
a path to citizenship at some point and also to bring their
families together. We also need to make sure to be using
redesignation authority, because sometimes a situation in a
country triggers a need for TPS, and then, you know, time can
change again, time goes on, but actually the situation is even
worse. So, that TPS needs to be redesignated to make sure to
protect people.
Ms. Titus. Thank you. Also, I think you were on the ground
when Title 42 was lifted. You know, there were some that were
just so anxious to see these people rushed across the border,
chaos, sending down troops. I don't know if they thought there
was going to be some confrontation, but of course it didn't
happen and the numbers have actually gone down. Would you talk
about that a little bit for us?
Ms. Acer. Yes, so we were there, including on the first day
after Title 42, we were in Matamoros, we also were in Reynosa.
Everywhere we went, you know, we met asylum seekers. We spoke
to, I think, hundreds of asylum seekers. I was part of a
delegation with the Haitian Bridge Alliance and other NGO's, as
well as just on our own, with our own researcher. You know,
people were struggling to follow the process for seeking asylum
at ports of entry. We were asked so many questions about the
CBP One app. People were trying to use it, couldn't get an
appointment. There were tons of glitches, as you've all heard.
Some people with dark skin were having trouble actually being
able to register for the system.
Many people don't have phones, asylum seekers. We spoke to
many families who had been robbed of their phones or didn't
have one to begin with. In some cases, there was a need for
internet access. You know, people were walking around
struggling, trying to get sufficient internet access to be able
to actually use the app.
The other problem is that the number of appointments are
really small when you look across the border and you have
asylum seekers who've been waiting and waiting, you know, for
weeks and months. It's in the U.S. interest for people to
actually go to ports of entry and seek asylum there, if
possible.
I'd stress also, though, that it's so important for there
to be access to asylum for people who can't use and access CBP
One. Not everyone can. There are people who don't speak
languages that are used by the system. As I mentioned, there
are people without phones. We've got to make sure that our
ports of entry are operational and that there's ways for people
who are seeking asylum who don't have to have CBP One
appointments to be able to do so and who can't get them. Asylum
seekers from Mexico. There are asylum seekers from Mexico who
have been waiting and waiting. It's the next-door country but
can't get in at one of the ports of entry.
Ms. Titus. Thank you, and I yield back, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields. I now recognize Mr.
Strong from Alabama.
Mr. Strong. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Wolf, under U.S.
law, the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security is,
and I quote, ``charged with a duty to control and guard the
boundaries and borders of the U.S. against illegal entry of
aliens.'' Mr. Wolf, would it be safe to say that it is a
responsibility of this role to be apprised of strategies,
tactics, and methods being employed to exploit our borders?
Mr. Wolf. Absolutely.
Mr. Strong. Would you also say that a great deal of time at
DHS is devoted solely to briefing and keeping the Secretary
informed on such matters?
Mr. Wolf. Yes, there are numerous ways the Secretary stays
informed about a number of things going on at the border.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. On several occasions this year when
he has appeared before Congress, Secretary Mayorkas has
testified that he was unfamiliar with some of the tactics being
employed by cartels at the Southern Border. Mr. Wolf, in what
circumstance would you say it is understandable or acceptable
for the Secretary of Department of Homeland Security to be
unaware of what is happening at the border?
Mr. Wolf. In that particular instance, I can't imagine how
he's not aware of those tactics.
Mr. Strong. Is it a total failure at every level?
Mr. Wolf. Again, I can't imagine why he would not know that
just by visiting the border, talking to Border Patrol agents,
and understanding that, frankly, it's just common knowledge----
Mr. Strong. I would----
Mr. Wolf [continuing]. That those are the tactics.
Mr. Strong. I would think so also. Mr. Wolf, Mr. Scott, Mr.
Edlow, whoever is comfortable, Secretary Mayorkas has had more
than 2 years to observe the failure of his policies and either
change course or resign if not allowed to by President Biden.
He has done the opposite, doubling down on those policies, and
implementing new unlawful programs. Does this strike you as
someone helplessly responding to a crisis or someone intent on
policies that caused the crisis?
Mr. Scott. I believe he's very committed to his policies. I
don't mean to be out of order, but I'd like to comment on your
last question for the Secretary.
Mr. Strong. Please do.
Mr. Scott. I put in writing, as the chief of the Border
Patrol what those tactics were in a memo that went through
commissioner, Acting Commissioner Troy Miller, and it was
addressed to Secretary Mayorkas. It's clearly outlined. That
was while I was still chief of the Border Patrol. I----
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Mr. Scott, I appreciate that. I want
to come back to you with this question. Why would the
Department of Homeland Security Secretary oppose the
construction of more border wall system, especially when Border
Patrol agents routinely say it is an important part of the
toolkit?
Mr. Scott. Because the President campaigned on no more
border wall.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Mr. Scott, since you are here, and I
want to thank you again for coming back before us. I know I
have met you several times. During the Trump administration,
you looked--the big thing that I saw whenever you were there,
Border Patrol apprehended, processed, and by ICE Air returned
these illegal aliens to the country of their origin. What
message did this send when you were there to those seeking to
enter America illegally?
Mr. Scott. That is a huge deterrent. A couple of things
happened, I think, and we keep talking about gotaways, but what
people aren't really understanding is that every gotaway and
then every person released into the United States does exactly
what you would do. They call home and they tell their family
and friends where they're at. They check in. Their friends and
family hear that, that message gets out, and more come. When we
put people on airplanes and they show up back in the home
country after expending all these resources, they have horror
stories about the trip, unfortunately, but they chose that
trip. But they tell those stories and then they see them back
home. That has a huge deterrent effect. That actually saves
people's lives because people choose to stay where they're at
and make things better as opposed to put themselves in the
cartel's hands.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. Mr. Wolf, Secretary Mayorkas has
apparently turned off all the fiber-optic sensors embedded in
the border fence that was built during the Trump administration
to allow the Border Patrol to detect when and where people are
trying to either climb the fence, which is not easy, or cut
through the fence with welding equipment. Do you believe
Secretary Mayorkas has played a role in directing the
Department of Homeland Security to halt the completion of
lights, post-construction, and/or turn off the fiber-optic
sensors embedded in existing fences?
Mr. Wolf. So, I can't think of a reason why you would
decommission or turn off capabilities that are already
installed. The border wall system is much more than just that
physical infrastructure. Lights, camera, roads, physical
access, all the things that Border Patrol agents need to do
their job, why you would turn those off, it's beyond me. I
can't even think of a reason why you would do that.
Mr. Strong. Thank you. With 8 seconds left, I know it was
mentioned that illegals don't have internet access. I want to
let everybody know that there are counties in Alabama that
don't have internet access also. We need to work on America to
solve that problem. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields back. I now recognize
Mr. Ezell from Mississippi.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Fentanyl poisoning is
now the largest leading cause of death for Americans 18 to 49.
As a 42-year law enforcement officer and a sheriff, I saw the
devastating effects of young teenagers and young adults dying
as a result of this. It is heartbreaking. The death toll
continues to climb. The rising power of the Mexican cartels
continue to grow. This low-cost manufacturing of a drug is
terrible to this open border. Mr. Scott, do you believe the
current fentanyl crisis is the consequences of Mr. Mayorkas's
open border policy?
Mr. Scott. I believe that in part it really is. I want to
highlight some misinformation. People keep talking about
seizures as if it was the total. More fentanyl is seized at the
ports of entry than in between the ports of entry. But it's
because CBP officers are there doing a fantastic job. They're
ready to greet everybody every day. We're leaving hundreds of
miles of border open every single day. No one patrolling it.
But yet Border Patrol is still catching fentanyl between the
ports of entry. The metric needs to be how much is available in
our cities. There's no shortage.
Mr. Ezell. Mm-hmm. In your role as Border Patrol Chief, how
you have seen cartels, tell us how you have seen the cartels
capitalize on the border crisis and used the surges for
migrants to smuggle their narcotics.
Mr. Scott. So, historically, the cartels have used any
distraction they can. Honestly, a lot of people have a hard
time picturing this. So, just think of sports. You fake a play
to the right, you run the real play to the left. That's what
the cartels have done. They've always done it. They've always
tried to do it. When you've seen in El Paso a young child, I
think the last one was basically like a several-month-old child
being dropped over the fence in plain sight of cameras where
they know it's going to be viewed that's because they know
agents are going to prioritize taking care of that baby and
they can push something else through.
Now unfortunately, we've given them millions of
distractions. We've given them right now, what, 3,500
distractions a day that the Border Patrol is having to go deal
with so that they can bring anything they want in. It's lowered
their overhead. It's lowered their risk. It's a direct impact
on the ability to get narcotics in cities in the United States
and other threats.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you. Mr. Wolf, last year 850 migrants died
at the border. This is the highest ever recorded. The average
under the Trump administration was 280. If this is the case,
why does the Biden administration continue to tout their
immigration policies as safe, humane, and orderly?
Mr. Wolf. I'm not sure I have an answer for you,
Congressman. The amount of deaths that are increasing in that
desert and along that river are a factor of the amount of
people coming across the border. We're seeing a huge spike,
right? So, we were at 10,000 a day. For a long time, we were at
7,000 a day. We're still at 3,500 to 4,000 a day, right? You
only have to go back to Secretary Jeh Johnson under the Obama
administration, who said 1,000 a day is a bad day for the
Border Patrol. We're in crisis mode. We're still at 3,500.
So, this idea that somehow we have retracted from 10 and
that we should pat everyone, ourselves on the back and say,
good job, you're still losing the ballgame in a big way. So, I
think that is something we need to look at.
Mr. Ezell. Absolutely. Thank you. Mr. Wolf, I keep thinking
about these words safe, humane, and orderly. Do you believe
that Secretary Mayorkas has been honest with the American
people?
Mr. Wolf. I don't. Not only on those words, but, you know,
when you talk about the border is secure, operational control,
he talks about putting people in expedited removal. He knows
what that means. The staff of this committee knows what that
means. None of those individuals will likely be removed. All
they have to do is claim asylum and they are pulled out of
expedited removal.
So, he uses terms like these for the American people to try
to explain away what's going on along that border. But those
that work in the Department know immigration. They know
something else. So, if you're a Border Patrol agent and you
hear these words and you're saying, you know, your political
leadership is saying, look, I'm removing all these folks under
expedited removal, you know that's not the case.
Mr. Ezell. Mr. Scott, could you add anything to that?
Mr. Scott. I would agree to that 100 percent. The words
very rarely match the actions. I'll just leave it at that.
Mr. Ezell. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I now recognize Mr.
Brecheen from Oklahoma.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So, Secretary
Mayorkas swore an oath to support and defend the Constitution
against all enemies, both foreign and domestic. He swore that
oath to defend against all enemies, foreign and domestic, to
the Constitution. He did not swear an oath to support this
administration's policies. By this Majority Membership's count,
Secretary Mayorkas has chosen to ignore or refuse to enforce
over 10 different Federal laws. This is a dereliction of duty
and a violation of his oath.
The rule of law, which is a term that is thrown around
oftentimes by Members of Congress, means that nobody is above
the law. It means no Member of the Congress, it means no member
of the Judiciary, it means no Secretary of Homeland Security.
The rule of law matters. What the Constitution and what Federal
law dictate matter. Speaking about the rule of law, Margaret
Thatcher once said, any country or government which wants to
proceed toward tyranny starts to undermine legal rights and
undermine the law. President JFK, John F. Kennedy once said,
certain other societies may respect the rule of force of law--
we respect--rule of force, we respect the rule of law. Barack
Obama, former President, said, one of the challenges of a
democratic government is making sure that even in the midst of
emergencies and passions, we make sure that the rule of law . .
. prevail.
So, I want to talk about the Federal law, and I want to
talk about the areas that have been violated. Section 103(a)(5)
of the Immigration and Nationality Act says that, he, speaking
of Mayorkas in his position currently, shall have the power and
duty to control and guard the boundaries and borders of the
United States against illegal entry of aliens. Mr. Scott, how
is Mayorkas violating this?
Mr. Scott. He's not even trying. So, all you have to do is
look at his words, any public statement. He continually talks
about creating pathways for more migrants to come to the United
States. CBP One app is nothing more than an invitation world-
wide without any immigration documents or any right to come to
the United States. You've never heard him once support any
initiative the Border Patrol put out that actually allows them
to increase their situational awareness and be able to stop the
flow. He even disciplined agents for trying to stop the flow.
Mr. Brecheen. Mr. Wolf, I am going to read something, throw
this to you. On May 10, a reporter, immigration analyst Todd
Bensman reported ahead of the expiration of Title 42 that
Mexican immigration officials were informing him they were
coordinating with DHS personnel on the other side of the border
to move illegal aliens from the Mexico side of the Rio Grande
to the American side. In other words, Mexican DHS officials
were helping illegal aliens cross into the United States. This
would violate Section 274 of the Act we just cited, which
prohibits aiding and abetting illegal immigration or helping
someone enter the country illegally. What are your thoughts on
this?
Mr. Wolf. I think it's concerning. Look, Border Patrol
agents are in a difficult position. When they see hundreds of
folks coming across that river, they want to make sure that
they're safe and secure, but at the same time, they should not
be facilitating that either. So, my guess is those decisions
had some buy off from leadership somewhere in the department.
Mr. Brecheen. They would have to.
Mr. Wolf. Yes.
Mr. Brecheen. They would have to. No one would take that
upon their authority without Mayorkas knowing about it. Mr.
Wolf, Section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act, also
just mentioned beforehand, says that parole can only be granted
on a case-by-case basis, a temporary basis, for an urgent
humanitarian reason, significant public benefit. How is
Mayorkas's mass release of illegal aliens into the interior
violating this U.S. law? Where is he deriving the authority to
violate the clear language of the statute?
Mr. Wolf. So, we use that authority very differently.
Urgent humanitarian need is if someone needs to come into the
United States for a medical procedure of some kind, you allow
them in, and then obviously you remove them as well. For a
significant public benefit, you want to parole someone in to
probably testify at a criminal trial, you parole them in, and
then you ask them to leave. What you don't do is parole 360,000
individuals a year from four different nationalities,
regardless of who you are, regardless of what you do, the
simple fact that you come from that country, that you are
somehow granted parole.
I think it's interesting that those individuals are not
being put in the asylum system. So, the administration is
either signaling that they don't qualify for asylum or the
system's broken, which we know it to be. Instead, they're
paroling them in, which is a different set of benefits. Again,
it's a little bit of a shell game that they're using.
Mr. Brecheen. Is he adhering to Federal law?
Mr. Wolf. I don't believe he is.
Mr. Brecheen. No. Last question, Mr. Scott. Article IV,
Section 4 guarantees to every State a Republican form of
government and to protect those States against invasion. Five
million people, more than the population of Oklahoma have come
in illegally under the Biden administration. Do you believe
that he is violating the Constitution, Article IV, Section 4?
Mr. Scott. I believe what we have at the Southwest Border
currently is an invasion but for a slight different reason than
most people understand. The illegal aliens themselves may not
be the invader, but they are being used by a cartel that has
nation-state power. People don't understand the power of the
cartel in Mexico, the influence they have on the government,
the weaponry they have, is equivalent to many, many countries.
That cartel is using this massive illegal immigration every day
to invade our country, the sovereignty of it, and to pose real
threats. Through fentanyl alone, which is only one of the
things they smuggle, they've killed more Americans than most
wars. It's an invasion.
Mr. Brecheen. Thank you. I yield, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Green. The gentlemen yields. I now recognize Mr.
Crane from Arizona.
Mr. Crane. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I find it interesting
that many of my colleagues continue to talk about how
Republicans screaming about open borders is causing this
invasion. I want to ask a couple of the panelists, weren't you
guys paying attention back in the Presidential campaign back in
September 2019, when then-candidate Joe Biden said, we are a
Nation who says if you want to flee and you are fleeing
oppression, you should come? Mr. Wolf, did you hear that?
Mr. Wolf. I did.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Scott, did you hear that?
Mr. Scott. Yes, I did.
Mr. Crane. Mr. Edlow.
Mr. Edlow. I'll be honest, Congressman, I wasn't paying
attention at that point.
Mr. Crane. Darn it, Mr. Edlow, you broke the streak. Ms.
Acer, how about yourself?
Ms. Acer. I don't recall the exact words, but certainly
I've heard President Biden speak positively about the
importance of seeking asylum.
Mr. Crane. What do you think, Mr. Wolf, what kind of
message do you think that sends to people that might want a
better life?
Mr. Wolf. Well, I think it sends the message that the
borders are open. Now is the time to come. If I'm elected,
there's going to be a new security regime along those borders.
I think that we saw the results of that.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely. Absolutely. I wanted to double-tap
on that because that is a massive part of the causation here.
Next, you know, I just I find it interesting as I sit in this
chamber and I continue to hear political theatre, political
theatre. This is all political theatre.
I want to go through some of the political theatre that we
continue to hear. Four-point-eight million encounters at the
Southwest Border, 1.3 million known gotaways, 69 individuals
just this year on the Terrorist Watch List, 71,238 fentanyl
deaths in 2022. Does that sound like political theatre to you
guys?
Mr. Wolf. It does not.
Mr. Crane. No, it is not. How about this? Border town's
only hospital running out of resources, on the brink of
collapse caring for migrants. Yuma, Arizona in the State that I
represent. Does that sound like political theatre? That is the
problem. These are real lives. These are real issues. This is
real infrastructure that is being overrun. This isn't political
theatre.
The reason we continue to scream about it is because our
colleagues don't really seem to care. Quite honestly, the
American people sends us, Congressmen and -women
representatives to represent them up here in Washington, DC and
they are feeling the causation of these policies. They are
feeling the causation of this plan.
I want to also go into the political theatre of what the
American taxpayer feels, $182 billion dollars reported to cover
the costs incurred from the presence of illegal aliens. That is
$1,156 every year per taxpayer. Is that political theatre? Do
people feel that, Mr. Wolf?
Mr. Wolf. I believe they do feel that. I think the most
concerning thing is it's all avoidable.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely. What about you, Mr. Scott? Do you
think that American taxpayers feel that?
Mr. Scott. I spent most of my career along the Southwest
Border. I work with Texas a lot right now, and they're double-
paying for border security. It's a resounding yes. It's
completely avoidable.
Mr. Crane. Absolutely. How about five suspected MS-13 gang
members in United States illegally charged with murder and
death of Maryland 15-year-old? Is that political theatre?
California MS-13 gang member accused of 10-year-old's torture
and murder. How about that, political theatre? How about this
one? Five MS-13 gang members who killed Virginia teenager
sentenced to life in prison, Washington Post. More political
theatre that we have to continue to scream about because nobody
on the other side is listening. This administration continues
to ignore it.
You know, one of the most interesting things, because I am
the last person that gets to question anybody, Mr. Scott, I
heard you testifying. How many administrations did you serve
under, sir?
Mr. Scott. I was in the Border Patrol for about 6. I was in
leadership positions in 5.
Mr. Crane. Right. You know, you said something that really
struck me as somebody who has been in the military before. You
said that when you actually and members of your team actually
brought up deterrence on phone calls with this Secretary, that
you guys were shut down immediately.
Mr. Scott. Correct. Face-to-face, transition teams, phone
calls, the entire time.
Mr. Crane. That seems really odd, sir. It doesn't sound as
if this Secretary wanted to hear what could stop these 71,000
fentanyl deaths, what could stop these hospitals from getting
overrun, what could stop these children from getting murdered
by MS-13 gang members? Does it?
Mr. Scott. No. We were prevented from talking about border
security or threats at all.
Mr. Crane. The last thing I want to say, Ms. Acer, I know
you spent a lot of your life trying to help migrants, right? I
read your bio, and I think a lot of Americans can identify with
that and even appreciate it. What they don't appreciate is that
your concern and care does not seem to extend to them
whatsoever. That is a problem. Ma'am, I want to ask you one
question. Has your organization ever taken money from the Soros
Foundation?
Ms. Acer. Excuse me?
Mr. Crane. The Soros Foundation, have you ever----
Ms. Acer. Yes, yes. We've received money from multiple,
multiple foundations over many years.
Mr. Crane. Do you know how much money----
Ms. Acer. And I--can I----
Mr. Crane [continuing]. You guys have taken from the Soros
Foundation?
Ms. Acer. No, I do not know how much money we've taken in
from any foundation. I just am really troubled if you're
somehow picking on one particular foundation. There's a long
history of the Soros Foundation being targeted for antisemitic
reasons.
Mr. Crane. That has nothing----
Ms. Acer. And so, I----
Mr. Crane [continuing]. To do, ma'am, with why we have an
issue with it. Everybody knows that George Soros is a globalist
and uses his money to often destroy the very things that
protect Americans, our way of life, and our freedom. That is
exactly why I asked you the question. Thank you. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. We have a Member, an
at-large Member, who has and we, of course, sought unanimous
consent at the beginning to allow her to be here. Ms. De La
Cruz, you are recognized from Texas.
Ms. De La Cruz. Thank you, Mr. Chair, for hosting this
meeting today and for allowing me to waive on today to this
important hearing. I am Congresswoman Monica Del La Cruz. I am
here on behalf of my constituents, on behalf of the RGV Border
Patrol sector, the brave men and women who serve and defend
this country. You know, Texas 15 is right along the border in
South Texas. It includes McAllen, Texas. Over the last several
years, I have seen the other side of the aisle, the current
administration, demonize our hardworking Border Patrol agents.
Not only demonize them, but cripple them with lack of
resources, not only on the technology side, but lack of
resources from being able to put current policies in place and
do their job, which is to protect this country. But yet they
get up day after day and still go to their work, long hours.
When I think about those brave men and women, I not only
think about them, but I think about their spouses and their
children. Because the stories that you don't hear are the
stories about how these men and women, when they go and pick up
children who have been abandoned because the cartels, they just
leave these children on lands, children at the age of 1, at the
age of 2, of 3. Our Border Patrol men and women are carrying
these babies. They are helping women to give birth on the
banks.
The reason that I came today and asked to be waived on is
because they need a voice. They need a voice to stand up for
them, to show them that the people in Congress care. Well, at
least some of them. Because when we look at this room, I can
see people on the other side of the aisle are not here. Are not
here to see what the crisis is at our borders, to see our
national security and how there is a lack of security due to
this administration.
That being said, I want to say that Chief Scott, you were
here under the previous administration. My understanding from
speaking to my friends in Border Patrol in the RGV sector is
that you put together many processes and put them in place in
order to be able to facilitate the immigrants coming through
and how to properly put them through the borders. That being
said, there were several various or there were various
Executive Orders under the previous administration that seemed
to work. Can you tell me how the Executive Orders from the
previous administration and the Executive Orders from this
administration have changed?
Mr. Scott. During the last administration--and the Trump
administration gets labeled with a lot of this--but under
Secretary Wolf's guidance and others, we put together
integrated teams and we had a simple question put in front of
us. Literally every week we had to go back to the White House
and give answers. What can we do to secure the border and
protect America?
In all the EOs that went in place, MPP, the asylum
cooperative agreements, I was sending Border Patrol agents to
countries down south, left and right, to build relationships
with them and just simply get them to enforce their own laws.
It was all about protecting America. Then on January 2021,
everything switched. Every one of those policies that actually
showed progress and improved and protected America was replaced
with messages that said, speed up the processing as fast as you
can. We're not into the deterrence business anymore, and we
need to find new ways to get more migrants into the United
States.
Ms. De La Cruz. So, do policies work?
Mr. Scott. Policies do work. Rhetoric works short-time, but
policies and actions work long-term. I believe Mr. Edlow is
really a key into some of those policies, and he may have some
more.
Ms. De La Cruz. Before I go to you, let me ask you one last
question. Mr. Scott, how many people did you personally parole
into this country?
Mr. Scott. So, while I was chief of the Border Patrol, that
authority was delegated to sector chiefs. Not to try to get out
of it, but because that's how much we cared about it.
Ms. De La Cruz. Mm-hmm.
Mr. Scott. There's 20 sector chiefs Nation-wide. So, when I
was a sector chief, in a year, I think the most paroles I ever
did was about 10. The things that people are missing is there
was a very in-depth threat assessment done with every one of
those individuals. There was a plan to keep track of them. Then
when whatever the reason was, was done, we physically made sure
the person was removed from the United States consistent with
the law.
Ms. De La Cruz. That being said, how does that compare with
the current administration and amount of paroles that are led
into this country?
Mr. Scott. We were using it consistent with the law, case-
by-case, individual determination. From my understanding, the
way it's being used now is just a blanket way to get people out
of stations, avoid the optics of people backed up in Border
Patrol stations.
Ms. De La Cruz. I think that is where this is of real
concern is it all goes to optics when it is convenient to the
Biden administration. With that, I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentlelady yields. I now recognize the
Ranking Member for his closing comments.
Mr. Menendez. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. You know, we have
had the opportunity to engage in a dialog about what we hope we
can do together. You know, for me, I think today was
challenging because it feels a move away from working together
across the aisle on a lot of the challenges that we have to
face, including the border. It is a move away from trying to
come to a comprehensive approach to immigration reform.
The fact that the report was issued this morning without
consultation with Minority, with the staff, I want to be clear
about one thing. Secretary Mayorkas has not violated the law.
He and the Department of Homeland Security have been working to
secure the border every day. I have been to the border twice
since January. I went with a delegation of Democrats from
Homeland Security. So, we have an interest in dealing with this
issue directly and availing ourselves of the opportunities to
deal with people directly who are at the front lines. So, we
are not running from this issue, but we are trying to work at
it in a constructive manner.
If you talk about the administration, Secretary Mayorkas
has increased efforts to go after smugglers. We talked about
additional legal pathways to enter the United States. But that
actually hurts the cartels' and smugglers' business model. So,
by creating constructive, actual avenues for people to come
here legally, it undermines what the cartels are trying to do
at the border.
The numbers are what they are. Encounters at the border are
down. We don't all have to agree with the administration's
policies, but the facts show that they are in fact effective. I
do hope that in the future we can have real substantive
discussions on the threats facing our Nation. It is critically
important that we do so. I hope we can do so under different
circumstances. I look forward to doing that work because we are
here to create solutions for all of our constituents and I look
forward to those days. I yield back.
Chairman Green. The gentleman yields. I recognize myself
for a few closing comments. First, I just want to reiterate
that we are looking at a cause and effect. The cause is
policies that were working. You can look at the numbers that
were coming in and those policies were thrown away. Migrants
listened to the President about granting asylum and all this
stuff, granting, you know, permission to just basically come
into the country. They came and they tested the system. Those
who got here made phone calls back home and the wave of people
started.
This notion that a migration crisis has occurred and we are
responding to it is wrong. We created a migration crisis by
creating an incentive for people to come here. We opened our
border. People tested it and they called home. Now more are
coming. Not hurricanes, not earthquakes, not changes to our
immigration law, not changes to the budget at CBP, not changes
to the number of Border Patrol agents. What changed were
policies. It has created a mass migration wave from 160
countries of people coming to the United States.
Tragically, the drug cartels have taken advantage of this.
They seized on the opportunity to use people to pay them up to
$13 billion, transferred to some of the most heinous people. We
have seen the images. We have seen the videos of them burning
human corpses they have executed. Yet, we are trying to find,
you know, some excuse for this. The cause and the effect is
policies and a mass wave and cartels who are manipulating the
situation.
Add to that the tactics and strategy of the cartel to
overwhelm Customs and Border Patrol with mass waves of people,
thinning of the line in order to process, frees up the cartels
to come right across the border in their carpet shoe, wearing
backpacks full of fentanyl. We have seen the piles of the
backpacks in Arizona and Texas.
The effects, Americans are more unsafe, period. All you
have to do is look at that little baby from France who was
visiting the United States, crawling around on a VRBO carpet,
and encountered fentanyl left from someone before and that baby
died. How many Americans take their kids to the hotel? How many
Americans go to a VRBO and say you don't know if you are safe
in the United States of America because of the policies of this
administration and this Secretary.
We know that rapists and murderers have been released and
that is not counting the population of the gotaways. We have
got percentages in the folks that have turned themselves in.
Why would you be a gotaway by the way, if you are just here to
get in for economic purposes or even asylum, just turn yourself
in and you will get released into the country. Why would you be
a gotaway? One-point-five million of them in the United States
now. What percentage of that 1.5 million are murderers or
rapists or drug dealers or cartel members? Mr. Mayorkas can't
answer that question. We are going to have Mr. Mayorkas back
here. No one can answer that question.
Americans are unsafe because of this open border. National
security, 200-plus terrorists versus 11. That tells you that
the terrorists are trying harder and harder to get into this
country because they know the policy. The door is open.
National security. This chart is incredible. You look at the
past several years, there is not much statistical difference in
those years, but suddenly in this year look at the Chinese
nationals pouring into this country. We have reports from
sector chiefs saying they are PLA-associated. They are taking a
lesson from the Russians who infiltrated Ukraine before they
invaded. Now, it is not to say that the Chinese are going to
invade the United States, but if we were to defend Taiwan,
think about what those people might become.
It is interesting to think about. But Mr. Mayorkas can't
guarantee us what they are. They are just being released into
the United States. That is a national security issue. Migrants
separated, you now, we are talking 85,000. I understand the
phone call system. That means there were some, whatever the
number is and probably in the thousands. Oh, by the way, the
New York Times not known, and in the report, not a Fox News,
not a Newsmax, the New York Times went and found some of those
people. Found they were stacked in homes as much as 20 and were
being used in forced labor. Should never happen in America. It
happened because Mayorkas's decision, a dereliction of duty, as
far as I am concerned, waived the background checks on those
individuals. It is unconscionable.
It has been discussed the financial cost too, not just the
human cost, an effect, and it will cost us. It is costing us.
Your health insurance is going up because of the uncompensated
care at the ER, period. Why? There are 7-plus million people.
Mr. Mayorkas broke the law. We have had witnesses cite the
law, read the law, and describe the methodologies, which he is
either subverting it or breaking it. He has refused to abide by
at least two court orders. Fact. He made it lawful to enter the
country in lawful pathways that don't exist in the law. That is
breaking the law. That is violating the law.
He clearly lied to Congress. Chip Roy showed him the
definition of operational control. He said, yes, according to
that definition, we have operational control of the border.
Then in the Senate, after Ortiz made his comment, he admitted
no one's ever had control by that definition. Admitting that he
lied when he was in front of the committee with Chip Roy. A
Secretary of Homeland Security, a Secretary of any department
in our Government cannot come to the U.S. Congress and lie to
Congress under oath, period. That is a dereliction of duty.
Whether you like the fact that we are, you know, helping people
who are in need, he lied to Congress. That is unacceptable.
Oh, by the way, we went back and searched the record. All
the pounding on Mr. Wolf here, which will tell you something,
if you are not defending your own guy and just beating up on
the witness, maybe you don't have a leg to stand on. But we
went back and looked at your record, sir, and we can't find
anywhere where you claimed to have had operational control.
At least you didn't lie. He admitted his own incompetence.
In the Senate, he said he did not understand the strategies of
the cartels. Now, Merrick Garland, the Attorney General, said,
yes, that is the strategy of the cartels. The Attorney General
gets it. The Secretary of Homeland Security doesn't understand
the strategy of the cartel he has been asked to confront to
protect Americans. That is admitting incompetence.
I want to correct the record on a few things, too. Asylum
is the heart of our country trying to help people in need. I
get it, appropriate. Abuse of asylum laws for a political
purpose is wrong. Asylum is not granted to people, if you read
the law, just because they are coming from a corrupt
government, or from a crime-ridden area, or poverty. Asylum is
granted when a Government is pursuing an individual. The U.N.
Charter is very clear when a refugee is seeking asylum and they
go into another country, that country is supposed to take care
of them and not pass them on to another country. That is in the
United Nations Charter. Why is this happening all over Central
America? Why are we accepting that that is OK? We signed the
U.N. Charter. They signed the U.N. Charter. Let's enforce it.
There are insinuations that because we want to see the rule of
law in place, that we are somehow anti-migrant or anti-charity.
When I ran my health care company, I built a not-for-profit
for a lot of reasons. I wanted to hire physicians to join my
company that had a heart to serve people. So, we had a not-for-
profit and we paid those doctors' expenses so that they could
do foreign trips and we could run free clinics. I want to serve
people, but the Government doesn't get to pick where my charity
goes. The Government doesn't get to decide that I, Mark Green's
taxpayer dollars are going to go for taking care of--maybe I
want to give my charity to Gold Star families. The family
members of dead Americans who fought for this country, maybe
that is where I want my charity to go. Maybe I, you know, want
to plant trees and save the environment. The best vacuum
cleaner for CO
2
on the planet is a tree.
But I am having to pay taxes that the President gets to
decide where that charity goes. No. There has been an
accusation today the GOP has done nothing. We just passed a
border security bill that addresses all these issues.
Ms. Acer, you said that we shouldn't say that the border is
open because it might incentivize more people to come. I think
that is what the implication of what you were saying. I
couldn't agree more. That is why we are having the migration
crisis, is we opened the border. The President said it in his
campaign. People come and they call and now they are coming
into the country. I agree. It creates an incentive and you
apparently do too.
Immigration is not our committee. Here is another thing.
Well, maybe I misunderstood you, but that is what I thought you
said. But immigration is not our committee. We don't get to
solve the immigration problems. People here today have talked
about, hey, we got to fix immigration. Yes, we got to fix
immigration. But if you create more of an incentive for people
to come, they are going to come. You have to secure the border
first. You secure the border, then we will fix immigration. I
couldn't agree more on that.
NGO's, not all NGO's are bad. Not all NGO's are good. There
are some that are doing great things and there are some that
are incentivizing the migration that is harming people and
there are some incentivizing people to break the law. That is
just period. Just because you are looking into NGO's, it
doesn't mean that you are anti-NGO. It means you want people
taken care of appropriately.
We have talked about the CBP One app and the shell game
that that is. We have been, you know, accused of not addressing
other issues like cyber. We have many other subcommittees that
are taking actions on cyber and maritime security and other
things. That stuff's all going on. You can't make the
accusation that we are just here prosecuting Mr. Mayorkas.
Congress has both an oversight requirement, an oversight
obligation as much as it has a passing laws obligation.
Oversighting this crisis is our duty and we are not going to
shirk that duty. It is revealing that Democrats today spent far
more time baselessly attacking Mr. Wolf than defending
Secretary Mayorkas and his policies.
If you examine the facts, there is no defense for his
dereliction of duty. This is just the beginning of a lot of
hearings fulfilling that duty for oversight. We will get to the
bottom of what is going on at our Southern Border. We will
characterize the costs to the American people. We will inform
them and hopefully inform the President. My hope is that the
President is unaware of all this and that maybe he will do the
right thing and fire a guy who has lied to Congress, broken the
laws, and facilitated this mass migration that has resulted in
the harm both of Americans and of the migrants.
I want to thank the witnesses for their valuable testimony
today and all of our Members for their questions. As I said at
the beginning, we were going to disagree. We did. But that is
what this is all about. It is the sausage making, as they say.
Members of the subcommittee--the committee may have some
additional questions for the witnesses and we would ask that
the witnesses respond to those in writing. Pursuant to
Committee Rule VII(D), the hearing record will be held open for
10 days for such purposes. Without objection, the committee
stands adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 1:30 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

[all]
