- PROJECTING PRESENCE AND POWER IN THE INDO-PACIFIC: AN EXAMINATION OF THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD'S CONTRIBUTIONS TO MARITIME SECURITY

[House Hearing, 118 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]

PROJECTING PRESENCE AND POWER IN THE
INDO-PACIFIC: AN EXAMINATION OF THE
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD'S CONTRIBU-
TIONS TO MARITIME SECURITY

=======================================================================

HEARING

BEFORE THE

SUBCOMMITTEE ON
TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH CONGRESS

FIRST SESSION

__________

SEPTEMBER 28, 2023

__________

Serial No. 118-32

__________

Printed for the use of the Committee on Homeland Security

[GRAPHIC NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]

Available via the World Wide Web: http://www.govinfo.gov

__________

U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
55-018 PDF                  WASHINGTON : 2024

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COMMITTEE ON HOMELAND SECURITY

Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee, Chairman
Michael T. McCaul, Texas             Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi,
Clay Higgins, Louisiana                  Ranking Member
Michael Guest, Mississippi           Sheila Jackson Lee, Texas
Dan Bishop, North Carolina           Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida           Eric Swalwell, California
August Pfluger, Texas                J. Luis Correa, California
Andrew R. Garbarino, New York        Troy A. Carter, Louisiana
Marjorie Taylor Greene, Georgia      Shri Thanedar, Michigan
Tony Gonzales, Texas                 Seth Magaziner, Rhode Island
Nick LaLota, New York                Glenn Ivey, Maryland
Mike Ezell, Mississippi              Daniel S. Goldman, New York
Anthony D'Esposito, New York         Robert Garcia, California
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Delia C. Ramirez, Illinois
Morgan Luttrell, Texas               Robert Menendez, New Jersey
Dale W. Strong, Alabama              Yvette D. Clarke, New York
Josh Brecheen, Oklahoma              Dina Titus, Nevada
Elijah Crane, Arizona
Stephen Siao, Staff Director
Hope Goins, Minority Staff Director
Natalie Nixon, Chief Clerk

------

SUBCOMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND MARITIME SECURITY

Carlos A. Gimenez, Florida, Chairman
Clay Higgins, Louisiana              Shri Thanedar, Michigan, Ranking
Nick LaLota, New York                    Member
Laurel M. Lee, Florida               Donald M. Payne, Jr., New Jersey
Mark E. Green, MD, Tennessee (ex     Robert Garcia, California
officio)                         Bennie G. Thompson, Mississippi
(ex officio)
Vacancy, Subcommittee Staff Director
Alex Marston, Minority Subcommittee Staff Director

C O N T E N T S

----------
Page

Statements

The Honorable Carlos A. Gimenez, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Florida, and Chairman, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     1
Prepared Statement.............................................     3
The Honorable Shri Thanedar, a Representative in Congress From
the State of Michigan, and Ranking Member, Subcommittee on
Transportation and Maritime Security:
Oral Statement.................................................     4
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Mark E. Green, M.D., a Representative in Congress
From the State of Tennessee, and Chairman, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     5
The Honorable Bennie G. Thompson, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Mississippi, and Ranking Member, Committee on
Homeland Security:
Prepared Statement.............................................     6
The Honorable Michael T. McCaul, a Representative in Congress
From the State of Texas:
Prepared Statement.............................................     7

Witnesses

Vice Admiral Andrew J. Tiongson, USCG Commander, Pacific Area,
United States Coast Guard:
Oral Statement.................................................     8
Prepared Statement.............................................     9
Brigadier General Neil R. Richardson, USAF Deputy Director for
Strategic Planning and Policy, United States Indo-Pacific
Command, Department of Defense:
Oral Statement.................................................    11
Prepared Statement.............................................    13
Ms. Camille Dawson, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of East
Asian and Pacific Affairs, Department of State:
Oral Statement.................................................    15
Prepared Statement.............................................    16

PROJECTING PRESENCE AND POWER IN THE INDO-PACIFIC: AN EXAMINATION OF
THE UNITED STATES COAST GUARD'S CONTRIBUTIONS TO MARITIME SECURITY

----------

Thursday, September 28, 2023

U.S. House of Representatives,
Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation and
Maritime Security,
Washington, DC.
The subcommittee met, pursuant to notice, at 10:03 a.m., in
room 310, Cannon House Office Building, Hon. Carlos Gimenez
[Chairman of the subcommittee] presiding.
Present: Representatives Gimenez, Higgins, LaLota,
Thanedar, Payne, and Garcia.
Also present: Representatives Pfluger, Radewagen, and
Moylan.
Chairman Gimenez. The Committee on Homeland Security,
Subcommittee on Transportation Maritime Security will come to
order.
Without objection, the Chair may declare the subcommittee
in recess at any point.
Today's hearings will examine how the United States Coast
Guard's mission set and unique capabilities advance our
Nation's goal of a free and open Indo-Pacific.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger,
the gentlewoman from California, Ms. Kim, the gentleman from
Guam, Mr. Moylan, and the gentlewoman from American Samoa, Ms.
Radewagen, are permitted to sit with the subcommittee and ask
questions of the witnesses. So ordered.
I now recognize Ranking Member Thanedar for the purposes of
seeking unanimous consent.
Mr. Thanedar. Yes.
Chairman Gimenez. Do you have anybody else that you would
like to recognize to be able to sit and ask questions?
Mr. Thanedar. Unanimous consent for Mr. Case to ask
questions?
Chairman Gimenez. Without objection, so ordered.
Without objection, the gentleman from Texas, Mr. McCaul's,
statements has been submitted for the record. So ordered.
I now recognize myself for an opening statement.
Today, our subcommittee is discussing the importance of the
Indo-Pacific region to United States national security
interests and opportunities for us to operate more effectively
in the region. The Indo-Pacific region spans a huge portion of
the globe and includes more than half of the world's
population. The waters of the Pacific and Indian Ocean have
facilitated global trade for centuries and the shipping lanes
through the Straits of Malacca and South China Sea remain
critical to today's economy. Fish stocks in the region's oceans
continue to provide nourishment to billions of people around
the world. The maritime domain drives the region's economies,
which together account for 60 percent of global GDP and two-
thirds of global economic growth. The Indo-Pacific region is
crucial not only to overall global economy, but also to the
safety, security, and the well-being of American citizens. The
United States is a Pacific nation.
Five States, 3 territories, and 8 dependencies enjoy direct
access to the Pacific Ocean; 80 percent of the United States
exclusive economic zone is in the Pacific Ocean. American
businesses utilize access to the world's largest ocean to
obtain and deliver goods and services to customers at home and
across the globe. The region is critical to U.S. interests.
This is why both the Trump and Biden administrations have
promoted the vision of a free and open Indo-Pacific.
To support this vision we must address the existing
challenges facing the region. The People's Republic of China
presents the most direct challenge to this vision. With its
illegitimate claims over large swaths of the Western Pacific
Ocean, the PRC is pursuing its own ambitions at the expense of
sovereignty of its neighbors and international law. These
claims, if accepted, would adversely impact U.S. trade in the
region. In 2016 14 percent of U.S. shipping passed through
international waters in the South China Sea. If access to the
shipping lanes in the South China Sea was impeded, it would
have a significant impact on our economy.
PRC is also continuously disrespecting the sovereignty of
countries in the region as its distance water fishing fleet
pillages fish stocks in other nations' exclusive economic
zones. The United States is being adversely impacted by this
trend. Illegal fishing by PRC vessels is depleting the tuna
stocks off the coast of American Samoa, which is having a
ruinous effect on the territory's fishing industry. These
fishing fleets also have a wide reputation for human rights
abuses on their fishing vessels, with many crew members
reporting physical and verbal abuse and having to work grueling
hours without access to sufficient food and water.
The PRC's malign actions in the region are also
facilitating other illegal activities by large and
sophisticated transnational criminal organizations. These
trends will undermine the vision of a free and open Indo-
Pacific and we must address them to realize our vision.
The United States Coast Guard plays a critical role in U.S.
activity in the Indo-Pacific region. Since its establishments
in 1790, the U.S. Coast Guard has provided invaluable service
to the American people by securing our territorial waters,
enforcing our laws at sea, and performing life-saving missions
in our maritime environment. In the region, Coast Guard vessels
patrol the EEZs of the United States and partner nations, and
Coast Guard personnel on land provide much-needed expertise to
bolster the security and law enforcement capabilities of our
allies and partners. Coast Guard's presence in the region
strengthens the work also being done by the wider U.S.
military, the Department of State, and other Federal actors to
advance the vision of a free and open Indo-Pacific.
[The statement of Chairman Gimenez follows:]
Statement of Chairman Carlos A. Gimenez
September 28, 2023
Today, our subcommittee is discussing the importance of the Indo-
Pacific region to U.S. national security interests and opportunities
for us to operate more effectively in the region.
The Indo-Pacific region spans a huge portion of the globe and
includes more than half of the world's population.
The waters of the Pacific and Indian Ocean have facilitated global
trade for centuries, and the shipping lanes through the Strait of
Malacca and South China Sea remain critical to today's economy.
Fish stocks in the region's oceans continue to provide nourishment
to billions around the world.
The maritime domain drives the economies within the region, which
account for 60 percent of global GDP and two-thirds of global economic
growth.
The Indo-Pacific region is crucial not only to the overall global
economy but also to the safety, security, and well-being of American
citizens.
The United States is a Pacific nation, with 5 States, 3
territories, and 8 dependencies enjoying direct access to the Pacific
Ocean.
Eighty percent of the United States' Exclusive Economic Zone is in
the Pacific Ocean.
American businesses utilize access to the world's largest ocean to
obtain and deliver goods and services to customers at home and across
the globe.
The region is critical to U.S. interests.
This is why both the Trump and Biden administrations have promoted
the vision of a ``free and open Indo-Pacific.''
To support this vision, we must address the existing challenges
facing the region.
The People's Republic of China presents the most direct challenge
to this vision.
With its illegitimate claims over large swaths of the Western
Pacific Ocean, the PRC is pursuing its own ambitions at the expense of
the sovereignty of its neighbors and international law.
These claims, if accepted, would adversely impact U.S. trade in the
region.
In 2016, 14 percent of U.S. shipping passed through international
waters in the South China Sea.
If access to the shipping lanes in the South China Sea was impeded,
it would have a significant impact on our economy.
The PRC is also continuously disrespecting the sovereignty of
countries in the region as its Distance Water Fishing fleet pillages
fish stocks.
The United States is being adversely impacted by this trend--
illegal fishing by PRC vessels is depleting the tuna stocks off the
coast of American Samoa, which is having a ruinous effect on the
territory's fishing industry. These fishing fleets also have a wide
reputation for human rights abuses on their fishing vessels with many
crew reporting physical and verbal abuse and having to work grueling
hours without access to sufficient food and water.
The PRC's malign actions in the region are also facilitating other
illegal activity by large and sophisticated transnational criminal
organizations.
These trends all undermine the vision of a ``free and open Indo-
Pacific,'' and we must address them to realize this vision.
The United States Coast Guard plays a critical role in U.S.
activity in the Indo-Pacific region.
Since its establishment in 1790, the U.S. Coast Guard has provided
invaluable service to the American people by securing our territorial
waters, enforcing our laws at sea, and performing life-saving missions
in our maritime environment.
In the region, Coast Guard vessels patrol the EEZs of the United
States and partner nations, and Coast Guard personnel on land provide
much-needed expertise to bolster the security and law enforcement
capabilities of our allies and partners.
The Coast Guard's presence in the region strengthens the work also
being done by the wider U.S. military, the Department of State, and
other Federal actors to advance the vision of a ``free and open Indo-
Pacific.''
I am grateful that we are joined by a distinguished panel of
witnesses who are prepared to speak about this work.
Vice Admiral Tiongson, Brigadier General Richardson, and Deputy
Assistant Secretary Dawson, thank you for testifying before the
subcommittee this morning on this important topic.
I look forward to your insights.

Chairman Gimenez. I am grateful that we are joined by a
distinguished panel of witnesses who are prepared to speak
about this work.
Vice Admiral Tiongson--I am sorry, is that correct?
Admiral Tiongson. Tiongson, sir. Tiongson.
Chairman Gimenez. Tiongson. Sorry. OK. Tiongson--Brigadier
General Richardson--did I pronounce that right? OK, I am glad--
and, Deputy Assistant Secretary Dawson, thank you for
testifying before the subcommittee this morning on this
important topic. I look forward to your insights. Now turn it
over to the Ranking Member for his opening statements.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez, for calling
today's hearing, and good morning. Thank you to our witnesses
for sharing their expertise with us here today.
The United States Coast Guard faces tremendous challenges
in the wide-open waters of the Indo-Pacific, from limited
resources and expanding demands on their mission to aggression
from maligned state actors and a changing climate. But the
Coast Guard is also well-positioned to partner with the State
Department, the Department of Defense, and allied nations in
the region to support diplomacy, disaster relief, search-and-
rescue operations, and law enforcement to uphold the rules-
based international order in the Indo-Pacific.
I am eager to hear from our witnesses today on how the
Coast Guard can best support diplomatic solutions to
counteraggression and lawlessness from the People's Republic of
China and other nations that violate international sovereignty
and global law, including through partnership with other large
nations, like the country I was born in, India. I am also
interested to learn more about how the Coast Guard is best
positioned to assist small island nations in the Indo-Pacific
to invest in a climate-resilient future and safeguard their own
maritime sovereignty.
The Chinese fishing fleet has shown alarming disregard for
the law and threatens the fishing stock that is vital to many
nations and families across the region. One thing is certain,
with a Government shutdown only days away, Congress must act
immediately to ensure operations in the Indo-Pacific and around
the globe are fully funded for this fiscal year. Our national
security and the livelihoods of millions of Americans depend on
us this week, and we cannot fail them.
The uncertainty created by the right-wing Republicans
hearkens back to the 2019 shutdown that left Coast Guard
members working without pay for weeks. We must respect the
sacrifice and service of our military families and provide them
the paychecks they earn.
Thank you again to Chairman Gimenez and to all of our
witnesses.
I yield back.
[The statement of Ranking Member Thanedar follows:]
Statement of Ranking Member Shri Thanedar
September 28, 2023
Good morning.
Thank you, Chairman Gimenez, for calling today's hearing, and thank
you to our witnesses for sharing their expertise with us here today.
The United States Coast Guard faces tremendous challenges in the
wide-open waters of the Indo-Pacific, from limited resources and
expanding demands on their mission, to aggression from malign state
actors and a changing climate.
But the Coast Guard is also well-positioned to partner with the
State Department, the Department of Defense, and allied nations in the
region to support diplomacy, disaster relief, search-and-rescue
operations, and law enforcement to uphold the rules-based international
order in the Indo-Pacific.
I am eager to hear from our witnesses today on how the Coast Guard
can best support diplomatic solutions to counter aggression and
lawlessness from the People's Republic of China and other nations that
violate international sovereignty and global law, including through
partnerships with other large nations like my country of birth, India.
I am also interested to learn more about how the Coast Guard is
best positioned to assist small island nations in the Indo-Pacific to
invest in a climate-resilient future and safeguard their own maritime
sovereignty.
The Chinese fishing fleet has shown alarming disregard for the law
and threatens the fishing stock that is vital to many nations and
families across the region.
One thing is certain: with a Government shutdown only days away,
Congress must act immediately to ensure operations in the Indo-Pacific
and around the globe are fully funded for this fiscal year.
Our national security and the livelihoods of millions of Americans
depend on us this week, and we cannot fail them.
The uncertainty created by the right-wing Republicans harkens back
to the 2019 shutdown that left Coast Guard members working without pay
for weeks. We must respect the sacrifice and service of our military
families and provide them the paychecks they earn.
Thank you again to Chairman Gimenez, and to all our witnesses.
I yield back.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you to the Ranking Member.
Other Members of the committee are reminded that opening
statements may be submitted for the record.
[The statement of Chairman Green, Ranking Member Thompson,
and Hon. McCaul follows:]

Statement of Chairman Mark E. Green, M.D.
September 28, 2023
Thank you, Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member Thanedar for
convening this hearing today.
The 17th Century English explorer Sir Walter Raleigh once wrote,
``Whoever commands the sea commands the trade; whoever commands the
trade of the world commands the riches of the world, and consequently
the world itself.''
Since the end of the Cold War, we have existed in a unipolar world
in which control of the sea has largely been unchallenged.
On the high seas, the United States has helped create a world order
that prioritizes respect for international law and norms.
Our instruments of national power--including the U.S. Coast Guard,
the U.S. military, and the Department of State--have helped maintain
this world order with presence, engagement, and, at times, execution of
law enforcement or defense authorities established in domestic statute
or by international agreements.
However, this world order is under threat from the People's
Republic of China.
In the South China Sea, the People's Republic of China (PRC) has
undertaken a strategy of adopting territorial claims that are
inconsistent with international law and norms governing the high seas.
As the steady flow of news stories demonstrates, the PRC employs
nefarious methods to uphold its illegitimate claims.
Last month, the Chinese Coast Guard used a water cannon against a
Philippine vessel within the Philippines' Exclusive Economic Zone, and
against a Vietnamese fishing vessel off the Vietnamese coast.
Additionally, in pursuing natural resources at sea, the PRC
routinely disregards the sovereign rights of nations in the Indo-
Pacific region and even as far away as West Africa.
As a nation dependent upon not only free and uninhibited access to
the world's oceans but also the bedrock of international law and norms
to maintain peace and order, the United States must stand strong in the
face of the PRC's increasingly belligerent and aggressive actions.
This is no easy task, especially in our region of focus today, the
Indo-Pacific.
Stretching from Southern California to South Africa and from Alaska
to Antarctica, the Indo-Pacific region stretches our personnel and
assets across a wide swath of the globe.
The tyranny of distance is real in this region.
Our military experienced this first-hand during World War II, when
our forces in the Pacific often had to transit distances comparable to
the size of the continental United States.
We would do well to keep that experience in mind today, for while
technology has changed since World War II, geography has not.
We must also be mindful of the rising tensions between the United
States and the PRC.
While we must maintain our sovereignty and uphold the norms that
keep the peace abroad, I do not want to see us start a new Cold War.
The United States Coast Guard offers unique capabilities in
addressing these issues with the appropriate level of strength and
tact.
The Coast Guard has decades of experience operating in the Indo-
Pacific and already has relationships with many countries in the
region.
Furthermore, the Coast Guard's law enforcement capabilities offer
the United States a less threatening alternative than conventional
military force in bolstering the security presence in the region.
Our Sentinels can play the role of diplomat, technical expert,
police officer, and, if necessary, surface combatant.
In doing so, they also reinforce the efforts of our military and
our State Department in the region.
Thus, the Coast Guard is an invaluable tool in ensuring that the
United States heeds Sir Walter Raleigh's words and ensures that neither
the PRC nor other malign actors wrestles away our command of the high
seas.
I am grateful that we have before us witnesses representing not
only the U.S. Coast Guard, but also U.S. Indo-Pacific Command and the
U.S. Department of State, which together represent three important
components of national power in the Indo-Pacific region.
I thank our witnesses for appearing before the subcommittee today,
and I look forward to their testimonies.
I yield back.
______

Statement of Ranking Member Bennie G. Thompson
September 28, 2023
Good morning. Thank you to Chairman Gimenez and Ranking Member
Thanedar for calling today's hearing on maritime security challenges in
the Indo-Pacific, and thank you to our witnesses for testifying on this
important topic.
The Indo-Pacific region is increasingly critical to the efforts of
the U.S. Coast Guard and its partners to secure the maritime domain and
enforce an international rules-based order.
The region faces a variety of challenges, from rising sea levels as
a result of climate change, to aggressive territorial claims and
fishing tactics from malign state actors, including the People's
Republic of China.
Small island nations in the region have limited resources to
respond to disasters and defend their territorial waters, and the Coast
Guard's ability to provide support and partnership to those nations is
key to advancing U.S. interests in the region.
The Coast Guard engages in valuable training, exercises, and
personnel exchanges with partners in region to bolster maritime law
enforcement, port security, search and rescue, disaster response
capabilities, and enforcement of illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing.
The Coast Guard has limited resources, however, and the vastness of
the Pacific makes it impossible for the service to deploy everywhere it
would like to.
Congress must invest in the Coast Guard's cutter programs and
workforce to maximize its ability to deploy throughout the Indo-
Pacific.
The Coast Guard's coordination and collaboration with the
Departments of Defense and State is also critical to ensuring limited
resources are deployed optimally.
I am eager to learn more about how the agencies represented by the
witnesses here today work in concert to support both military readiness
and diplomacy.
I must also note that the witnesses testifying today represent
large workforces of civil servants who provide critical functions on
behalf of the United States.
If the Republican Majority follows through on its threats to shut
down the Government, these workers will be forced to work without pay,
jeopardizing their ability to advance U.S. interests at home and
abroad.
I hope the Majority will step back from the ledge and act quickly
to avoid an unnecessary Government shutdown which would undermine all
of the critical efforts that will be discussed today.
Thank you again to our witnesses.
______

Statement of Honorable Michael T. Mccaul
September 28, 2023
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for convening this important hearing.
The People's Republic of China is actively destabilizing the Indo-
Pacific region through its nefarious activities on the high seas. Its
distance water fishing fleet operates without regard to national
borders established and respected by international law and norms, and
its illegitimate sovereignty claims in the South China Sea undermine
free and open access by all nations to important trade routes located
in international waters.
The U.S. Coast Guard plays a vital role in not only deterring the
PRC from operating in United States exclusive economic zone but also in
building partnerships with nations across the Indo-Pacific. Coast Guard
personnel provide needed training to other nations from everything to
fisheries protection and EEZ enforcement to port security and search
and rescue (SAR) capabilities. The Department of State is crucial in
facilitating these bi- or multilateral agreements that allow the Coast
Guard to utilize its assets and personnel to advance U.S. interests in
the region at a level below the threshold of armed conflict. While the
presence of U.S. Navy ships might appear threatening not only to the
PRC but also to several other countries in the region, the presence of
the U.S. Coast Guard communicates the United States' commitment to
upholding international law and the sovereignty of individual States.
I regret that I was unable to attend the hearing today, but I am
grateful for the work that my colleagues are doing on this critical
topic.

Chairman Gimenez. Again, I am pleased to have a
distinguished panel of witnesses before us today on this
critical topic. I ask that our witnesses please rise and raise
their right hands.
[Witnesses sworn.]
Chairman Gimenez. Let the record reflect that the witnesses
have answered in the affirmative. Thank you, and please be
seated.
Like to formally introduce our witnesses.
Vice Admiral Andrew Tiongson--sorry--serves as the
operational commander for the United States Coast Guard Pacific
area, Brigadier General Neil Richardson serves as the deputy
director for strategic planning and policy for the United
States Indo-Pacific Command, and Ms. Camille Dawson serves as
the State Department's deputy assistant secretary for the
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs.
I thank each of our distinguished guests for being here
today.
I now recognize Vice Admiral Tiongson for 5 minutes to
summarize his opening statements.

STATEMENT OF VICE ADMIRAL ANDREW J. TIONGSON, USCG COMMANDER,
PACIFIC AREA, UNITED STATES COAST GUARD

Admiral Tiongson. Good morning, Chairman Gimenez, Ranking
Member Thanedar, and Members of the committee. I am honored to
appear here before you today to discuss the United States Coast
Guard's work to advance the United States strategy for the
Indo-Pacific region as a trusted partner.
First, I want to thank you for your strong support of the
Coast Guard, a key component of the Department of Homeland
Security. Continued Congressional support enables our service
to protect the homeland, save lives, preserve the
sustainability of our oceans, and strengthen regional and
national stability to combat transnational maritime threats.
My written testimony has been provided to the committee,
and I ask that it be entered into the record.
Chairman Gimenez. So ordered.
Admiral Tiongson. Mr. Chairman and Members of the
committee, the Coast Guard operates on all 7 continents and
throughout the homeland. Our work force embodies our distinct
value proposition, maritime governance. We protect, defend, and
save those who live and work on the sea, we protect the sea
itself, and we support the rule of law. The Coast Guard serves
a Nation whose economic prosperity and national security rely
on free and open oceans.
The Coast Guard's Pacific area encompasses 74 million
square miles of ocean, more than half of the world's
population, and 77 countries. Within this area are 3 of the 5
largest global economies, through which nearly $4 trillion in
annual maritime commerce flow. This area includes 8 of the 10
largest U.S. trading partners, 7 of the world's 10 largest
militaries, and 80 percent of the United States exclusive
economic zone.
Regional partners are challenged by malign activities on
the sea. Impacts to vital fish stocks from illegal, unreported,
and unregulated fishing threaten world-wide protein security,
an existential threat to many Pacific Island nations. Threats
to global supply chains and infrastructure pose a risk to
trillions of dollars in economic activity, while these same
risks pose the potential to disrupt prosperity, stability, and
freedom of navigation. Natural disasters exacerbated by a
changing climate and rising sea levels also threaten fragile
economies and ecosystems.
This complex maritime environment requires governance by,
with, and through trusted partnerships that enable
prioritization of limited resources and sustained multilateral
efforts to counter the most critical threats and challenges.
The Coast Guard supports partner nations in developing legal
frameworks and capacity to protect their sovereign rights. We
model good governance through our operational approach. We must
always see threats and challenges through our partners' eyes
and strive to meet them where they are with what they need. Our
highly visible white ships with orange racing stripes allow us
to demonstrate maritime governance wherever we go.
In the last year alone, the Coast Guard participated in
exercises with our partners across the Indo-Pacific, deployed
advisors during the motor vessel Princess Empress, large-scale
oil spill response, and regularly provided search and rescue,
technical assistance, and security and law enforcement training
to partner nations.
Our efforts to uphold and build sound maritime governance
in the Indo-Pacific focuses on countering malign activities.
These activities erode the customary balance between coastal
State rights, freedom of navigation, and lawful use of the high
seas. We aim to bolster the capacity of like-minded nations to
do the same and reinforce our position as a trusted partner.
Again, thank you for Congress' continued support and for
the opportunity to appear before you today.
I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Tiongson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Andrew J. Tiongson
September 28, 2023
introduction
Good afternoon, Chairman Gimenez and distinguished Members of the
subcommittee. It is my pleasure today to discuss the Coast Guard's
efforts to promote a free, open, and resilient Indo-Pacific in support
of the Indo-Pacific Strategy of the United States. At all times a
branch of the U.S. Armed Forces, a Federal law enforcement agency, a
regulatory body, a first responder, and a member of the U.S.
intelligence community, the Coast Guard operates on all 7 continents
and throughout the homeland, serving a Nation whose national security
and economic prosperity are inextricably linked to the sea.
The United States has direct strategic interests in the Indo-
Pacific comprising 1.3 million square miles, which is 28 percent of the
4.5 million square miles of ocean that is the U.S. Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ). The Coast Guard safeguards this EEZ, protects and defends
more than 100,000 miles of U.S. coastline and inland waterways, and
saves thousands of lives per year. The Coast Guard is working to answer
an increased demand for Indo-Pacific engagement within available
resources, balancing numerous dynamic maritime risks facing our Nation.
Around the globe, the Coast Guard is in high demand as an
instrument of international diplomacy, recognized as the U.S. maritime
service with the most relatable mission profile to many nations'
maritime forces. Partner nations often structure and model their
actions after the U.S. Coast Guard to help address the universal
challenges posed by transnational crime, human smuggling, maritime
safety and security, environmental stewardship, illegal, unreported,
and unregulated (IUU) fishing, and provocations in their waters under
their jurisdiction from fleets flying foreign flags.
The Coast Guard's strategic vision for the Indo-Pacific is to build
a more free, open, connected, prosperous, secure, and resilient Indo-
Pacific with unrestricted, lawful access to the maritime domain for all
nations, advancing the existing rules-based international order and
solidifying the United States as a trusted partner for maritime safety,
security, and prosperity in the region. To effectively achieve this
vision, the Coast Guard works closely with U.S. interagency partners to
provide capacity building and we also work to ensure our deployments
are planned strategically.
The U.S. Coast Guard supports national strategic guidance with our
operations, activities, and investments by synchronizing efforts across
the interagency, and with allies and partners. We prioritize operations
through three Lines of Effort (LOE): Prepare a Ready Force; Generate
Combined Effects; and Uphold Governance. This vision, and all of the
Coast Guard's actions in the region, directly align with the
administration's five objectives in the U.S. Indo-Pacific Strategy:
1. Advance A Free and Open Indo-Pacific;
2. Build Connections Within and Beyond the Region;
3. Drive Regional Prosperity;
4. Bolster Indo-Pacific Security; and
5. Build Regional Resilience to Transnational Threats.
The Coast Guard has operated in the Indo-Pacific for more than 150
years, and the Service is increasing efforts through targeted patrols
with our National Security and Fast Response Cutters in support of
Coast Guard missions and to enhance our partnerships. With a modest
regional Coast Guard footprint, the Service partners with the
Department of State (DOS) and the Department of Defense (DoD) to engage
partners. Across Oceania, we actively leverage our 12 bilateral law
enforcement agreements with Pacific Island countries to assist our
partners in enforcing their respective domestic sovereign rights,
building strong maritime governance regimes, and forming a unified
front against malign activity.
coast guard indo-pacific engagement
The Coast Guard maintains a permanent and expeditionary global
footprint to execute its 11 statutory missions. U.S. Coast Guard
operations with partners and allies protect national interests by
expanding operations beyond the U.S. EEZ, enhancing partner nation
capability, and disrupting and deterring threats further from our
shores.
In the Indo-Pacific, Coast Guard operations focus on issues that
directly confront local populations. This includes strengthening
maritime governance and solving problems that protect people's
livelihoods through protection of fish stocks, ensuring the safety of
life at sea, preparing for climate-induced natural disasters, marine
environmental protection, and protecting routine transportation and
commerce against mishap and malicious activity.
Operations At Sea.--In fiscal year 2022, multiple Coast Guard
National Security Cutters participated in multi-national initiatives,
including Operations BLUE PACIFIC and NORTH PACIFIC GUARD. The
deployments supported the U.S. SEVENTH Fleet during U.S. Navy-led
Cooperation Afloat Readiness and Training, Rim of the Pacific, and
Southeast Asia Cooperation and Training exercises. National Security
Cutters supported the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA)
targeting IUU fishing in Oceania. Finally, Coast Guard deployable
specialized forces embarked on U.S. Navy vessels operating in the
Western and Central Pacific in support of IUU fishing enforcement under
the Oceania Maritime Security Initiative.
Defense Readiness.--The Coast Guard has served in every major armed
conflict involving the United States since 1790. Around the world, on
any given day, Coast Guard members are deployed in direct support of
geographic Combatant Commander priorities. In the Indo-Pacific theater,
Coast Guard capabilities and authorities are leveraged to advance
important strategic national security objectives.
National Security Cutter deployments support the U.S. Indo-Pacific
Command (USINDOPACOM) and provide opportunities to engage partner
nations. The Coast Guard also supports USINDOPACOM with small adaptive
force packages and professional engagements in Oceania. The Service
remains committed to interoperability with our DoD partners and is
always ready to fulfill a complementary role during conflict or
contingency operations as a part of the Joint Force. Whether we are
supporting military mobility through our management of the marine
transportation system or operating jointly with other services and
combatant commanders, the Coast Guard remains Semper Paratus (Always
Ready) to protect and serve whenever our Nation calls.
Cooperation.--The Coast Guard's network of more than 60 multi- and
bi-lateral agreements and participation in international fora are
unique among government agencies and military forces. The bilateral
agreements authorize personnel with enforcement authority from the
partner nation to embark Coast Guard cutters and conduct combined law
enforcement operations inside the partner nation's EEZ.
Operations pursuant to these agreements, combined with activities
within the U.S. EEZ surrounding American Samoa, Guam, and the Northern
Marianas, expand opportunities that bolster a rules-based order to
address challenges ranging from fisheries enforcement and counter
narcotics, and support joint contingency plans for disaster and
pollution response. These partnerships are vital to America's ability
to secure our EEZ and our success in the broader context of
geostrategic competition.
The Coast Guard's law enforcement, regulatory, and humanitarian
missions promote professional service-to-service relationships and
enhanced cooperation on maritime, economic, and national security
challenges. In this context, the Coast Guard works through the security
cooperation, Security Assistance, and capacity-building programs in DoD
and DOS to provide bilateral and multilateral training to partners,
including hosting resident training, deploying Mobile Training Teams
(MTTs), and exchanging subject-matter experts (SMEs). Since 2009, the
Coast Guard has hosted more than 900 students from the Indo-Pacific
region and conducted more than 200 MTT deployments and SME exchanges
with 78 course offerings ranging from maritime law enforcement to
international leadership and management.
The Coast Guard works with the Pacific Island countries to assess
their needs and develop strategies to improve their capabilities; for
one nation this may mean advanced law enforcement training, and for
another this may include disaster response training to build climate
change resiliency. Beyond building capacity through a consistent
training presence, these efforts demonstrate commitment to the region
and promote the United States as a trusted partner. Additionally, these
engagements enable long-term relationships as foreign military students
continue interacting with Coast Guard personnel as they advance in
their respective organizations.
Advancing a Free and Open Indo-Pacific.--Building and reinforcing
partnerships, the Coast Guard provides specialized operational
capabilities in support of national security objectives in the Indo-
Pacific. The Coast Guard employs a unique blend of diplomatic,
military, economic, and law enforcement tools. By setting and enforcing
standards of behavior in the maritime domain, the Coast Guard
represents rules-based order and provides options for like-minded
nations to counter malign actors.
As part of a whole-of-Government approach to addressing challenges
in Oceania and the broader Indo-Pacific region, the Coast Guard offers
transparent, persistent engagement and partnership at both professional
and personal levels. The Coast Guard is expanding our engagement in the
Indo-Pacific by establishing additional long-term presence as attaches,
liaisons, and advisors to strengthen regional and partner engagement,
working to build the capacity of the coast guards and maritime law
enforcement agencies in the region in coordination with DoD and DOS,
creating a multi- and mini-lateral friendly and encouraging
environment. We are also working closely with like-minded partners to
coordinate capacity-building efforts and expand information sharing in
the region.
Beyond regular multi-mission patrols across the Indo-Pacific by our
National Security Cutters, the Coast Guard is demonstrating our
enduring commitment to the region by homeporting 3 of our newest Fast
Response Cutters (FRC) in Guam and is relocating a major cutter to the
region in fiscal year 2024 with the specific missions of promoting
maritime governance, establishing persistent U.S. presence, and
conducting meaningful engagements. These cutters increase Coast Guard
operational presence throughout the vast Indo-Pacific region and help
to protect our EEZ from threats of IUU fishing and transnational crime.
In the fiscal year 2024 Unfunded Priority List, the Coast Guard
also requested $400 million for 4 FRCs to further the Indo-Pacific
Strategy of the United States through expanded presence and engagement
to promote a free and open Indo-Pacific. Additional FRCs would begin to
transform the Coast Guard from an organization which currently provides
episodic presence, to be persistent and visible, strengthening
coordination with Allied and partner nations to bolster regional
security.
conclusion
The Coast Guard has operated in the Indo-Pacific with our key
partners for more than 150 years and is proud to be considered a
trusted partner in maritime security, safety, and stewardship.
Partnership with relevant U.S. Government agencies and like-minded
partners is critical to the Coast Guard's continued capacity-building
efforts and regional presence. Through international engagement,
partnership, and presence, the Coast Guard can bridge gaps between the
DOS diplomacy and DoD force. The Service is well-positioned to operate
in this region, while continuing its other critical missions.
The Coast Guard recognizes this consequential new period of
American foreign policy requires additional Coast Guard presence in the
Indo-Pacific. U.S. interests in the region have become ever clearer,
just as they have become more difficult to protect. The Coast Guard has
a valuable role to conduct persistent and effective operations to
uphold rules-based maritime governance. The Coast Guard anticipates an
increasingly dynamic future and stands ready to increase cooperation,
promote order, and deter conflict.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Vice Admiral Tiongson.
I now recognize Brigadier General Richardson for 5 minutes
to summarize his opening statement.

STATEMENT OF BRIGADIER GENERAL NEIL R. RICHARDSON, USAF DEPUTY
DIRECTOR FOR STRATEGIC PLANNING AND POLICY, UNITED STATES INDO-
PACIFIC COMMAND, DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE

General Richardson. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member
Thanedar, and distinguished Members of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the
U.S. Coast Guard's critical role in support of the INDOPACOM
mission. on behalf of Admiral Aqualino, I'd like to thank you
for your continuous support to the men and women of U.S.
INDOPACOM and their families. Your support is instrumental to
our ability to accomplish our missions every day.
The Indo-Pacific is the most consequential region in the
world, encompassing more than half the world's population, the
busiest maritime trade routes, and key allies and partners. It
is also the epicenter for great power competition with the
People's Republic of China. Ensuring stability and security in
the Indo-Pacific is not only vital for maintaining a regional
peace, but also for global commerce and safeguarding American
interest.
The U.S. Coast Guard and INDOPACOM work together every day
to prevent conflict in this region. INDOPACOM is dedicated to
preserving a free and open Indo-Pacific where nations can
thrive economically and maintain their sovereignty without
external coercion. Foundational to our approach is a campaign
of integrated deterrence in which we use our military tools in
concert with all instruments of national power to convince
potential aggressors that they cannot achieve their objectives
through force. U.S. forces must be postured and operating in
the right places with the right capabilities at the right time
and executing the right missions alongside the like-minded
allies and partners to deliver integrated deterrence and, if
deterrence fails, prevail in conflict.
The Indo-Pacific region has many nations with military that
performs Coast Guard duties or law enforcement agencies in
place of militaries. The U.S. Coast Guard's dual role as both a
law enforcement agency and a military service makes it an ideal
tool for capacity building and outreach to these nations. The
Coast Guard's collaboration with these allies and partners in
the Indo-Pacific fosters regional cooperation and strengthens
the U.S. network of like-minded nations.
The U.S. Coast Guard's versatility, as well as unique
capabilities and authorities, make it well-suited to address a
wide range of challenges in the region, many of which are high
priorities to our allies and partners, including maritime
security, law enforcement, and environmental protection in
support of the INDOPACOM mission. Simply put, the Coast Guard
is frequently the right force in the right place at the right
time with the right capabilities. I have seen first-hand the
utility of the Coast Guard during a recent visit to Oceania,
where our partners expressed an insatiable appetite for
increased presence, activities, and training with the U.S.
Coast Guard.
As you know, presence matters, and the Coast Guard's
presence in the Indo-Pacific sends a strong message that the
United States is committed to upholding the rules-based
international order. Illegal, unreported, and unregulated, or
IUU fishing, is a major threat to marine sources and the
economies of many of our partners in the Indo-Pacific. The
Coast Guard works closely with our allies and partners to
combat IUU fishing through surveillance, enforcement, and
building partner capacity. This allows the Coast Guard to help
enforce and maintain international law and support partner
nation sovereignty. This is especially critical in the Indo-
Pacific, where many distant water fishing fleets are common and
the Pacific Island countries often lack the capacity to detect
and interdict these vessels on their own.
Similarly, bilateral law enforcement agreements allow for
the exchange of shipriders between the United States and
partner nations, permitting partner law enforcement personnel
to embark on Coast Guard vessels and aircraft to enforce their
laws, and vice versa. These agreements allow the Coast Guard to
work more effectively with partners in the region to enforce
applicable national laws, combat illegal activity on the high
seas and in the waters under the jurisdiction of our partners,
and build maritime law enforcement capacity in those partner
nations.
Additionally, the Coast Guard's capabilities and
responsibility for environmental protection and disaster
response aligns with ally and partner priorities. Many allies
and partners in the region consider climate change to be the
single greatest threat to their livelihoods, security, and
well-being. By enforcing environmental regulations and
responding to pollution incidences and natural disasters, the
Coast Guard helps to preserve the delicate marine ecosystem of
many Indo-Pacific nations and contributes to the sustainable
development of the region, which is essential to long-term
stability.
A whole-of-Government approach is essential to succeed in
the Indo-Pacific strategy and in our competition with the PRC.
The Coast Guard's contributions to INDOPACOM are an integral
part of this effort. Its versatility, cooperative relationship
with allies and partners, and ability to promote maritime
security and the rules-based order make it an invaluable asset
in the region. INDOPACOM supports strong and robust funding and
resourcing for the Coast Guard to ensure it can continue and,
where possible, grow its valuable contributions to peace and
security throughout the region.
Finally, as we navigate the complex challenges of the Indo-
Pacific, let us not forget the steadfast service of the Coast
Guard personnel who work to ensure that the seas remain safe,
secure, and open for all. Their dedication is a testament to
the United States' enduring commitment to a prosperous and
peaceful Indo-Pacific for generations to come.
Sir, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you
today, and I look forward to your questions.
[The prepared statement of Mr. Richardson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Neil R. Richardson
28 September 2023
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and distinguished
Members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear
before you today to discuss the U.S. Coast Guard's critical role in
support of the INDOPACOM mission. On behalf of Admiral Aquilino, I
would like to thank you for your continuous support to the men and
women of INDOPACOM and their families. Your support is instrumental to
our ability to accomplish our missions every day.
The Indo-Pacific is the most consequential region of the world,
encompassing more than half the world's population, the busiest
maritime trade routes, and key allies and partners. It is also the
epicenter for great power competition with the People's Republic of
China (PRC). Ensuring stability and security in the Indo-Pacific is not
only vital for maintaining regional peace but also for global commerce
and safeguarding American interests. The U.S. Coast Guard and INDOPACOM
work together every day to prevent conflict in this region.
INDOPACOM is dedicated to preserving a free and open Indo-Pacific,
where nations can thrive economically and maintain their sovereignty
without external coercion. Foundational to our approach is a campaign
of integrated deterrence, in which we use our military tools in concert
with all instruments of national power to convince potential aggressors
that they cannot achieve their objectives through force. U.S. forces
must be postured and operating in the right places, with the right
capabilities, at the right times, and executing the right missions
alongside like-minded allies and partners to deliver integrated
deterrence, and, if deterrence fails, prevail in conflict.
The Indo-Pacific region has many nations with a military that
performs Coast Guard duties or law enforcement agencies in place of
militaries. The U.S. Coast Guard's dual role as both a law enforcement
agency and a military service makes it an ideal tool for capacity
building and outreach to these nations. The Coast Guard's collaboration
with these allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific fosters regional
cooperation and strengthens the U.S. network of like-minded nations.
The U.S. Coast Guard's versatility, as well as unique capabilities
and authorities, make it well-suited to address a wide range of
challenges in the region, many of which are high priorities to our
allies and partners--including maritime security, law enforcement, and
environmental protection--in support of the INDOPACOM mission. Simply
put, the Coast Guard is frequently the right force, in the right place,
at the right time, with the right capabilities. I have seen first-hand
the utility of the Coast Guard during a recent visit to Oceania where
our partners expressed an insatiable appetite for increased presence,
activities, and training with the U.S. Coast Guard.
As you know, presence matters and the Coast Guard's presence in the
Indo-Pacific sends a strong message that the United States is committed
to upholding the rules-based international order. Illegal, unreported,
and unregulated or IUU fishing is a major threat to marine resources
and the economies of many of our partners in the Indo-Pacific. The
Coast Guard works closely with our allies and partners to combat IUU
fishing through surveillance, enforcement, and building partner
capacity. This allows the Coast Guard to help enforce and maintain
international law and support partner nation sovereignty. This is
especially critical in the Indo-Pacific, where many distant water
fishing fleets are common and the Pacific Island Countries often lack
the capacity to detect and interdict these vessels on their own.
Similarly, bilateral law enforcement agreements allow for the
exchange of ship riders between the United States and partner nations,
permitting partner law enforcement personnel to embark on Coast Guard
vessels and aircraft to enforce their laws, and vice versa. These
agreements allow the Coast Guard to work more effectively with partners
in the region to enforce applicable national laws, combat illegal
activity on the high seas and in waters under the jurisdiction of our
partners, and build maritime law enforcement capacity in those partner
nations.
Additionally, the Coast Guard's capabilities and responsibility for
environmental protection and disaster response aligns with ally and
partner priorities. Many allies and partners in the region consider
climate change to be the single greatest threat to their livelihoods,
security, and well-being. By enforcing environmental regulations and
responding to pollution incidents and natural disasters, the Coast
Guard helps to preserve the delicate marine ecosystems of many Indo-
Pacific nations and contributes to the sustainable development of the
region, which is essential for long-term stability.
A whole-of-Government strategy is essential to succeed in our Indo-
Pacific Strategy, and in our competition with the PRC. The Coast
Guard's contributions to the INDOPACOM are an integral part of this
effort. Its versatility, cooperative relationship with allies and
partners, and ability to promote maritime security and the rules-based
order make it an invaluable asset in the region. Indo-Pacific Command
supports strong and robust funding and resourcing for the Coast Guard
to ensure it can continue, and where possible grow, its valuable
contributions to peace and security throughout the Indo-Pacific.
Finally, as we navigate the complex challenges of the Indo-Pacific,
let us not forget the steadfast service of the Coast Guard personnel
who work to ensure that the seas remain safe, secure, and open for all.
Their dedication is a testament to the United States' enduring
commitment to a prosperous and peaceful Indo-Pacific for generations to
come.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today and I look
forward to your questions.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, General Richardson.
I now recognize Ms. Dawson for 5 minutes to summarize her
opening statements.

STATEMENT OF CAMILLE DAWSON, DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY, BUREAU
OF EAST ASIAN AND PACIFIC AFFAIRS, DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Ms. Dawson. Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and
Members of the subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to
appear before you today to testify on Department of State
efforts to advance U.S. maritime security interest in the Indo-
Pacific.
As we are all aware, the Indo-Pacific faces mounting
challenges, particularly from the People's Republic of China.
The PRC's coercion and provocations span the globe, but they
are most acute in the Indo-Pacific, including in the maritime
domain. We have seen a clear and upward trend of PRC
provocations, most notably in the South China Sea, to include
an assertive expansion of unlawful maritime claims and
interference with freedoms of navigation and overflight. We are
taking a range of measures to address these challenges.
At the same time, our approach to the region is about much
more than just one country. Our approach is driven by the Indo-
Pacific strategy, our shared affirmative vision for a region
that is free and open and ever more connected, prosperous,
secure, and resilient. We work through a whole-of-society and
whole-of-Government approach in close coordination with our
colleagues across the interagency, including the Coast Guard,
INDOPACOM, and others in the Department of Defense, to advance
that vision.
The origin of the free and open Indo-Pacific as a concept
is rooted in connecting two oceans and promoting a free and
open maritime space. Protecting this critical maritime domain
falls into three key lines of effort. No. 1, diplomacy to
promote respect for international law and the rules-based
order; No. 2, capacity-building programs for the region's
maritime law enforcement agencies and militaries, and, No. 3,
our operations to demonstrate that all countries can fly, sail,
and operate anywhere that international law allows. Close
cooperation with like-minded partners lies at the heart of our
approach to the Indo-Pacific region because we recognize that
no one country can meet the challenges alone. We work through
multilateral architecture, such as ASEAN, the Pacific Islands
Forum, and the Indian Ocean Rim Association, as well as newer
flexible arrangements, such as the Quad, AUKUS, Partners in the
Blue Pacific, trilateral cooperation with the Republic of Korea
and Japan, and with the Philippines and Japan and the U.S.-E.U.
Indo-Pacific Consultations.
We have taken steps to advance our maritime security
objectives through activities such as implementing the Indo-
Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness, conducting
the first-ever joint U.S.-E.U. naval exercise in March this
year, and strengthening our diplomatic presence by opening
additional embassies and expanding our staffing in the Pacific
Islands. We have also used public diplomacy and legal diplomacy
to advance maritime security goals. One example of this is
State Department attorneys briefing governments, scholars, and
thought leaders around the world using the Department of
State's Limits in the Seas publication to counter the PRC's
unlawful maritime claims in the South China Seas. Capacity
building is also central to our efforts, both as a development
tool and a way to build and maintain relationships, and we
appreciate our strong collaboration with Congress on this
priority.
In fiscal year 2022, State's Bureau of Political Military
Affairs provided $286 million in security assistance to the
Indo-Pacific region, much of which had a maritime security
focus. State and the Coast Guard also pursued bilateral
maritime law enforcement agreements to counter illicit
transnational maritime activities, including IUU fishing and
the trafficking of humans, wildlife, arms, and drugs, including
fentanyl. The most recent maritime law enforcement agreement in
the region was with Papua New Guinea, which entered into force
in August. These examples, though not exhaustive, highlight our
approach to leverage our expertise, resources, and networks to
advance a free and open Indo-Pacific region, promote U.S.
maritime security interest, and deter PRC efforts to undermine
the regional order for its own gain.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering
questions and those of Members of the subcommittee.
[The prepared statement of Ms. Dawson follows:]
Prepared Statement of Camille Dawson
September 28, 2023
Chairman Gimenez, Ranking Member Thanedar, and Members of the
subcommittee: Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today
to testify on Department of State efforts to advance U.S. maritime
security interests in the Indo-Pacific. We deeply appreciate this
committee's leadership and support for policies that advance our
maritime objectives.
As you are all aware, the Indo-Pacific faces mounting challenges,
particularly from the PRC. The PRC's coercion and aggression spans the
globe, but it is most acute in the Indo-Pacific, including in the
maritime domain. We have seen a clear and upward trend of PRC
provocations, most notably in the South China Sea, to include an
assertive expansion of unlawful maritime claims and interference with
freedoms of navigation and overflight and other lawful uses of the sea.
However, our approach to the region is about much more than just
one country--it is a whole-of-society approach, driven by the Indo-
Pacific Strategy (IPS), our shared, affirmative vision for a region
that is free and open and ever more connected, prosperous, secure, and
resilient. We work in close coordination with our colleagues across the
interagency, including with the Coast Guard and Department of Defense,
to advance that vision.
The origin of the free and open Indo-Pacific as a concept is rooted
in connecting two oceans and promoting a free and open maritime space.
Protecting this critical maritime domain falls into three key lines of
effort: (1) Our diplomacy together with likeminded partners to promote
respect for international law and the rules-based order, and the need
for peaceful settlement of disputes; (2) maritime capacity-building
programs for the region's maritime law enforcement agencies and
militaries; and (3) our own operations, including Freedom of Navigation
Operations and routine presence operations, to demonstrate that all
countries have the right to fly, sail, and operate anywhere that
international law allows.
To advance the maritime security priorities of the IPS, the
Department of State works closely with like-minded partners to keep the
region open and accessible and ensure the region's seas and skies are
governed and used according to international law. This close
cooperation with allies and partners lies at the heart of our approach
to the Indo-Pacific region because we recognize that no one country can
meet the challenges alone. In particular, we build support for rules-
based approaches to the maritime domain, including in the South China
Sea, the East China Sea, and the Taiwan Strait. Prominent examples of
this approach include our work through existing regional multilateral
architecture, such as ASEAN, the Pacific Islands Forum, and the Indian
Ocean Rim Association, as well as newer, more flexible arrangements
such as the Quad, AUKUS, Partners in the Blue Pacific, trilateral
cooperation with the Republic of Korea and Japan, and the U.S.-EU Indo-
Pacific Consultations.
The Quad works to ensure the Indo-Pacific remains free and open.
Through the Indo-Pacific Partnership for Maritime Domain Awareness
(IPMDA), the Quad is committed to supporting regional partners' efforts
to improve their maritime domain awareness. This year, the Department
of State also hosted the first-ever Quad Maritime Conference in
Washington, DC.
Our enhanced trilateral security partnership with Australia and the
United Kingdom--AUKUS--supports Australia's acquisition of
conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines at the earliest
possible date. AUKUS also enhances our joint capabilities and
interoperability through a concrete program of work on advanced
capabilities, including cyber, artificial intelligence, quantum
technologies, and additional undersea capabilities.
Launched by the United States and like-minded partners in June
2022, Partners in the Blue Pacific (PBP) is rooted in our shared
determination to support a prosperous, secure, resilient, free, and
open region that benefits people in the Pacific. We advance a range of
maritime initiatives under the PBP framework, which is forging ever-
closer partnerships with Pacific Island nations through activities such
as the PBP workshop on illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU)
fishing and maritime domain awareness that we hosted in Hawaii in
January.
At the Camp David Summit last month, U.S., ROK, and Japan leaders
also agreed to establish a trilateral maritime mechanism to synchronize
partner capacity building in Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands.
Additional actions that advance U.S. maritime security interests
include the first-ever joint U.S.-E.U. naval exercise, conducted this
year through the U.S.-E.U. Indo-Pacific consultations; progress opening
embassies in the Pacific that will strengthen our presence and
partnerships; and public diplomacy programs to advance maritime
security goals. In partnership with DOD, we launched a public
engagement program in the Philippines to provide cameras to fisher folk
to record IUU fishing. We also offered legal exchange programs and
consultations around the region related to maritime law, where
attorneys at the Department of State explain their publication ``Limits
in the Seas No. 150'' and advise officials from the region how to
counter the PRC's baseless claims in the South China Sea through
appropriate legal fora. The Department of State also sponsored a
maritime boundary workshop for ASEAN nations to enhance their legal
capabilities and solve their disputes peacefully.
Capacity building is central to our maritime security efforts in
the Indo-Pacific, both as a development tool and a way to build and
maintain relationships, and we appreciate our strong collaboration with
Congress on this priority. We maintain robust security assistance
intended to build maritime capacity and maritime domain awareness, and
we see the need to expand this effort. Through our Bureau of
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, the Department of
State funds nearly $20 million of Coast Guard capacity-building efforts
to strengthen maritime governance while protecting the security of the
American people. Similar programs extend to combating cyber threats in
the maritime domain to help partner countries defend against cyber
attacks on critical maritime infrastructure, such as ports and
navigation systems. The Department of State's Bureau of Political-
Military Affairs Security Assistance Office provided $286 million in
fiscal year 2022 security assistance to the Indo-Pacific region.
Security assistance efforts in the region include building partner
nation maritime security, maritime domain awareness, humanitarian
assistance and disaster response, and military professionalization.
This security assistance develops and enhances partner nation
capabilities and advances a range of U.S. interests.
Additionally, the Department of State and Coast Guard continue to
pursue new bilateral maritime law enforcement agreements which cover a
spectrum of illicit transnational maritime activities, including IUU
fishing, drug and migrant smuggling, and illicit transport of weapons
of mass destruction. These agreements enable the U.S. Government to
engage with and support partners who are still building or expanding
their capacity for maritime domain awareness or at-sea enforcement, and
provides them the tools to do so. The most recent agreement with Papua
New Guinea entered into force in August and was successfully utilized
earlier this month during an historic joint operation with Papua New
Guinea Defense Force shipriders and the Coast Guard Cutter Myrtle
Hazard.
Collaboration across the U.S. Government to advance maritime
security in the Indo-Pacific enables us to demonstrate physical
presence and commitment to meeting the needs of the region. This is
powerful evidence that directly disproves the false narrative--
propounded by the PRC and others--that the United States is retreating
from the region. Our presence and responsiveness to needs identified by
countries in the region is particularly relevant in the Pacific
Islands, where many of the countries lack sufficient law enforcement
capabilities and do not have standing militaries. In such locations,
our Coast Guard partners are indispensable, building trust and
providing resources and training in a manner that cannot be replicated
by any other U.S. agency.
These examples, though not exhaustive, highlight our approach--in
collaboration with the Coast Guard, DOD, others in the interagency, and
counterparts throughout the region--to leverage our expertise,
resources, and networks to advance a free and open Indo-Pacific region,
promote U.S. maritime security interests, and deter PRC efforts to
undermine the regional order for its own gain.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I look forward to answering your questions
and those of other Members of the subcommittee.

Chairman Gimenez. Thank you, Ms. Dawson.
Members will be recognized in order of seniority for their
5 minutes of questioning.
I will go a little bit out of order and ask for consent to
allow the gentleman from Louisiana, Mr. Higgins, to go first.
He needs to go to another hearing.
Mr. Higgins. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
indulgence.
Gentlemen, ma'am, we will be moving quickly during my 5
minutes of questioning here.
Admiral Tiongson, General Richardson, and Secretary Dawson,
some of my inquiries are directed at all of you, and I thank
you for being here.
Today we are focused on United States Coast Guard
engagement in the Indo-Pacific region. Overall, I would like to
address America's need for enhanced presence in the region in
order to maintain the growing potentials for economic stability
and growth and to hedge against the threat of military conflict
and China's influence in the region.
So as it relates to our discussion today, China is a key
factor, and I think we all acknowledge that. This is the
balance that we seek to invest American treasure effectively,
efficiently, appropriately, in order to counter the growing
threat of China, both militarily and through economic
oppression or interference in the area. The United States Coast
Guard has a very important role to play there, as does the Air
Force and the United States Navy. So I would like to ask you
all to give me your considered response regarding shipbuilding
as it relates to your plan moving forward in the larger
strategic considerations and planning for what the next decade
looks like in the Indo-Pacific region.
I have done a tremendous amount of work with your
counterparts and colleagues in the United States Navy, both in
uniform and in the civilian realm, ma'am, regarding
shipbuilding and what the larger mission is in the Pacific.
There is a growing concern about the U.S. Government stepping
away from the long-established historical success of using
smaller shipyards across the country, who have proven to be
very responsive and efficient and flexible with regards to
providing vessels for the United States Navy, United States
Coast Guard in order to accomplish changing mission parameters,
as opposed to doing business increasingly with large
internationally-owned shipyards that sometimes even have direct
ties to China, including partnerships with China. This is a
concern for the U.S. Government to step away from a long,
proven, and successful relationship with many smaller shipyards
across the country to provide the vessels that we need and
slide toward coordinating the construction of those vessels and
funding the construction of those vessels with huge, massive
international corporation shipyards that sometimes have heavy
ties with China. This is a concern. We believe that American
vessels should be built in American owned shipyards with
American technology, American engineering, and American work
force. I have shipyards in South Louisiana. Bollinger Shipyards
has delivered its 180th vessel to the United States Coast Guard
over 35-year period. That is another fast response cutter, I
have a shipyard named Metal Shark. They have an international
footprint, do a lot of business with the Government. They are
building vessels for Bangladesh and Vietnam through the U.S.
Government protocols and parameters and laws.
So I would like all of you to please respond briefly to my
concern and know that my office and my other colleagues stand
with you to move forward with this vision.
Admiral.
Admiral Tiongson. We are very grateful for the
administration and Congress support in our recapitalization
efforts. As you know, we are in the middle of recapitalizing
our fleets of vessels. We have national security cutters that
have been supported throughout the administration and Congress.
We have our two highest-priority acquisitions right now being
supported, the Offshore Patrol Cutter and the Polar Security
Cutter as well.
Sir, as you mentioned, our fast response cutters are being
built and coming out right now out of Louisiana. That's
excellent support for our recapitalization efforts to put those
ships throughout the world where our demand is, where there's
demand for the Coast Guard.
Mr. Higgins. I thank the Admiral for your answer.
My time has expired. Mr. Chairman, perhaps the General and
Ms. Dawson will be able to provide answers to my questions in
writing after the hearing.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman's time has expired.
I now recognize the Ranking Member from Michigan, Mr.
Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman Gimenez.
Without immediate action, Government funding will run out
on Saturday at 11:59 p.m. In recent years, Coast Guard members
and other Government employees have suffered because of
dysfunctional Republican spending fights.
Admiral, how would a lapse in appropriations affect the
Coast Guard's readiness in the Pacific area?
Admiral Tiongson. Sir, first, our top priorities during a
lapse in appropriation would be those missions that support
national security and the safety of people, as well as
property. What that means is accepted missions would include
things like search and rescue, counter-drug mission, illegal
migration operations, defense readiness. The operations that we
are conducting within the Indo-Pacific fall under the defense
readiness heading. So we will continue to do that.
As you recalled, in 2019, the Coast Guard was not funded,
we were not funded for 35 days. What that means in Indo-Pacific
is if ships will be deployed and Coast Guard members will not
be receiving paychecks, that will clearly have a morale issue
on them, as well as impacts to their families and longer
impacts in terms of recruiting and retention.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
Ms. Dawson, what kind of effect does regular uncertainty
about Government funding have on diplomatic relationships in
the Pacific and across the globe?
Ms. Dawson. Thank you for the question.
So what I would say is that it directly impacts our ability
to engage in critical, face-to-face diplomacy. Additionally, we
know what the PRC narrative is about the United States, what
they are trying to push in their public messaging, and that is
that the United States is unstable and unreliable. A Government
shutdown, unfortunately, reinforces the PRC's narrative in that
regard.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you.
As an Indian immigrant, given today's topic, I am also
interested in the relationship the United States has with India
when it comes to maritime security efforts.
For all of the witnesses, what efforts do your agencies
make to work with India to advance partnership and security in
the maritime environment?
Admiral Tiongson. I would describe the U.S. Coast Guard's
relationship with India as a budding relationship. We work on
international forward together. I would say the Quad. I would
also reflect to the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating
Piracy and Armed Robbery, ReCAAP. We work with them there as
well. We work with India in shipboard exchanges, we work with
India in training and exercises for maritime law enforcement.
In addition to that, I personally am going to be going to India
here to strengthen our relationship within the next few months.
Mr. Thanedar. Finally, the climate change. How does that--
climate change represents an existential threat across the
Indo-Pacific, particularly for low-lying and small island
nations.
Admiral, what effect has the USCG seen from the changing
climate in the region already? How are you prepared for
worsening climate conditions in the future?
Admiral Tiongson. We are definitely seeing types of
catastrophic events caused by either climate change or sea-
level rise. So, for example, just recently, there was a drought
in one of the Pacific Island nations of which we worked very
closely with our State Department personnel or partners, as
well as the Bureau of Humanitarian Assistance and provided aid
to that country. Additionally, what we do is we provide
training and subject-matter expertise on how to deal with those
types of disasters in humanitarian assistance and disaster
response.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you so much.
My time is up, so I yield back, Chairman.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman's time is up.
I would hope that my colleagues from across the aisle on
the Democrat side will join the 98 percent of the Republicans
who will vote for a continuing resolution at the end of this
week so that we don't have a Government shutdown. We are in
agreement. We don't need to have a Government shutdown. Let's
see how many of the Democrats will vote for our continuing
resolution.
My questions are about the area of the Second Thomas Shoal.
Admiral, do we patrol there? Do we have a presence there? I
personally was there about a month ago and I saw the activity
that is happening. I believe the ship that is called the Sierra
Madre, that is on the Second Thomas shoal. Much to my chagrin,
I saw a Chinese Coast Guard cutter there, and I saw a Chinese
frigate. I think it was a frigate there. Do we have any
presence in that area? Does the United States Coast Guard have
a presence there? Then what are your activities there and what
do you do there?
Admiral Tiongson. We have an outstanding relationship with
the Philippine Coast Guard. We do patrol in areas in and around
the Philippines. All of that run and coordinated with our DoD
friends from the Seventh Fleet.
What we do with the Philippines is we prepare their force
to go ahead and put forth their sovereignty and enforce their
sovereignty. We do that through maritime law enforcement and
security training. In fact, in the Philippines, that is our
largest security assistance program that we have. Just a couple
of weeks ago, or within the last couple of weeks, we opened up
an entire training center for those types of efforts, as well
as how to maintain their equipment and things of that nature.
Our relationship is extremely strong, and I personally
engage with the commandant of the Philippine Coast Guard to
always ask, what else can we do for you to help you prepare to
go out there and enforce your sovereignty?
Chairman Gimenez. The Chinese have also built some man-made
islands out there that, from what we saw, had radar sites, it
looked like maybe even anti-aircraft sites, and they act as if
somehow they own the place. Do we recognize that? Do we patrol
those areas or do we make sure that shipping is allowed to
progress through that area without being challenged by the PRC?
Admiral Tiongson. Sir, we work with several nations in and
about that region, all like-minded partners that are interested
in maritime governance. Frankly, maritime governance is the key
to what's going on here. We want to bolster our partners'
capacity and capability to push forth their sovereign rights in
all different facets. So if it's transiting their waters or if
it's fisheries, the illegal, unreported, unregulated fisheries,
we want to help them to do that to the best of our ability.
Chairman Gimenez. Have you seen a rise in the intimidation
by the PRC, by the CCP toward other nations in the area?
Admiral Tiongson. We have certainly seen a rise in that
type of aggression from actors like the China Coast Guard. We
have worked again with our partners to how do you go about and
push your sovereignty forward and defend yourself while that is
happening?
Chairman Gimenez. OK, very good.
But again, do we have a presence there? I know you say you
work with our partners, but does the United States Coast Guard
actually have a presence there to show that we are undeterred
by Chinese aggression, by Chinese intimidation, their claims,
their illegal claims of sovereignty over some of these islands
and the areas around them, their illegal claim to sovereignty
over the Second Thomas Shoal? Do we have a presence there to
say that, no, we do not recognize your claims to this, and we
are here, and we are here to stay? Do we do that?
Admiral Tiongson. Over the last year, we've actually had
three of our national security cutters deploy into the region
to work very closely through INDOPACOM and Seventh Fleet. Right
now, we have a national security cutter in the region as we
speak.
The other way we get about in our regions is through fast
response cutters, smaller vessels that work in the Oceania part
of the Indo-Pacific. There are four additional fast response
cutters that are on our unfunded----
Chairman Gimenez. I have only got 25 seconds, I need to get
this answered. What is the greatest existential threat in the
area, is it climate change or is it the PRC?
Admiral Tiongson. Talking to many of our partners, our
partners' top things are climate change followed by fisheries.
Chairman Gimenez. By fisheries, not the PRC?
Admiral Tiongson. Followed fisheries and those malign
actors that go ahead and steal their sovereign food and rights
and those types of things. A lot caused by China.
Chairman Gimenez. Is that your personal opinion too or is
that your partners' personal opinion?
Admiral Tiongson. That is what I have heard through talking
to partners, so it's not personal.
Chairman Gimenez. I am asking your personal opinion. I am
asking your personal opinion. What is your personal opinion?
Admiral Tiongson. Sir, my personal opinion is that it is
about maritime governance and how that breaks down sovereignty
of the various nations. What we're trying to do is help bolster
that maritime governance.
Chairman Gimenez. Fair enough.
My time is up.
I now recognize the gentlewoman from American Samoa, Ms.
Radewagen. Radewagen.
Ms. Radewagen. Radewagen.
Chairman Gimenez. Yes, there we go.
Ms. Radewagen. [Speaking Native language] and good morning.
I want to thank Chairman Gimenez, Chairman Green Ranking Member
Thanedar for inviting me to participate in today's hearing on
the Coast Guard's role in the Pacific, my home district.
The Coast Guard is one of the most important and effective
tools in that the United States has encountering the PRC's
malign influence in Pacific waters. In noting what General
Richardson just said, I can say that everywhere I go in the
Indo-Pacific their leaders tell me the two things they want
most are Coast Guard and Peace Corps.
But in fact, many Pacific Island leaders have asked me also
about the shiprider program. But here we are, we arrive at the
crux of the problem--resourcing. American Samoa is the only
U.S. jurisdiction south of the equator and we are a gateway to
the South Pacific with the best deepwater port within 2,500
miles.
Admiral Tiongson, thank you for all you do in the Pacific.
Can you tell me how many cutters--you mentioned part of it
earlier--how many cutters you have patrolling the South
Pacific, including U.S. territorial waters and the compact
EEZs?
Admiral Tiongson. We have three fast response cutters that
are stationed in Guam, a buoy tender that is stationed in Guam.
These patrol routinely in the region, but it is episodic at
best in the presence that they provide.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you. So it sounds like that is the
only territorial waters where the Coast Guard has these
vessels, Guam?
Admiral Tiongson. They patrol throughout that entire region
of Oceania. I am grateful for the support of Congress and the
administration on what is called an Indo-Pacific support cutter
that we will have this fall, this winter time frame. It will be
stationed out of Hawaii. It will also patrol that area,
providing subject-matter expert exchanges with the various
nations as well as sometimes conducting illegal, unreported,
unregulated fisheries enforcement.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
As a follow-up, at present, do you have the ability to
effectively counter IUU fishing in the South Pacific? I mean, I
will be honest, Admiral, American Samoa needs a permanent Coast
Guard presence to counter PRC IUU fishing. They have been in
American Samoa's EEZ. OK. So what additional resources does the
Coast Guard need to meet current operational requirements in
District 14?
Admiral Tiongson. I just mentioned that it's episodic type
of presence. What we need to do to continue to be a trusted
partner is improve our presence there. The fiscal year 2024
budget has four fast response cutters on our unfunded
priorities list. Those four FRCs will increase that presence
and provide more of the IUU fishery enforcement that you were
talking about.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, I yield back the balance of my time.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentlewoman yields your time back.
I recognize the gentleman from Guam, Mr. Moylan.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank you to the panel
members for allowing me to waive in for this hearing.
I appreciate the chance to hear from this distinguished
witness panel have a chance to get to record the importancy of
the presence of the U.S. Coast Guard in the South Pacific,
whether it be for patrolling our waters, training allied Coast
Guard detachments, or performing search-and-rescue operations,
the Coast Guard's ability to act like a Swiss Army knife is
essential to carrying out a wide variety of necessary mission
across the blue continent.
First question. General Richardson, Guam is 4,000 miles
from Hawaii, 6,000 miles from California, and 8,000 miles from
Washington, DC. One thing we discuss a lot on the islands is
the tyranny of distance. I wonder, very briefly, you can
elaborate on how that affects planning and logistics for all
INDOPACOM operations.
General Richardson. Thank you, sir, for the question.
As you know, Guam and its 170,000 American citizens is
essential to U.S. security, and we take that seriously. Guam is
also critical for the staging and deploying of forces west of
the international dateline and throughout the region to deliver
combat credible and integrated deterrence. In Admiral
Aquilino's seize-the-initiative approach, the idea is to pull
assets and people, forces west of the international dateline to
cut the transit time, to cut the response time to be able to
support and defend in that area. With that, the logistics and
the planning would also follow. So we do expect to see some
decrease in that. But as you mentioned earlier, distance there,
it's all water. So it's either naval or air assets that have to
support that.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, General.
Vice Admiral, if you were informed that the Coast Guard was
going to receive increase in your budget, what additional
resources do you feel would help you most specifically in the
Pacific region then and in general, across your areas of
responsibility? Briefly please.
Admiral Tiongson. To briefly answer the questions, I
mentioned, the unfunded priorities list that we have with four
FRCs that are on that list. There is also one Maritime Patrol
aircraft that's on that list. Those types of things, coupled
with the potential of a second of these Indo-Pacific support
cutters, would help increase our presence toward being a
trusted partner.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you.
So basically, the six cutters are not enough to cover the
nautical area equivalent to the size of the continental United
States. All right, thank you.
As a follow-up, as I said earlier in my question, Guam is
4,000 miles away from Hawaii and I am an advocate for having
decision makers as close to the ground as possible because only
there can they get the holistic view necessary to do the job to
the best of their ability.
So, Vice Admiral, do you think that the Coast Guard's
District 14 headquarters in Hawaii is close enough to Guam and
the South Pacific Islands to ensure adequate distribution of
resources?
Admiral Tiongson. As you know, the D14 headquarters is
there, but there is also a sector Guam and Patrol Forces
Micronesia right there in Guam. With all of those things, I do
believe it is enough to provide that support that's necessary.
What we need is more assets like those FRCs to provide more
persistent presence.
Mr. Moylan. Thank you.
Next question, Ms. Dawson. In recent years the State has
neglected the Pacific Islands to the detriment of our
relationship in the region. Currently there is no bureau for
the Pacific Islands at State. Instead, they are under the East
Asia Bureau which also handles China, Japan, as well as North
and South Korea. The East Asian Bureau is clearly in dire need
of restructuring.
Why hasn't the Department of State organized a Bureau for
the Pacific Islands and shown the region the focus necessary to
ensure our relationships are properly maintained?
Ms. Dawson. Thank you for the question.
So the Bureau is actually the Bureau of East Asian and
Pacific Affairs and we do have an office specifically focused
on Oceania. Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific Islands is
the name of the office. We have a deputy assistant secretary
with oversight of our work in the Pacific Islands.
I would note that in just the past 2 years we have seen a
huge increase in the attention and focus of the administration
to the Pacific Islands. Just this week, the White House hosted
a summit with the Pacific Islands Forum and we have, as I am
sure you are all tracking, opened new embassies in the Pacific
Islands, opened two new embassies this year----
Mr. Moylan. Thank you, Ms. Dawson. I am sorry for our
shortness of time. But basically let's not group the Pacific
Islands along with China, Japan, North and South Korea. Let's
have our own island, these groups together as one as we
continue to do the work of the administration.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
We have time for a second round.
I now recognize the Ranking Member from Michigan, Mr.
Thanedar.
Mr. Thanedar. Thank you, Chairman.
The climate change represents the greatest existential
threat to small Pacific Island nations facing rising sea levels
and depleting fishing stock. The Coast Guard and its partners
must be prepared for the security ramifications of a changing
climate in the Indo-Pacific.
My question to Ms. Dawson is how does climate change factor
into the diplomatic work the United States is doing in the
region? How will climate change continue to affect strategic
competition in the Indo-Pacific in the future?
Ms. Dawson. Thank you.
So we start with conversations with partners and allies.
That is really the heart of our diplomatic work. In those
conversations, we ask countries, what are your greatest needs,
how can we partner with you most effectively? Very frequently,
it is about climate change. They are asking for solutions to
address the challenges presented by climate change. So we are
working through not only our bilateral relationships to provide
assistance where feasible, but also through multilateral
engagements, including the Quad and other arrangements.
So we ask countries to identify their most pressing needs
and then collectively, with like-minded countries, we are
seeking to find the ways that we can most effectively address
those needs and bring the required resources to bear.
Mr. Thanedar. All right, thank you, Ms. Dawson.
Mr. Chair, I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
I now recognize myself for another 5 minutes.
Now, I don't know who will answer this. The fishing stocks
there in the Pacific, not only there in the South Pacific, but
also in the Eastern Pacific. I know that is maybe outside of
your realm, but tell me about the problem of fishing and
illegal fishing and who is conducting it and how much of the
fish stock is being depleted because of the activity of illegal
fishing and the fishing fleets around the Pacific. If you have
any estimation, and I don't know who can answer that. Probably
you, Vice Admiral. If you could do that for me, I appreciate
it.
Admiral Tiongson. Sir, you mentioned the Eastern Pacific
and fishery stocks. As we speak, I have two cutters that are in
the Eastern Pacific right now conducting IUU fisheries, high
seas boardings, and inspections. We do it underneath the
auspices of the Regional Fisheries Management Organization.
This particular one is a South Pacific one. We are conducting
those operations. That fleet is usually around anywhere from
350 to 600 fishing vessels. They are vessels that are Chinese
vessels, and they bring all kinds of problem sets into that
region.
First, they're fishing in the waters--Ecuador's and taking
away and displacing Ecuador's fishermen from that. Those
fishermen have to find other types of livelihoods. They usually
are associated with things like forced labor and human
smuggling. They could also be associated with environmental
causes. A lot of their trash and wear that's on those ships
just gets tossed right into the oceans, wrecking our pristine
areas throughout the world. There's a lot with IUU fishing. We
are enforcing those as we speak in the EastPac, as you
mentioned. That is within my AOR.
Chairman Gimenez. Would you characterize the Chinese
fishing fleets in the Eastern Pacific, and probably all around
the Pacific, as having a devastating effect on fish stocks in
the Pacific?
Admiral Tiongson. Throughout the Pacific, I would say
throughout the world.
Chairman Gimenez. Throughout the world. Because what do
they do? They don't care about quotas, they don't care about
the numbers, they just fish. I guess, look, the problem with
the CCP and the PRC is that they are food-dependent. They need
30 percent, they are 30 percent short on food independence. So
they go around the world--and fish is one of the staple foods,
so they go around the world and they fish. But the way they do
it, do you think that it is reckless? Do you think that it
poses a threat to world fisheries around the world?
Admiral Tiongson. Absolutely. It is depleting fishery
stocks. It is robbing sovereign nations of their economies as
well as their protein source. This is a problem of which the
United States Coast Guard, through our illegal unreported,
unregulated fishery strategy, I say we're going to try to take
the lead of this and work our way with many other interagency
players and partner nations to get after this.
Chairman Gimenez. Now, somebody said something about
climate change and fisheries. What is causing a more
devastating effect, climate change or human activity?
Admiral Tiongson. I'm certainly not an expert on all of
those sciences. What I can mention is that some places, even in
and around the United States, say up in the Alaska region, what
we see is fishery stocks moving further north for colder water.
Chairman Gimenez. Interesting. OK.
That is all I have for now.
I now recognize the gentleman from Texas, Mr. Pfluger, for
5 minutes.
Mr. Pfluger. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the
ability to waive on a very important topic. Thank the witnesses
for being here for your service.
This hearing, it really couldn't be more timely. The Indo-
Pacific region, obviously valuable to our national security. In
a time of increased aggression from adversaries like the
Chinese Communist Party, as well as the Putin's regime, the
United States must be patient in our advances and maintain our
ability to project all different types of instruments of power.
Additionally, the U.S. Coast Guard recently announced that they
will increase the number of maritime patrols and training
operations in the Indo-Pacific, which I believe is good.
Since the shift from countering violent extremism in our
national security and national defense strategies to more of a
great power competition, Russia has used private military
companies to illegally seize territories, the PRC is employing
coercive economic practices through their Belt and Road
initiative. We see this playing out all throughout the world,
not just in the Indo-Pacific, but I think the epicenter of it
is in the Indo-Pacific.
I just happened to spend a large amount of time in my
career in the Indo-Pacific at Kadena Air Base and had a front
row seat early in the stages of this desire to not just be a
regional hegemon, but also to have a more global impact, which
I think that they are rightly doing.
General Richardson, I want to start with you. In your
testimony you say it is going to take a whole-of-Government
approach and in addition to what the maritime strategy is, in
addition to what air power is doing. Talk to me about what that
whole-of-Government approach looks like. Notably, where are we
falling short on that whole-of-Government approach?
General Richardson. Thank you, sir, and appreciate the
question.
The whole-of-Government approach, as has been mentioned in
this forum so far, really, it starts with diplomacy. As we work
through the diplomacy, then we can use the other instruments of
national power as well, which is where the Coast Guard, as a
valuable partner, comes into that discussion. This is mostly in
the Micronesia Oceania area that I'll refer to here initially
because of those small nations and their inability to create a
navy, an army, an air force. In many cases, most of those don't
have air forces. Their navies more represent the Coast Guard.
So they're a key player in that. From the DoD perspective, we
need to have a persistent presence in the area at all times.
So, again, going back to Admiral Aquilino's seize the
initiative approach, pulling assets and personnel west of the
international dateline to create that persistent presence
through exercises and operations is key to what we do to
counter the malignant influence of the PRC.
Mr. Pfluger. We recently sent a letter from a caucus that
we have called the Mach 1 Caucus, about the concerns of having
a lack of air power at Kadena Air Base in particular, a place
that I am familiar with. Can you update me on the permanent
presence of a fighter presence there at Kadena to have what you
just mentioned, which is presence?
General Richardson. Yes, sir. It is my understanding that
we still have probably the same that you saw when you were
there. I believe it's about 48 of the F15s and a number of
KC135s in the area.
Mr. Pfluger. So is there a plan to pull those F15s out, as
was mentioned in the fiscal 2022 budget request from DoD?
General Richardson. Sir, I believe that the Air Force does
have some plans to rebuild the force from those terms, but I
can't speak specifically to what the number will be into the
future.
Mr. Pfluger. I am sorry to keep on with you here. In your
testimony you mentioned that many of our partners and allies
see climate change as the No. 1 existential threat. Is that a
view that is shared by the DoD?
General Richardson. Sir, just exactly what I said. When we
speak to the nations themselves, they share that as one of
their No. 1 security threats. From the DoD perspective, we are
focused on all of the threats, but primarily we're still
focused on the PRC as our pacing threat, and we'll continue to
go after that.
Mr. Pfluger. I hope that we will stay focused on the PRC.
If you are Xi Jinping and you are looking at the
vulnerabilities that we have right now, and I appreciate the
presence that you guys bring to this region, you are looking
for signs of weakness. I think that we don't have to get into
the discussion of my own personal views of the weakness that we
have displayed over the last couple of years, but you guys are
standing in the gap. The Coast Guard, the Blue Water Navy, the
Air Force, the Air power, the triad that we have to hold these
threats accountable and to deter, we are in a very tough time
right now. I don't have to tell you that, this is your
profession. I am very worried about this region and I hope that
any discussion of climate change or things that would distract
us away from what the PRC intends to do, which is to reunify
Taiwan with China, and that is a stated goal of Xi Jinping, I
hope that we will focus on that and focus on the threat and
keep our heads down to deter so that we don't get into a bad
situation.
With that, Mr. Chairman, thank you for allowing me to go a
little bit over time.
I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentleman yields back.
Ms. Radewagen, do you want another round of questions?
Ms. Radewagen. Yes, Mr. Chairman.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. I recognize the gentlelady from the
American Samoa.
Ms. Radewagen. So, Admiral Tiongson, what types and numbers
of cutters would be needed to prevent a large fishing fleet of
like the 300 fishing ships seen in the waters around the
Galapagos Islands back in 2020?
Admiral Tiongson. That is the same exact fishing fleet that
I was just speaking about. So, as I mentioned----
Ms. Radewagen. That will do the job?
Admiral Tiongson. I'm sorry, ma'am?
Ms. Radewagen. You think that will do the job?
Admiral Tiongson. What you meant I think what we have done
over time is we have become very good at working with our
interagency partners and collecting the intelligence that
enables us to go ahead and target vessels within those packs.
Ms. Radewagen. So that is a yes. Thank you.
So, as a follow-up, what existing information and
coordination mechanisms do you have in place to mitigate your
force shortfalls and other regional allies like Australia,
France, and New Zealand? What is needed to better utilize these
partnerships in safeguarding our own waters in the Pacific?
Yes, Admiral.
If the other two want to jump in, feel free.
Admiral Tiongson. We work very closely with the Australians
and the other countries that you mentioned. We share
information back and forth. For example, in Australia, we have
an attache that's there. Within their joint forces, we have a
liaison officer that keeps us abreast of all of their types of
operations and all of the operations that we're running. We
share that information back and forth.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Admiral, following up on the Chairman's earlier question,
what is the estimated value of fish stocks in ours and other
compact waters? What do our island and waterfront communities
tell you that is needed to safeguard their livelihoods?
Admiral Tiongson. What they need is presence and they need
help from the Coast Guard. Through the bilaterals that you
spoke of earlier, our bilateral shiprider agreements, we're
able to do that because they may not have the capacity and/or
the resources to do their own sovereignty. We do that for them
and we have blossomed a great deal in our relationships to a
point where two of those nations are enabling us to enforce
their sovereignty without having a shiprider, just calling into
them. We call that the enhanced shiprider program.
Ms. Radewagen. Last, why has there not been a permanent
Coast Guard presence in American Samoa? American Samoa relies
on fishing for its livelihood. As you know, we are a one
industry economy, and it is all about fishing for its
livelihood. As competition for fish stocks heats up, it has a
deleterious impact on these Americans' lives. What is the Coast
Guard doing now to safeguard these Americans' livelihoods and
safety in our own waters?
I understand from somebody in the Coast Guard that you will
be ratcheting up your activity over the course of the next year
out in our area. I don't know exactly what that means, but
sounds hopeful.
Admiral Tiongson. With the addition of the Indo-Pacific
support cutter, we will be ratcheting up more because that will
provide more presence, assets for more presence. But what we
have there are essentially fast response cutters and a buoy
tender that enables us to go ahead and have episodic presence
in and around places like America Samoa. We need to increase
that. That's why on our unfunded priorities list, there are
four FRCs, fast response cutters.
Ms. Radewagen. Thank you.
Chairman, I yield back.
Chairman Gimenez. The gentlelady yields back.
I have had some follow-up questions.
American Samoa is American territory and I am concerned
that we have episodic presence in American territory. So
whatever the Coast Guard can do to have a permanent presence in
American Samoa, especially in light of the fact that we see
much more aggressive action by the CCP, the PRC, the fishing
fleets that are ravaging fish stocks around the world, we don't
want that to happen around American Samoa or any American
territory.
Got a question. OK, so I am ignorant about this. So you
found a 350 fleet fishing fleet off of in the Eastern Pacific,
illegally fishing. What does international law allow you to do?
Admiral Tiongson. What we work through is the auspices of a
regional fisheries management organization. Those organizations
are comprised of several nations that come together and they
sign CMMs, or Conservation Management Measures. That tells them
how much to catch, what types of catches, rules on definning,
and those types of things.
Chairman Gimenez. That is not really what I am going after.
What I am going after, you find fishing vessels that are
violating those restrictions, laws, et cetera, what can you do
about it? What do you do about it?
Admiral Tiongson. I'll give you a great example from last
year, that same fishing fleet run by China in the Eastern
Pacific. We conducted boardings on some of them, we saw that
there were violations, we reported those to the Fisheries
Management Organization, who reported them to the flagged
states of those vessels. Those vessels, actually 30-plus of
them were deflagged. They had no home at that point. But we
were able to seize the catch, take those catches away. But in
addition to that, there was a willing partner, and the partner
was the country of Panama. They went ahead and talked with
other willing partners in Ecuador, and they took action against
the actual companies and the fish production companies as well.
Chairman Gimenez. What about the vessels themselves? What
happened to them?
Admiral Tiongson. Stateless vessels have no rights and
those types of things, and they are subject to any type of
boardings and inspections throughout the world. What happened
to those particular ones is a few of them have been reflagged
in different places, but they are on our watch list.
Chairman Gimenez. So but you don't seize the vessels
themselves?
Admiral Tiongson. No, sir, we do not.
Chairman Gimenez. So as soon as you leave the area, they
can go ahead and start doing whatever they were doing before?
Admiral Tiongson. We watch them extremely closely and
provide that enforcement that's necessary to prevent and deter
that type of activity.
Chairman Gimenez. Have you ever seen or boarded vessels on
numerous occasions doing the same thing? Repeat offenders.
Admiral Tiongson. Once we have them and we watch them very
closely. Have there been repeat offenders? I'm almost positive
that there have been.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. Interesting. You said they were
Chinese-flagged vessels? They were home ported in China? Or
where are they from? They are Chinese vessels, right?
Admiral Tiongson. They were Chinese vessels flagged in
another nation.
Chairman Gimenez. OK. That is interesting, too. So they are
Chinese vessels. I mean I know we--you know, I used to be the
mayor of Miami Dade, so I know we have a bunch of cruise ships
that are flagged somewhere else, but they are really American
cruise ships. So they just look for another home, another flag,
and then fly that flag until they get caught again and then
just--is that what they do, too? Do they go flag hunting once
you catch them?
Admiral Tiongson. There are some of these vessels that are
on that particular watch list that have looked for flags of
convenience, just as you mentioned.
Chairman Gimenez. But do they then take their catch and do
they go back to China? Is that what they are doing? Or are they
selling their catch everywhere around the world?
Admiral Tiongson. In many ways, they have production
vessels that are with them in that fleet. When they process the
fish those fish can go anywhere around the world. Majority does
go to China.
Chairman Gimenez. Interesting. OK.
Well, look, we talk a lot about climate change and fish
stocks and all that, but the facts are that the PRC, the CCP,
is the world's greatest polluter by a factor of two. Every
week, they are opening up a new coal-fired power plant in
China, they are increasing their carbon dioxide output. As we
decrease ours, they are increasing theirs. So everything that
we are doing here, they are more than outdoing on the other
side through their efforts. So they are the greatest polluter
in the world, they are the greatest carbon dioxide producer in
the world, they are also now, according to testimony, they are
also the leading cause of the reduction in fish stocks from
around the world.
Am I exaggerating something, or do you think that that is
an accurate statement that the CCP, the PRC, is raiding and
destroying fish stocks around the world? Is that an
overstatement? Am I being too dramatic or is it pretty
accurate?
Admiral Tiongson. I would have to look at the numbers, sir,
and get back to you. I can state that the Chinese distance
water fleet, distant water fishing fleet, is the largest
throughout the world.
Chairman Gimenez. Do you find them to be law-abiding or do
you find them to do whatever the heck they want to do just as
long as you don't catch them?
Admiral Tiongson. They are clearly involved with illegal,
unreported, unregulated fisheries throughout the world.
Chairman Gimenez. Fair enough.
So I guess--so you still think that climate change is the
greatest existential threat here in this area or is it the PRC
and the CCP?
Admiral Tiongson. If you're asking me what the partner
nations tell me, they list----
Chairman Gimenez. I didn't ask you to tell me what the
partner nations feel, I say you, what do you feel? What is the
greatest existential threat to this area?
Admiral Tiongson. Sir, I feel it's maritime governance.
It's the ability to bolster partner nations so that they can
take care of their own sovereign rights in trade and things of
that nature, as well as the pollution within the oceans and to
be prepared for humanitarian assistance disaster response.
Chairman Gimenez. OK.
Since nobody else wants to ask any questions, I am just
going to continue to ask questions, I guess, until I am done.
In order for you to provide the patrol and the resources
that you need to adequately protect American Samoa, what do you
need from the Coast Guard? What do you need from us? What do we
need to do?
Admiral Tiongson. We have had excellent support, but again,
I will refer to the 4 fast response cutters that are on our
unfunded priorities list for fiscal year 2024. Those will
enable us to have more persistent presence throughout--at
American Samoa and throughout that region.
Chairman Gimenez. Why don't we have a permanent presence in
American Samoa?
Admiral Tiongson. Sir, I do not know the answer to that
question. I know that we have that permanent presence in Guam,
which enables us to do expeditionary deployments and we are
able to patrol in and around the waters of American Samoa.
Chairman Gimenez. How far away is American Samoa from Guam?
Admiral Tiongson. It's a few hundred miles, to the best of
my knowledge. I'd have to look that up on a chart.
Chairman Gimenez. I can have a colloquy. How far away is
that?
Ms. Radewagen. Several thousand.
Chairman Gimenez. Several thousand miles? So it is like
from here to Wyoming?
Admiral Tiongson. If you're asking me, sir, I'd have to
look at a chart----
Chairman Gimenez. A pretty good distance, OK.
Admiral Tiongson. It is a distance.
Chairman Gimenez. It is not like you are not in the hood.
OK, 2,000 miles is 2,000 miles. So again, you know, I asked--it
is American territory, they are American citizens, they deserve
American protection. So why aren't we there?
Admiral Tiongson. We are there through----
Chairman Gimenez. Something, OK.
Admiral Tiongson [continuing]. Fast response. Episodically
we are there.
Chairman Gimenez. Yes, yes. An inflatable boat, anything,
OK. Why aren't we there? We should have a presence there. Is
there any military presence there, General?
General Richardson. Sir, not to my knowledge. I don't think
we have anything there on a permanent basis.
Chairman Gimenez. OK.
All right. Anybody else have any other questions?
All right, since nobody else has any other questions, this
hearing is hereby adjourned.
[Whereupon, at 11:23 a.m., the subcommittee was adjourned.]

[all]
